in modern times ,  the most popular clarinet is the b clarinet . 
the clarinet is widely used as a solo instrument . 
clarinets were soon accepted into orchestras . 
the clarinet is uncommon ,  but not unheard of ,  in rock music . 
there are not always e clarinet ,  alto clarinet ,  and contra-alto clarinets/contrabass clarinet parts in concert band music ,  but all three are quite common . 
in concert bands ,  clarinets are an important part of the instrumentation . 
the production of sound by a clarinet follows these steps:
theobald böhm did not directly invent the key system of the clarinet . 
some klezmer musicians prefer albert system clarinets . 
these extra waves are what gives the clarinet its characteristic tone . 
the modern clarinet developed from a baroque instrument called the chalumeau . 
many works of chamber music have also been written for the clarinet . 
the bass clarinet has a characteristically deep ,  mellow sound ,  while the alto clarinet is similar in tone to the bass  -lrb-  though not as dark  -rrb-  . 
clarinets have the largest pitch range of common woodwinds . 
in classical music ,  clarinets are part of standard orchestral and concert band instrumentation . 
in the 20th century ,  composers such as igor stravinsky ,  richard strauss ,  gustav mahler ,  and olivier messiaen enlarged the clarinet section on occasion to up to nine players ,  employing many different clarinets including the e or d soprano clarinets ,  basset horn ,  alto clarinet ,  bass clarinet ,  and/or contrabass clarinet . 
most modern clarinets have `` undercut '' tone holes that improve intonation and sound . 
groups of clarinets playing together have become increasingly popular among clarinet enthusiasts in recent years . 
most alto and bass clarinets have an extra key to allow a  -lrb-  written  -rrb-  e .  modern professional-quality bass clarinets generally have additional keywork to written c .  among the less commonly encountered members of the clarinet family ,  contra-alto and contrabass clarinets may have keywork to written e ,  d ,  or c; the basset clarinet and basset horn generally go to low c . 
the popular brazilian music styles of choro and samba use the clarinet . 
note: a böhm system soprano clarinet is shown in the photos illustrating this section . 
also ,  some contemporary dixieland players continue to use albert system clarinets . 
the clarinet is a musical-instrument family belonging to the group known as the woodwind instruments . 
the clarinet was originally a central instrument in jazz ,  beginning with the new orleans players in the 1910s . 
eee and bbb octocontra-alto and octocontrabass clarinets have also been built . 
since the clarinet has a wider range of notes ,  the lowest note of the b clarinet is significantly deeper  -lrb-  a minor or major sixth  -rrb-  than the lowest note of the oboe . 
chojnów  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a small town in legnica county ,  lower silesian voivodeship ,  in south-western poland . 
the motto of chojnów is `` friendly city '' . 
to the south of the town is the surrounding chojnowska plain . 
coat of arms of the chojnów has is a blue escutcheon . 
chojnów is located in the central-western part of the lower silesia region . 
the stars of canes venatici are not bright . 
other notable spiral galaxies in canes venatici are the sunflower galaxy  -lrb-  m63, ngc 5055 -rrb- ,  m94  -lrb-  ngc 4736 -rrb- ,  and m106  -lrb-  ngc 4258 -rrb- . 
m94, also classified as ngc 4736, is a face-on spiral galaxy 15 million light-years from earth . 
ngc 4631 is a barred spiral galaxy ,  which is one of the largest and brightest edge-on galaxies in the sky . 
m3  -lrb-  ngc 5272 -rrb- is a globular cluster 32,000 light-years from earth . 
the most prominent cluster of t tauri stars and young b-type stars are in the chamaeleon i cloud ,  and are associated with the reflection nebula ic 2631.
chamaeleon  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a small constellation in the southern sky . 
chamaeleon is also the location of cha 110913, a unique dwarf star or proto solar system . 
cholesterol is recycled in the body . 
cholesterol synthesis can also be turned off when cholesterol levels are high . 
most ingested cholesterol is esterified ,  and esterified cholesterol is poorly absorbed . 
ldl particles are the major blood cholesterol carriers . 
total cholesterol is defined as the sum of hdl ,  ldl ,  and vldl . 
plants make cholesterol in very small amounts . 
the 1987 report of national cholesterol education program ,  adult treatment panels suggests the total blood cholesterol level should be: < 200 mg/dl normal blood cholesterol ,  200–239 mg/dl borderline-high ,  > 240 mg/dl high cholesterol . 
cholesterol is oxidized by the liver into a variety of bile acids . 
abnormally low levels of cholesterol are termed `` hypocholesterolemia '' . 
conversely ,  ldl receptor synthesis proceeds when a cell is deficient in cholesterol . 
finally ,  lanosterol is converted to cholesterol through a 19-step process . 
biosynthesis of cholesterol is directly regulated by the cholesterol levels present ,  though the homeostatic mechanisms involved are only partly understood . 
in biochemical experiments radiolabelled forms of cholesterol ,  such as tritiated-cholesterol are used . 
cholesterol can be purified using small sephadex lh-20 columns . 
the liver excretes cholesterol into biliary fluids ,  which is then stored in the gallbladder . 
within cells ,  cholesterol is also a precursor molecule for several biochemical pathways . 
human breast milk also contains significant quantities of cholesterol . 
ldl receptors are used up during cholesterol absorption ,  and its synthesis is regulated by srebp ,  the same protein that controls the synthesis of cholesterol `` de novo '' ,  according to its presence inside the cell . 
plant cells synthesize cholesterol as a precursor for other compounds ,  such as phytosterols and steroidal glycoalkaloids ,  with cholesterol remaining in plant foods only in minor amounts or absent . 
phospholipids and cholesterol ,  being amphipathic ,  are transported in the monolayer surface of the lipoprotein particle . 
on the basis of these findings ,  it has been suggested that the errα should be de-orphanized and classified as a receptor for cholesterol . 
typically ,  about 50% of the excreted cholesterol is reabsorbed by the small intestine back into the bloodstream . 
chromatin is present in most cells ,  with a few exceptions ,  for example ,  red blood cells . 
chromatin allows the very long dna molecules to fit into the cell nucleus . 
certain bacteria also contain plasmids or other extrachromosomal dna . 
sexually reproducing species have somatic cells  -lrb-  body cells  -rrb-  ,  which are diploid 2n having two sets of chromosomes  -lrb-  23 pairs in humans with one set of 23 chromosomes from each parent  -rrb-  ,  one set from the mother and one from the father . 
during interphase  -lrb-  the period of the cell cycle where the cell is not dividing  -rrb-  ,  two types of chromatin can be distinguished: structure of eukaryotic chromosome
chromosomes are normally visible under a light microscope only when the cell is undergoing the metaphase of cell division  -lrb-  where all chromosomes are aligned in the center of the cell in their condensed form  -rrb-  . 
asexually reproducing species have one set of chromosomes that are the same in all body cells . 
these tables give the total number of chromosomes  -lrb-  including sex chromosomes  -rrb-  in a cell nucleus . 
in archaea ,  the dna in chromosomes is even more organized ,  with the dna packaged within structures similar to eukaryotic nucleosomes . 
some use the term chromosome in a wider sense ,  to refer to the individualized portions of chromatin in cells ,  either visible or not under light microscopy . 
in spite of their appearance ,  chromosomes are structurally highly condensed ,  which enables these giant dna structures to be contained within a cell nucleus . 
the number of human chromosomes was published in 1923 by theophilus painter . 
the number of plasmids in the cell is almost entirely determined by the rate of division of the plasmid – fast division causes high copy number . 
colonna was appointed as archbishop of messina in 1255.
the 'colonna di stigliano' line is represented by don prospero colonna di stigliano ,  prince of stigliano  -lrb-  b . 
in 1627 anna colonna ,  daughter of filippo i colonna ,  married taddeo barberini of the family barberini; nephew of pope urban viii . 
the main 'colonna di paliano' family is represented today by prince marcantonio colonna di paliano ,  prince and duke of paliano  -lrb-  b . 
 -lrb-  1954 -rrb- is a great grandson descendant of maria giulia colonna  -lrb-  1783-1867 -rrb- . 
the exiled colonnas allied with the pope's other great enemy ,  philip iv of france ,  who in his youth had been tutored by cardinal egidio colonna . 
in 1728, the carbognano branch  -lrb-  colonna di sciarra  -rrb-  of the colonna family added the name barberini to its family name when giulio cesare colonna di sciarra married cornelia barberini ,  daughter of the last male barberini to hold the name and granddaughter of maffeo barberini  -lrb-  son of taddeo barberini  -rrb-  . 
ceuta reverted to moorish andalusian rule in 927 along with melilla ,  and later tangier ,  in 951.
the name abyla has been said to have been a punic name  -lrb-  `` lofty mountain '' or `` mountain of god ''  -rrb-  for jebel musa ,  the southern pillar of hercules . 
ceuta  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is an spanish autonomous city on the north coast of africa ,  separated by from cadiz province on the spanish mainland by the strait of gibraltar and sharing a land border with m'diq-fnideq prefecture in the kingdom of morocco . 
these clipped forms continued as berber `` sebta '' and arabic `` sebtan '' or `` sabtah ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which themselves became `` ceuta '' in portuguese  -lrb-    -rrb-  and spanish  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the name was hellenized variously as `` ápini ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` abýla ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` abýlē ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` ablýx ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and `` abílē stḗlē ''  -lrb-   ,  `` pillar of abyla ''  -rrb-  and in latin as mount abyla  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  or the pillar of abyla  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  . 
ceuta ,  like melilla and the canary islands ,  was a free port before spain joined the european union . 
stomach cancer is the fourth most common cancer 990,000 cases  -lrb-  7.8%  -rrb-  ,  738,000 deaths  -lrb-  9.7%  -rrb-  . 
colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer 1.2 million cases  -lrb-  9.4%  -rrb-  ,  608,000 deaths  -lrb-  8.0%  -rrb-  . 
lung cancer  -lrb-  pulmonary carcinoma  -rrb-  is the most common cancer in the world ,  both in terms of cases  -lrb-  1.6 million cases; 12.7% of total cancer cases  -rrb-  and deaths  -lrb-  1.4 million deaths; 18.2% of total cancer deaths  -rrb-  . 
together they account for about 41% of worldwide cancer incidence and 42% of cancer deaths  -lrb-  for more detailed information on the carcinogens implicated in these and other cancers ,  see references  -rrb-  . 
breast cancer is the second most common cancer  -lrb-  1.4 million cases ,  10.9%  -rrb-  ,  but ranks 5th as cause of death  -lrb-  458,000, 6.1%  -rrb-  . 
there is a strong association of smoking with lung cancer; the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer increases significantly in smokers . 
co-carcinogens are chemicals that do not necessarily cause cancer on their own ,  but promote the activity of other carcinogens in causing cancer . 
occupational carcinogens are agents that pose a risk of cancer in several specific work-locations:
certain viruses can also act as carcinogens by interacting with dna . 
a carcinogen is any substance ,  radionuclide ,  or radiation that promotes carcinogenesis ,  the formation of cancer . 
genetic background ,  dietary practices and environmental factors also likely contribute to the incidence of dna damage and breast cancer risk . 
dna is nucleophilic; therefore ,  soluble carbon electrophiles are carcinogenic ,  because dna attacks them . 
the camouflage methods used are the matching of background colour and pattern ,  and disruption of outlines . 
countershading is less often used for military camouflage ,  despite second world war experiments that showed its effectiveness . 
in the second world war ,  the zoologist hugh cott ,  a protégé of kerr ,  worked to persuade the british army to use more effective camouflage methods ,  including countershading ,  but ,  like kerr and thayer in the first world war ,  with limited success . 
modern artists such as ian hamilton finlay have used camouflage to reflect on war . 
military camouflage patterns influenced fashion and art from the time of the first world war onwards . 
some animals' colours and patterns resemble a particular natural background . 
eliminating shadow was identified as a principle of military camouflage during the second world war . 
the camouflage may conceal the bug from both predators and prey . 
automotive manufacturers often use patterns to disguise upcoming products . 
jamaican maroons are said to have used plant materials as camouflage in the first maroon war  -lrb-  c .  1655–1740 -rrb- . 
the behaviour may be motion crypsis ,  preventing detection ,  or motion masquerade ,  promoting misclassification  -lrb-  as something other than prey  -rrb-  ,  or a combination of the two . 
by controlling chromatophores of different colours ,  cephalopods can rapidly change their skin patterns and colours . 
for ships ,  dazzle camouflage was mainly replaced with plain grey in the second world war ,  though experimentation with colour schemes continued . 
other regiments in india soon adopted the khaki uniform ,  and by 1896 khaki drill uniform was used everywhere outside europe; by the second boer war six years later it was used throughout the british army . 
mimesis is also employed by some predators and parasites to lure their prey . 
ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times . 
methods may be applied on their own or in combination . 
counterillumination camouflage is the likely function of the bioluminescence of many marine organisms ,  though light is also produced to attract or to detect prey and for signalling . 
movement catches the eye of prey animals on the lookout for predators ,  and of predators hunting for prey . 
animals such as chameleon ,  frog ,  flatfish such as the peacock flounder ,  squid and octopus actively change their skin patterns and colours using special chromatophore cells to resemble their current background ,  or ,  as in most chameleons ,  for signalling . 
since motion dazzle patterns would make animals more difficult to locate accurately when moving ,  but easier to see when stationary ,  there would be an evolutionary trade-off between motion dazzle and crypsis . 
counterillumination has rarely been used for military purposes . 
as of the 2010s ,  atomic clocks are the most accurate clocks in existence . 
word clocks are clocks that display the time visually using sentences . 
clocks have different ways of displaying the time . 
the primary purpose of a clock is to `` display '' the time . 
all modern clocks use oscillation . 
digital clocks display a numeric representation of time . 
a clock is an instrument used to measure ,  keep ,  and indicate time . 
some clocks ,  called 'flip clocks' ,  have digital displays that work mechanically . 
traditionally in horology ,  the term `` clock '' was used for a striking clock ,  while a clock that did not strike the hours audibly was called a timepiece . 
since the advent of digital clocks in the 1960s ,  the use of analog clocks has declined significantly . 
these clocks can be implemented in hardware or software . 
clocks can be classified by the type of time display ,  as well as by the method of timekeeping . 
a clock mechanism may be used to `` control '' a device according to time ,  e . g . 
it was also at this time that clock cases began to be made of wood and clock faces to utilize enamel as well as hand-painted ceramics . 
some clocks rely for their accuracy on an external oscillator; that is ,  they are automatically synchronized to a more accurate clock:
analog clocks usually use a clock face which indicates time using rotating pointers called `` hands '' on a fixed numbered dial or dials . 
an early record of a seconds hand on a clock dates back to about 1560 on a clock now in the fremersdorf collection . 
alarm clocks with visible indicators are sometimes used to indicate to children too young to read the time that the time for sleep has finished; they are sometimes called `` training clocks '' . 
these types of clocks were made as individual timepieces but more commonly used in synchronized time installations in schools ,  businesses ,  factories ,  railroads and government facilities as a master clock and slave clocks . 
as of 2013, the most stable atomic clocks are ytterbium clocks ,  which are stable to within less than two parts in 1 quintillion  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 1283, a large clock was installed at dunstable priory; its location above the rood screen suggests that it was not a water clock . 
it usually has a provision for `` setting '' the clock by manually entering the correct time into the counter . 
for convenience ,  distance ,  telephony or blindness ,  auditory clocks present the time as sounds . 
the salisbury cathedral clock ,  built in 1386, is considered to be the world's oldest surviving mechanical clock that strikes the hours . 
at the time of his death ,  steinmetz held over 200 patents . 
steinmetz was born karl august rudolph steinmetz on april 9, 1865 in breslau ,  province of silesia ,  prussia  -lrb-  now wrocław ,  poland  -rrb-  the son of caroline  -lrb-  neubert  -rrb-  and karl heinrich steinmetz . 
steinmetz also greatly advanced the understanding of lightning . 
steinmetz's equation ,  steinmetz solids ,  steinmetz curves ,  and steinmetz equivalent circuit theory are all named after him ,  as are numerous honors and scholarships ,  including the `` ieee charles proteus steinmetz award '' ,  one of the highest technical recognitions given by the institute of electrical and electronics engineers professional society . 
following the gymnasium ,  steinmetz went on to the university of breslau to begin work on his undergraduate degree in 1883.
he had a brother named childebrand ,  who later became the frankish `` dux ''  -lrb-  that is ,  `` duke ''  -rrb-  of burgundy . 
though his grandson became its first emperor ,  the `` empire '' such as it was ,  was largely born during the reign of charles martel . 
he divided francia between his sons ,  carloman and pepin . 
this naval arab invasion was headed by abdul rahman's son . 
charles set about integrating the outlying realms of his empire into the frankish church . 
thus ,  southern germany once more became part of the frankish kingdom ,  as had northern germany during the first years of the reign . 
charles' grandson ,  charlemagne ,  extended the frankish realms to include much of the west ,  and became the first emperor in the west since the fall of rome . 
after the reign of dagobert i  -lrb-  629–639 -rrb- the merovingians effectively ceded power to the pippinid mayors of the palace ,  who ruled the frankish realm of austrasia in all but name . 
charles ,  nicknamed `` martel '' ,  or `` the hammer '' ,  in later chronicles ,  was the son of pepin of herstal and his second wife alpaida . 
come morning ,  frankish scouts discovered that the umayyad force had withdrawn during the night . 
martel also received support from bishop pepo of verdun . 
unfortunately for rahman's son ,  however ,  he had overestimated the time it would take charles to develop heavy cavalry equal to that of the muslims . 
charles martel  -lrb-  c .  688 – 22 october 741 -rrb- was a frankish statesman and military leader who as duke and prince of the franks and mayor of the palace ,  was the `` de facto '' ruler of francia from 718 until his death . 
charles took time to rally more men and prepare . 
military historians believe he could have taken it ,  had he chosen to tie up all his resources to do so—but he believed his life was coming to a close ,  and he had much work to do to prepare for his sons to take control of the frankish realm . 
this plundering gave odo enough time to re-organise his aquitanian troops and warn charles martel of the impending danger . 
h .  g .  wells says of charles martel's decisive defeat of the muslims in his `` short history of the world: however ,  when the muslim first crossed the pyrenees ,  aquitaine was actually an independent realm under duke odo's leadership and the gothic septimania remained out of frankish rule . 
that same year ,  dagobert iii died and the neustrians proclaimed chilperic ii ,  the cloistered son of childeric ii ,  as king . 
richard gerberding points out that up to this time ,  much of martel's support was probably from his mother's kindred in the lands around liege . 
he left narbonne therefore ,  isolated and surrounded ,  and his son would return to conquer it for the franks . 
the next six years were devoted in their entirety to assuring frankish authority over the dependent germanic tribes . 
 ''the victory at the battle near poitiers and tours would later earn charles the cognomen `` martellus ''  -lrb-  l .  ,  and so `` martel '' ,  fr . 
although it took another two decades for the franks to drive all the arab garrisons out of septimania and across the pyrenees ,  charles martel's halt of the invasion of french soil turned the tide of islamic advances ,  and the unification of the frankish kingdoms under charles ,  his son pippin the younger ,  and his grandson charlemagne created a western power which prevented the emirate of córdoba from expanding over the pyrenees . 
charles also married a second time ,  to swanhild ,  and they had a child ,  grifo . 
he was the first to call himself duke and prince of the franks ,  a title later taken up by charles . 
in 731, after defeating the saxons ,  martel ,  turned his attention to the rival southern realm of aquitaine ,  and crossed the loire ,  breaking the treaty with odo . 
charles' son pippin the younger  -lrb-  pepin ii ,  the short  -rrb-  kept his father's promise and returned and took narbonne by siege in 759.
the caliphate believed it would take a generation ,  but charles managed it in five years . 
nonetheless ,  the papal applications for frankish protection showed how far charles had come from the days he was tottering on excommunication ,  and set the stage for his son and grandson to rearrange italian political boundaries . 
the pope ,  highly dependent on frankish armies for his independence from lombard and byzantine power  -lrb-  the byzantine emperor still considered himself to be the only legitimate `` roman emperor '' ,  and thus ,  ruler of all of the provinces of the ancient empire ,  whether recognized or not  -rrb-  ,  declared for `` him who had the power '' . 
he left the manned spaceflight engineer program in 1987.
colonel charles edward  -lrb-  `` chuck ''  -rrb-  jones  -lrb-  november 8, 1952 – september 11, 2001 -rrb- was a united states air force officer ,  a computer programmer ,  and an astronaut in the usaf manned spaceflight engineer program . 
this is basically a particle size effect . 
one of the most widely used of these is the varistor . 
when the size of the scattering center  -lrb-  or grain boundary  -rrb-  is reduced below the size of the wavelength of the light being scattered ,  the scattering no longer occurs to any significant extent . 
the piezoelectric effect is generally stronger in materials that also exhibit pyroelectricity ,  and all pyroelectric materials are also piezoelectric . 
the word `` ceramic '' may be used as an adjective to describe a material ,  product or process ,  or it may be used as a noun ,  either singular ,  or ,  more commonly ,  as the plural noun `` ceramics '' . 
advanced ceramics are also used in the medicine ,  electrical ,  electronics industries and body armor . 
noncrystalline ceramics ,  being glass ,  tend to be formed from melts . 
semiconducting ceramics are also employed as gas sensors . 
thus a reduction of the original particle size below the wavelength of visible light  -lrb-  ~ 0.5 micrometers for shortwave violet  -rrb-  eliminates any light scattering ,  resulting in a transparent material . 
if later heat treatments cause this glass to become partly crystalline ,  the resulting material is known as a glass-ceramic ,  widely used as cook-tops and also as a glass composite material for nuclear waste disposal . 
in the formation of polycrystalline materials  -lrb-  metals and ceramics  -rrb-  the size of the crystalline grains is determined largely by the size of the crystalline particles present in the raw material during formation  -lrb-  or pressing  -rrb-  of the object . 
fractography is widely used with fracture mechanics to understand the causes of failures and also verify the theoretical failure predictions with real life failures . 
this is typically somewhere between the minimum wavelength of visible light and the resolution limit of the naked eye . 
these materials do show plastic deformation . 
the wu xing  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the five elements ,  five phases ,  the five agents ,  the five movements ,  five processes ,  the five steps/stages and the five planets of significant gravity: mars-火 ,  mercury-水 ,  jupiter-木 ,  venus-金 ,  saturn-土 is the short form of `` wǔ zhǒng liúxíng zhī qì ''  -lrb-  五種流行之氣  -rrb-  or `` the five types of chi dominating at different times '' . 
the system of five phases was used for describing interactions and relationships between phenomena . 
some of the mawangdui silk texts  -lrb-  no later than 168 bc  -rrb-  also present the wu xing as `` five virtues '' or types of activities . 
the first church of christ ,  scientist is the legal title of the mother church and administrative headquarters of the christian science church . 
branch christian science churches and christian science societies are subordinate to the mother church ,  but are self-governed . 
branch churches of the mother church may take the title of `` first church of christ ,  scientist ''; second; but the article `` the '' must not be used ,  presumably to concede the primacy of the boston mother church . 
to be elected the first reader in one's branch church is one of the highest and most important positions the lay christian scientist may aspire to . 
the christian science board of directors is a five-person executive entity created by mary baker eddy to conduct the business of the christian science church under the terms defined in the by-laws of the `` church manual '' . 
the church has collected over 50,000 testimonies of incidents that it considers healing through christian science treatment alone . 
because there are no clergy in the church ,  branch church sunday services are conducted by two readers: the first reader ,  who reads passages from science and health ,  and the second reader ,  who reads passages from the bible . 
the bible and eddy's textbook on christian healing ,  `` science and health with key to the scriptures '' ,  are together the church's key doctrinal sources and have been ordained as the church's `` dual impersonal pastor '' . 
the hundreds of millions lost on broadcasting brought the church to the brink of bankruptcy . 
an international newspaper ,  the `` christian science monitor '' ,  founded by eddy in 1908 and winner of seven pulitzer prizes ,  is published by the church through the christian science publishing society . 
christian scientists may take an intensive two-week `` primary '' class from an authorized christian science teacher . 
connecticut is known as the `` constitution state '' . 
connecticut  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the southernmost state in the new england region of the united states . 
the highest court of connecticut's judicial branch is the connecticut supreme court ,  headed by the chief justice of connecticut . 
in 1790, 97% of the population in connecticut was classified as `` rural '' . 
2016 estimates put connecticut's population at 3,576,452.
hartford has been the sole capital of connecticut since 1875.
the new york ,  new haven and hartford railroad ,  called the `` new haven '' or `` the consolidated '' ,  became the dominant connecticut railroad company after 1872.
before 1991, connecticut had an investment-only income tax system . 
connecticut had been governed under the `` fundamental orders '' since 1639, but the state adopted a new constitution in 1818.
connecticut made agreements with pennsylvania and new york which extinguished her land claims within those states' boundaries and created the connecticut panhandle . 
the connecticut river cuts through the center of the state ,  flowing into long island sound . 
connecticut shares with the rest of new england a governmental institution called the new england town . 
connecticut does not have county government ,  unlike all other states except rhode island . 
connecticut's per capita personal income in 2013 was estimated at $60,847, the highest of any state . 
connecticut ratified the u . s .  constitution on january 9, 1788, becoming the fifth state . 
 ,  brendan sharkey is the speaker of the house of connecticut . 
between new haven and new york city ,  i-95 is one of the most congested highways in the united states . 
all wages of connecticut residents are subject to the state's income tax ,  even if earned outside the state . 
connecticut is the third smallest state by area ,  the 29th most populous ,  and the fourth most densely populated of the 50 states . 
as of the 2010 u . s .  census ,  connecticut's race and ethnic percentages were:
connecticut has five representatives in the u . s .  house ,  all of whom are democrats . 
before then ,  new haven and hartford alternated as capitals . 
the western boundaries of connecticut have been subject to change over time . 
after the fundamental orders ,  connecticut was granted governmental authority by king charles ii of england through the connecticut charter of 1662.
hartford is the poorest municipality in connecticut ,  with a per capita income of $13,428 in 2000.
connecticut's rural areas and small towns in the northeast and northwest corners of the state contrast sharply with its industrial cities such as stamford ,  bridgeport ,  and new haven ,  located along the coastal highways from the new york border to new london ,  then northward up the connecticut river to hartford . 
the name connecticut is derived from the algonquian word that has been translated as `` long tidal river '' and `` upon the long river '' ,  referring to the connecticut river . 
the western reserve section was settled largely by people from connecticut ,  and they brought connecticut place names to ohio . 
connecticut is bordered on the south by long island sound ,  on the west by new york ,  on the north by massachusetts ,  and on the east by rhode island . 
however ,  the state of connecticut does also provide statewide ordinances for noise control as well . 
connecticut levies a 6.35% state sales tax on the retail sale ,  lease ,  or rental of most goods . 
the connecticut river ,  thames river ,  and ports along long island sound have given connecticut a strong maritime tradition which continues today . 
connecticut permits a credit for taxes paid to other jurisdictions ,  but since residents who work in other states are still subject to connecticut income taxation ,  they may owe taxes if the jurisdictional credit does not fully offset the connecticut tax amount . 
the connecticut colony was originally a number of separate ,  smaller settlements at windsor ,  wethersfield ,  saybrook ,  hartford ,  and new haven . 
in 1974, connecticut elected democratic governor ella t .  grasso ,  who became the first woman in any state to be elected governor . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of connecticut was 3,590,886 on july 1, 2015, a 0.47% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
 ,  connecticut's united states senators are richard blumenthal  -lrb-  democrat  -rrb-  and chris murphy  -lrb-  democrat  -rrb-  . 
the connecticut state board of education manages the public school system for children in grades k–12.
there were some 1,200 connecticut troops on hand at the battle of bunker hill in june 1775.
the southwestern border of connecticut where it abuts new york state is marked by a panhandle in fairfield county ,  containing the towns of greenwich ,  stamford ,  new canaan ,  darien ,  and parts of norwalk and wilton . 
connecticut's first european settlers were dutchmen who established a small ,  short-lived settlement called fort hoop in hartford at the confluence of the park and connecticut rivers . 
in the summer and fall of 2016, connecticut experienced a drought in many parts of the state ,  causing some water-use bans . 
the clp governed the northern territory from 1974 until the 2001 election . 
in practice ,  clp house members usually sit with the liberals ,  while clp senators sit with the nationals . 
at the 2001 election the australian labor party won government by one seat ,  ending 27 years of clp government . 
the clp even lost two seats in palmerston ,  an area where the alp had never come close to winning any seats before . 
the clp competes against the australian labor party  -lrb-  northern territory branch  -rrb-   -lrb-  the local branch of australia's social-democratic party  -rrb-  . 
the clp dominated the northern territory legislative assembly from its establishment in 1974 until the 2001 general election ,  when the clp lost government winning only 10 of the 25 seats ,  and was reduced further to four parliamentary members at the 2005 election . 
the clp fielded candidates at the 1975 federal election ,  winning one seat each in the senate and in the house of representatives . 
the clp returned to office following the 2012 election ,  winning 16 of 25 seats ,  and leader terry mills became chief minister of the northern territory . 
in the 2001 federal election ,  the clp won the newly formed seat of solomon ,  based on darwin/palmerston ,  in the house of representatives . 
the clp first fielded candidates at the 1975 federal election ,  winning one seat in the senate and the non-voting seat in the house of representatives . 
after four defections during the parliamentary term ,  the clp was reduced to minority government by july 2015.
gary higgins became clp leader and opposition leader on 2 september ,  with lia finocchiaro as his deputy . 
the structure that the fully developed roman law provides is a contribution to the canon law . 
the institutions and practices of canon law paralleled the legal development of much of europe ,  and consequently both modern civil law and common law  -lrb-  legal system  -rrb-  bear the influences of canon law . 
the first code of canon law  -lrb-  1917 -rrb- was almost exclusively for the latin church ,  with extremely limited application to the eastern churches . 
most recently ,  1990, the vatican produced the `` code of canons '' of the eastern churches which became the 1st code of `` eastern catholic canon law '' . 
in all three traditions ,  a canon was originally a rule adopted by a church council; these canons formed the foundation of canon law . 
in presbyterian and reformed churches ,  canon law is known as `` practice and procedure '' or `` church order '' ,  and includes the church's laws respecting its government ,  discipline ,  legal practice and worship . 
because of its specialized nature ,  advanced degrees in civil law or theology are normal prerequisites for the study of canon law . 
the history of latin canon law can be divided into four periods: the `` jus antiquum '' ,  the `` jus novum '' ,  the `` jus novissimum '' and the `` code of canon law '' . 
other churches in the anglican communion around the world  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  the episcopal church in the united states ,  and the anglican church of canada  -rrb-  still function under their own private systems of canon law . 
the rule of saint columbanus embodied the customs of bangor abbey and other irish monasteries . 
the letter concludes:
 -lrb-  john 6:38 -rrb- in the tenth and final chapter ,  columbanus regulates forms of penance  -lrb-  often corporal  -rrb-  for offences ,  and it is here that the rule of saint columbanus differs significantly from that of saint benedict . 
during the last year of his life ,  columbanus received messenges from king chlothar ii ,  inviting the saint to return to burgundy ,  now that his enemies were dead . 
much shorter than the rule of saint benedict ,  the rule of saint columbanus consists of ten chapters ,  on the subjects of obedience ,  silence ,  food ,  poverty ,  humility ,  chastity ,  choir offices ,  discretion ,  mortification ,  and perfection . 
theuderic ii venerated columbanus and often visited him ,  but the saint admonished and rebuked him for his behaviour . 
 '' ,  mabillon gives the life in full ,  together with an appendix on the miracles of the saint ,  written by an anonymous member of the bobbio community . 
despite the king's offers to stay in his kingdom ,  columbanus left neustria in 611 for the court of king theudebert ii of austrasia in the northeastern part of the kingdom of the merovingian franks . 
columbanus did not lead a perfect life . 
about seventy years later at the place of gallus' cell the monastery of saint gall was founded ,  which in itself was the origin of the city of st .  gallen again about another three hundred years later . 
concord includes the villages of penacook ,  east concord ,  and west concord . 
concord  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital city of the u . s .  state of new hampshire and the county seat of merrimack county . 
green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made up of an inner layer of cellulose and outer layer of pectose . 
the resource that is most commonly considered is the time ,  and one talks of time complexity . 
the complexity of a problem is the infimum of the complexities of the algorithms that may solve the problem ,  including the unknowns algorithm . 
thus the complexity of a problem is not greater than the complexity of any algorithm that solves the problems . 
as these solutions must be written down ,  the complexity of this problem is formula_12 for this problem ,  an algorithm of complexity formula_13 is known ,  which may thus be considered as asymptotically quasi-optimal . 
for solving most problems ,  it is required to read all input data ,  which ,  normally ,  needs a time proportional to the size of the data . 
when the nature of the resources is not explicitly given ,  this is usually the time needed for running the algorithm ,  and one talks of time complexity . 
the computational complexity of a problem is the minimum of the complexities of all possible algorithms for this problem  -lrb-  including the unknown algorithms  -rrb-  . 
the time needed for a computation on processors is at least the quotient by of the time needed by a single processor . 
for example ,  the usual algorithm for integer multiplication has a complexity of formula_2 this means that there is a constant formula_3 such that the multiplication of two integers of at most digits may be done in a time less than formula_4 this bound is `` sharp '' in the sense that the worst-case complexity and the average-case complexity are formula_5 which means that there is a constant formula_6 such that these complexities are larger than formula_7 the radix does not appear in these complexity ,  as changing of radix changes only the constants formula_3 and formula_9
the main complexity problem is thus to design algorithms such that the product of the computation time by the number of processors is as close as possible to the time needed for the same computation on a single processor . 
a nonlinear lower bound of formula_14 is known for the number comparisons needed for a sorting algorithm . 
a standard method for getting lower bounds of complexity consists of `` reducing '' a problem to another problem . 
then the complexity of the problem is formula_19 this is this method that is used for proving that ,  if p ≠ np  -lrb-  a unsolved conjecture  -rrb-  ,  the complexity of every np-complete problem is formula_20 for every positive integer  . 
these are so common that they are also used as metaphors for other forms of coercion . 
physical coercion is the most commonly considered form of coercion ,  where the content of the conditional threat is the use of force against a victim ,  their relatives or property . 
the purpose of coercion is to substitute one's aims to those of the victim . 
finally ,  the web server returns the result to the client web browser for display . 
 ''client-host '' and `` server-host '' have subtly different meanings than `` client '' and `` server '' . 
clients and servers exchange messages in a request–response messaging pattern . 
the sharing of resources of a server constitutes a `` service '' . 
 -lrb-  by 1992, the word `` server '' had entered into general parlance .   -rrb- 
when a bank customer accesses online banking services with a web browser  -lrb-  the client  -rrb-  ,  the client initiates a request to the bank's web server . 
a server may receive requests from many distinct clients in a short period of time . 
in the client–server model ,  the server is often designed to operate as a centralized system that serves many clients . 
the population of dublin city ,  was 506,211.
the dublin region is a nuts level iii region of ireland . 
to these areas may be added the area of dublin city which collectively comprise the dublin region  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  and come under the remit of the dublin regional authority . 
as of early 2017, the unemployment rate for the dublin region was estimated at 6% . 
despite the legal status of the dublin region ,  the term `` county dublin '' is still in common usage . 
county dublin is the main transport node of ireland ,  and contains one international airport ,  dublin airport . 
these are dublin city council ,  south dublin county council ,  dún laoghaire–rathdown county council and fingal county council . 
the two main train stations are dublin heuston and dublin connolly ,  both of which serve intercity trains . 
thus ,  leibniz' argument is `` in fieri '' ,  while aquinas' argument is both `` in fieri '' and `` in esse '' . 
as a general trend ,  the modern slants on the cosmological argument ,  including the kalam argument ,  tend to lean very strongly towards an `` in fieri '' argument . 
this form of the argument is far more difficult to separate from a purely first cause argument than is the example of the house's maintenance above ,  because here the first cause is insufficient without the candle's or vessel's continued existence . 
 -lrb-  it may require occasional maintenance ,  but that is beyond the scope of the first cause argument .   -rrb- 
the difference between the arguments from causation `` in fieri '' and `` in esse '' is a fairly important one . 
leibniz's contingency argument was summarised by william lane craig ,  as follows:
thomas aquinas  -lrb-  c .  1225–1274 -rrb- adapted and enhanced the argument he found in his reading of aristotle and avicenna to form one of the most influential versions of the cosmological argument . 
this `` in fieri '' version of the argument therefore does not intend to prove god ,  but only to disprove objections involving science ,  and the idea that contemporary knowledge disproves the cosmological argument . 
a clutch damper is a device that softens the response of the clutch engagement/disengagement . 
motorcycles typically employ a wet clutch with the clutch riding in the same oil as the transmission . 
the hele-shaw clutch was a wet clutch that relied entirely on viscous effects ,  rather than on friction . 
cars use clutches in places other than the drive train . 
fast action friction clutches replaced dog clutches in some applications ,  eliminating the problem of impact loading on the dogs every time the clutch engaged . 
as the name implies ,  a cone clutch has conical friction surfaces . 
in the case of `` wet '' clutches ,  composite paper materials are very common . 
a lock-up clutch is used in some automatic transmissions for motor vehicles . 
an example of this is the dog clutch ,  most commonly used in non-synchromesh transmissions . 
on motorcycles the clutch is operated by a hand lever on the left handlebar . 
a centrifugal clutch is used in some vehicles  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  mopeds  -rrb-  and also in other applications where the speed of the engine defines the state of the clutch ,  for example ,  in a chainsaw . 
in a modern car with a manual transmission the clutch is operated by the left-most pedal using a hydraulic or cable connection from the pedal to the clutch mechanism . 
a clutch is a mechanical device which engages and disengages power transmission especially from driving shaft to driven shaft . 
in the simplest application ,  clutches connect and disconnect two rotating shafts  -lrb-  drive shafts or line shafts  -rrb-  . 
cows may tip themselves inadvertently . 
pranksters have sometimes pushed over artificial cows . 
cow tipping is the purported activity of sneaking up on any unsuspecting or sleeping upright cow and pushing it over for entertainment . 
trauma or illness may also result in a cow unable to rise to its feet . 
the owner of the cow commented that he had seen this happen `` once or twice '' before . 
stories about cow tipping tend to be second-hand ,  he says ,  told by someone who does not claim to have tipped a cow but who knows someone else who says he or she did . 
 ''if the cow does no more than modestly widen its stance without an overall shift of its center of gravity '' ,  he says ,  `` about 4,000 newtons or 14 pushers would be needed—quite a challenge to deploy without angering the cow . `` 
cow tipping has many references in popular culture and is also used as a figure of speech . 
cassandra or kassandra  -lrb-  ancient greek: κασσάνδρα ,   ,  also   -rrb-  ,  also known as alexandra ,  was a daughter of king priam and of queen hecuba of troy in greek mythology . 
while couplets traditionally rhyme ,  not all do . 
below is an example of a couplet:
rhyming couplets are one of the simplest rhyme schemes in poetry . 
here are some examples of rhyming couplets where the sense as well as the sound `` rhymes '':
couplets can also appear as part of more complex rhyme schemes ,  such as sonnets . 
brontë experienced the early deaths of all her siblings . 
charlotte brontë  -lrb-   ,  ; 21 april 1816 – 31 march 1855 -rrb- was an english novelist and poet ,  the eldest of the three brontë sisters who survived into adulthood and whose novels became classics of english literature . 
she enlisted in school at roe head in january 1831, aged 14 years . 
when world war ii broke out in 1939, oxford university press moved its offices from london to oxford . 
their son michael was born in 1922.
according to gunnar urang ,  co-inherence is the focus of all williams's novels . 
one of his greatest editorial achievements was the publication of the first major english-language edition of the works of søren kierkegaard . 
wild celery ,  `` apium graveolens '' var . 
the wild form of celery is known as `` smallage '' . 
celery seed is also used as a spice and its extracts have been used in herbal medicine . 
celery seeds can be used as flavoring or spice ,  either as whole seeds or ground . 
north of the alps wild celery is found only in the foothill zone on soils with some salt content . 
the leaves are used as seasoning; the small ,  fibrous stalks find only marginal use . 
celery is eaten around the world as a vegetable . 
leaf celery  -lrb-  chinese celery ,  `` apium graveolens var . 
the seeds can be ground and mixed with salt ,  to produce celery salt . 
in temperate countries ,  celery is also grown for its seeds . 
the stalks are eaten raw ,  or as an ingredient in salads ,  or as a flavoring in soups ,  stews ,  and pot roasts . 
in europe ,  another popular variety is celeriac  -lrb-  also known as `` celery root ''  -rrb-  ,  `` apium graveolens '' var . 
celery stalk may be preserved through pickling by first removing the leaves ,  then boiling the stalks in water before finally adding vinegar ,  salt ,  and vegetable oil . 
the order became extinct in the eighteenth century . 
about the year 1254, peter of morone gave the order a rule formulated in accordance with his own practices . 
the celestines were a roman catholic monastic order ,  a branch of the benedictines ,  founded in 1244.
he sent fifty monks of his order to introduce it ,  who remained there ,  however ,  for only a few months . 
cessna introduced the cessna 172 in 1956.
in 1963 cessna produced its 50,000th airplane ,  a cessna 172.
cessna's first helicopter ,  the cessna ch-1, received faa type certification ,  in 1955.
cessna's first business jet ,  the cessna citation i performed its maiden flight on september 15, 1969.
miłosz's first volume of poetry was published in polish in 1934.
miłosz became fluent in polish ,  lithuanian ,  russian ,  english ,  and french . 
in 1980 miłosz received the nobel prize in literature . 
czesław miłosz died on 14 august 2004 at his kraków home ,  aged 93.
czesław miłosz  -lrb-  ; 30 june 1911 – 14 august 2004 -rrb- was a polish poet ,  prose writer ,  translator and diplomat . 
miłosz wrote all his poetry ,  fiction and essays in polish and translated the old testament `` psalms '' into polish . 
miłosz spent world war ii in warsaw ,  under nazi germany's `` general government '' . 
in 1960 miłosz emigrated to the united states ,  and in 1970 he became a u . s .  citizen . 
pope john paul ii ,  along with miłosz's confessor ,  issued public messages to the effect that miłosz had been receiving the sacraments ,  which quelled the protest . 
miłosz memorialised his lithuanian childhood in a 1955 novel `` the issa valley '' and in the 1959 memoir `` native realm '' . 
during the holocaust in poland ,  miłosz was active in the work of organizacja socjalistyczno-niepodległościowa `` wolność ''  -lrb-  `` the 'freedom' socialist pro-independence organisation ''  -rrb-  . 
obligate or `` true '' carnivores are those whose diet requires nutrients found only in animal flesh . 
carnivores may alternatively be classified according to the percentage of meat in their diet . 
 ''carnivore '' also may refer to the mammalian order carnivora ,  but this is somewhat misleading: many ,  but not all ,  carnivora are meat eaters ,  and even fewer are true obligate carnivores  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
the diet of a hypercarnivore consists of more than 70% meat ,  that of a mesocarnivore 30–70% ,  and that of a hypocarnivore less than 30% ,  with the balance consisting of non-animal foods such as fruits ,  other plant material ,  or fungi . 
the rise of eukaryotic cells at around 2.7 gya ,  the rise of multicellular organisms at about 2 gya ,  and the rise of mobile predators  -lrb-  around 600 mya – 2 gya ,  probably around 1 gya  -rrb-  have all been attributed to early predatory behavior ,  and many very early remains show evidence of boreholes or other markings attributed to small predator species . 
a carnivore at the top of the food chain ,  not preyed upon by other animals ,  is termed an apex predator . 
all celtic languages extant today belong to the insular celtic languages ,  derived from the celtic languages spoken in iron age britain and ireland . 
the romans adopted the celtic cavalry sword ,  the spatha ,  and epona ,  the celtic horse goddess . 
the western la tène culture corresponds to historical celtic gaul . 
celtic cultures seem to have been widely diverse ,  with the use of a celtic language being the main thing they had in common . 
under caesar the romans conquered celtic gaul ,  and from claudius onward the roman empire absorbed parts of britain . 
the iron age hallstatt  -lrb-  c .  800–475 bc  -rrb-  and la tène  -lrb-  c .  500–50 bc  -rrb-  cultures are typically associated with proto-celtic and celtic culture . 
this view has been challenged by the hypothesis that the celtic languages of the british isles form a phylogenetic insular celtic dialect group . 
there are records of celtic mercenaries in egypt serving the ptolemies . 
italy is home to lepontic ,  the oldest attested celtic language  -lrb-  from the 6th century bc  -rrb-  . 
the celtic languages form a branch of the larger indo-european family . 
at the battle of telamon in 225 bc ,  a large celtic army was trapped between two roman forces and crushed . 
insular celtic culture diversified into that of the gaels  -lrb-  irish ,  scottish and manx  -rrb-  and the celtic britons  -lrb-  welsh ,  cornish ,  and bretons  -rrb-  of the medieval and modern periods . 
there are only very limited records from pre-christian times written in celtic languages . 
the defeat of the combined samnite ,  celtic and etruscan alliance by the romans in the third samnite war sounded the beginning of the end of the celtic domination in mainland europe ,  but it was not until 192 bc that the roman armies conquered the last remaining independent celtic kingdoms in italy . 
by the 6th century ,  however ,  the continental celtic languages were no longer in wide use . 
in gaul and the iberian peninsula  -rrb-  . 
for venceslas kruta ,  galatia in central turkey was an area of dense celtic settlement . 
the earliest undisputed direct examples of a celtic language are the lepontic inscriptions beginning in the 6th century bc . 
john t .  koch of aberystwyth university suggested that tartessian inscriptions of the 8th century bc might be classified as celtic . 
celtic river-names are found in great numbers around the upper reaches of the danube and rhine ,  which led many celtic scholars to place the ethnogenesis of the celts in this area . 
today ,  the term celtic generally refers to the languages and respective cultures of ireland ,  scotland ,  wales ,  cornwall ,  the isle of man ,  and brittany ,  also known as the celtic nations . 
celtic smiths and metalworkers created weapons and jewellery for international trade ,  particularly with the romans . 
evidence of insular celtic is available only from about 400 ad ,  in the form of primitive irish ogham inscriptions . 
before the discoveries at hallstatt and la tène ,  it was generally considered that the celtic heartland was southern france ,  see encyclopædia britannica for 1813.
celtic refers to a family of languages and ,  more generally ,  means `` of the celts '' or `` in the style of the celts '' . 
this would mean that tartessian is the earliest attested trace of celtic by a margin of more than a century . 
by the mid-1910s monet had achieved
in 1876, camille monet became ill with tuberculosis . 
it was during this time that monet began to develop the first signs of cataracts . 
monet purchased additional land with a water meadow . 
monet made a study in oils of his dead wife . 
monet has been described as `` the driving force behind impressionism '' . 
on 1 april 1851, monet entered le havre secondary school of the arts . 
his mother was a singer ,  and supported monet's desire for a career in art . 
monet's long career as a painter was spent in the pursuit of this aim . 
despite being baptized catholic ,  monet later became an atheist . 
monet's friend ernest hoschedé became bankrupt ,  and left in 1878 for belgium . 
monet rented and eventually purchased a house and gardens in giverny . 
monet's second wife ,  alice ,  died in 1911, and his oldest son jean ,  who had married alice's daughter blanche ,  monet's particular favourite ,  died in 1914.
following the death of her estranged husband ,  monet married alice hoschedé in 1892.
in addition to ``  ''  -lrb-  pictured above  -rrb-  ,  monet presented four oil paintings and seven pastels . 
in the spring of 1871, monet's works were refused authorisation for inclusion in the royal academy exhibition . 
on 7 april 2005 mandrakesoft announced the decision to change the name of the parent company to mandriva and their distribution name to mandriva linux ,  although the brazilian operation would not change its name from conectiva immediately . 
conectiva was a company founded on august 28, 1995, in curitiba ,  paraná ,  brazil ,  by a group of friends ,  among them arnaldo carvalho de melo ,  who was a pioneer in the distribution of linux and open source software in brazilian portuguese ,  spanish and english for all of latin america . 
the ancient city was destroyed by the roman republic in the third punic war in 146 bc and then re-developed as roman carthage ,  which became the major city of the roman empire in the province of africa . 
also ,  both phoenicians and carthaginians were well known for their secrecy . 
greek cities contested with carthage for the western mediterranean culminating in the sicilian wars and the pyrrhic war over sicily ,  while the romans fought three wars against carthage ,  known as the punic wars ,  `` punic '' meaning `` phoenician '' in latin . 
the latin adjective `` pūnicus '' ,  meaning `` phoenician '' ,  is reflected in english in some borrowings from latin—notably the punic wars and the punic language . 
the fall of carthage came at the end of the third punic war in 146 bc at the battle of carthage . 
most ancient literature concerning carthage comes from greek and roman sources as carthage's own documents were destroyed by the romans . 
also situated on the byrsa were luxury homes . 
in 2016, an ancient carthaginian individual ,  who was excavated from a punic tomb in byrsa hill ,  was found to belong to the rare u5b2c1 maternal haplogroup . 
the city developed from a phoenician colony into the capital of a punic empire dominating the mediterranean during the first millennium bc . 
aristotle remarked also:
the carthaginian republic was one of the longest-lived and largest states in the ancient mediterranean . 
the many amphorae with punic markings subsequently found about ancient mediterranean coastal settlements testify to carthaginian trade in locally made olive oil and wine . 
as noted ,  the celebrated ancient books on agriculture written by mago of carthage survives only via quotations in latin from several later roman works . 
the merchant harbor at carthage was developed ,  after settlement of the nearby punic town of utica . 
cartagenna and dermèche correspond with the lower city ,  including the site of punic carthage; byrsa is associated with the upper city ,  which in punic times was a walled citadel above the harbour; and `` la malga '' is linked with the more remote parts of the upper city in roman times . 
the issues involved in rural land management also reveal underlying features of punic society ,  its structure and stratification . 
when carthage fell ,  its nearby rival utica ,  a roman ally ,  was made capital of the region and replaced carthage as the leading center of punic trade and leadership . 
 ''from the greek author plutarch  -lrb-  c .  46 – c .  120 -rrb- we learn of the 'sacred books' in punic safeguarded by the city's temples . 
evidently carthage also had an institution of elders who advised the suffets ,  similar to a greek `` gerusia '' or the roman senate . 
yet some punic books  -lrb-  latin: `` libri punici ''  -rrb-  from the libraries of carthage reportedly did survive the fires . 
cutting the skin into strips ,  she laid out her claim and founded an empire that would become ,  through the punic wars ,  the only existential threat to rome until the coming of the vandals several centuries later . 
popular assemblies also existed at carthage . 
about the byrsa ,  the citadel area to the north ,  considering its importance our knowledge of it is patchy . 
punic culture here achieved the introduction of agricultural sciences first developed for lands of the eastern mediterranean ,  and their adaptation to local african conditions . 
originally the romans had landed their army on the strip of land extending southward from the city . 
 ''i have run the plough over it ,  like the ancient carthage of africa ,  and i have had salt sown upon it .  .  . `` 
the roman exarchate of africa was not able to withstand the seventh-century muslim conquest of the maghreb . 
in punic farming society ,  according to mago ,  the small estate owners were the chief producers . 
beyond these more settled berbers and the punic farming towns and rural manors ,  lived the independent berber tribes ,  who were mostly pastoralists . 
the merchants of carthage were in part heirs of the mediterranean trade developed by phoenicia ,  and so also heirs of the rivalry with greek merchants . 
graham ,  knuth and patashnik have proposed that the notation formula_1 be used to indicate that and are relatively prime and that the term `` prime '' be used instead of coprime  -lrb-  as in is `` prime '' to   -rrb-  . 
standard notations for relatively prime integers and are: and  . 
the set } is coprime ,  but it is not pairwise coprime since 2 and 4 are not relatively prime . 
the control unit  -lrb-  cu  -rrb-  is a component of a computer's central processing unit  -lrb-  cpu  -rrb-  that directs the operation of the processor . 
previously ,  control units for cpus used ad-hoc logic ,  and they were difficult to design . 
the control unit  -lrb-  cu  -rrb-  is digital circuitry contained within the processor that coordinates the sequence of data movements into ,  out of ,  and between a processor's many sub-units . 
hardwired control units are generally faster than microprogrammed designs . 
thus by only using a program of set instructions in memory ,  the cu will configure all the cpu's data flows as needed to manipulate the data correctly between instructions . 
2 for bassoon and cello  -rrb-  . 
the cello  -lrb-   ; plural cellos or celli  -rrb-  or violoncello  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is a string instrument . 
there are pieces for cello solo ,  j .  s .  bach's six suites for cello  -lrb-  which are among the best-known solo cello pieces  -rrb-  ,  kodály's sonata for solo cello and britten's three cello suites . 
there are also many sonatas for cello and piano . 
cello manufacturer luis & clark constructs cellos from carbon fibre . 
the cello bow has also been used to play electric guitars . 
this keeps the wood components of the cello from drying out . 
the cellos are a critical part of orchestral music; all symphonic works involve the cello section ,  and many pieces require cello soli or solos . 
she plays cello ,  sings harmony and duets . 
the tailpiece and endpin are found in the lower part of the cello . 
cellos are part of the standard symphony orchestra ,  which usually includes eight to twelve cello players . 
the cello is less common in popular music than in classical music . 
in cello playing ,  the bow is much like the breath of a wind instrument player . 
playing the cello is done while seated with the instrument supported on the floor by the endpin . 
a cello bow is roughly heavier than a viola bow ,  which in turn is roughly heavier than a violin bow . 
in the 20th century ,  the cello repertoire grew immensely . 
the cello is a member of the traditional string quartet as well as string quintets ,  sextet or trios and other mixed ensembles . 
both rao and lesh play the cello sitting cross-legged on the floor . 
the fine turners are used for subtle ,  minor adjustments to pitch ,  such as tuning a cello to the oboe's 440 hz a note or to tune the cello to a piano . 
the bridge holds the strings above the cello and transfers their vibrations to the top of the instrument and the soundpost inside  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
a review of compositions for cello in the romantic era must include the german composer fanny mendelssohn  -lrb-  1805–1847 -rrb- who wrote the fantasy in g minor for cello and piano and a capriccio in a-flat for cello . 
music for the cello is generally written in the bass clef ,  but both tenor clef and treble clef are used for higher-range parts ,  both in orchestral/chamber music parts and in solo cello works . 
compositions from the late-19th and early 20th century include three cello sonatas  -lrb-  including the cello sonata in c minor written in 1880 -rrb- by dame ethel smyth  -lrb-  1858–1944 -rrb- ,  edward elgar's cello concerto in e minor ,  claude debussy's sonata for cello and piano ,  and unaccompanied cello sonatas by zoltán kodály and paul hindemith . 
the smaller cellos are identical to standard cellos in construction ,  range ,  and usage ,  but are simply scaled-down for the benefit of children and shorter adults . 
a control store is the part of a cpu's control unit that stores the cpu's microprogram . 
the control store usually has a register on its outputs . 
the original system/360 models of ibm mainframe had read-only control store ,  but later system/360, system/370 and successor models loaded part or all of their microprograms from floppy disks or other dasd into a writable control store consisting of ultra-high speed random-access read-write memory . 
the data general eclipse mv/8000  -lrb-  `` eagle ''  -rrb-  had a sram writable control store ,  loaded on power-on through another cpu . 
saint colmcille is one of the three patron saints of ireland ,  after saint patrick and saint brigid of kildare . 
st .  columba's primary school in drumcondra is a girl's school named after the saint . 
the church of ireland cathedral in derry is dedicated to st colmcille . 
st columba's hospice ,  a prominent hospice in edinburgh ,  is named after the saint . 
st .  columba's school one of the most prominent english-medium schools in india run by the irish christian brothers is also named after the saint . 
st .  colmcilles primary school and st .  colmcilles community school are two schools in knocklyon ,  dublin ,  named after st .  colmcille ,  with the former having an annual day dedicated to the saint on 9 june . 
st colmcille’s boys’ national school and st .  colmcille’s girls’ national school ,  both located in the town of swords ,  are also named after the saint . 
another preceptor of colmcille was st .  mobhi ,  whose monastery at glasnevin was frequented by such famous men as st .  canice ,  st .  comgall ,  and st .  ciarán . 
here he imbibed the traditions of the welsh church ,  for finnian had been trained in the schools of st .  david . 
the assumed antecedent of a conditional proof is called the conditional proof assumption  -lrb-  cpa  -rrb-  . 
conditional proofs are of great importance in mathematics . 
the rule can be stated:
canadian english contains elements of british english and american english ,  as well as many canadianisms . 
southeast asian english comprises singapore english ,  malaysian english and brunei english; it features some influence from malay and chinese languages ,  as well as indian english . 
these dialects are sometimes referred to as `` new englishes ''  -lrb-  mcarthur ,  p .  36 -rrb-; most of them inherited non-rhoticity from southern british english . 
written english as used in the commonwealth generally favours british spelling as opposed to american spelling ,  with some exceptions in canada ,  where there is also a strong influence from neighbouring american english  -lrb-  north american english  -rrb-  . 
a distinctive east african english is spoken in countries such as kenya or tanzania . 
mccarry said in 1995, `` if i had to do it over again ,  i would have written novels about a pediatrician ,  anonymously . `` 
mccarry's first published novel came out in 1973, which means he was 43; in contrast ,  most successful novelists have their first novel published while they are still in their twenties . 
in as essay published by the `` washington post '' ,  he says that `` for a writer in america ,  going out to dinner is like living as an american in europe: total strangers think they can say anything they like to you . `` 
charles mccarry  -lrb-  born 1930 in massachusetts  -rrb-  is an american writer ,  primarily of spy fiction ,  and a former undercover operative for the central intelligence agency who `` the wall street journal '' described in 2013 as `` the dean of american spy writers ''; `` the new republic '' magazine calls him `` poet laureate of the cia . 
mccarry says ,  `` the themes of my novels have been ordinary things -- love ,  death ,  betrayal and the american dream . `` 
in contrast ,  as you read a paul christopher novel , you rarely see or know anything that christopher does not see and know . 
the cimbri  -lrb-  greek κίμβροι ,  latin cimbri  -rrb-  were an ancient tribe . 
the origin of the name `` cimbri '' is unknown . 
because of the similarity of the names ,  the cimbri have been at times associated with cymry ,  the welsh name for themselves . 
the cimbri had penetrated through the alps into northern italy . 
the cimbri are generally believed to have been a germanic tribe originating in jutland . 
some time before 100 bc many of the cimbri ,  as well as the teutons and ambrones migrated south-east . 
advocates for a northern homeland point to greek and roman sources that associate the cimbri with the jutland peninsula . 
the population of modern-day himmerland claims to be the heirs of the ancient cimbri . 
the cimbri are depicted as ferocious warriors who did not fear death . 
it was not until 105 bc that they planned an attack on the roman republic itself . 
 ''browns '' is written in brown . 
the cleveland browns are a professional american football team based in cleveland ,  ohio . 
the browns were announced as an expansion team in 1998 and resumed play in 1999.
through the 2018 season ,  the browns hold the longest active playoff drought in the nfl ,  at 16 seasons . 
the browns are the only national football league team without a helmet logo . 
the history of the cleveland browns american football team began in 1944 when taxi-cab magnate arthur b . 
neither was adopted as standard issue ,  although the us did later adopt the somewhat-longer m4 carbine ,  with a 14.5 '' barrel . 
a carbine  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  ,  from french `` carabine '' ,  is a long gun firearm but with a shorter barrel than a rifle or musket . 
by the 1990s ,  the us had adopted the m4 carbine ,  a derivative of the m16 family which fired the same 5.56mm cartridge but was lighter and shorter  -lrb-  in overall length and barrel length  -rrb-  ,  resulting in marginally reduced range and power ,  although offering better mobility and lighter weight to offset the weight of equipment and armor that a modern soldier has to carry . 
carbines were usually less accurate and less powerful than the longer muskets  -lrb-  and later rifles  -rrb-  of the infantry ,  due to a shorter sight plane and lower velocity of bullets fired from the shortened barrel . 
the modern usage of the term carbine covers much the same scope as it always had ,  namely lighter weapons  -lrb-  generally rifles  -rrb-  with barrels up to 20 inches in length . 
in the us ,  fitting a shoulder stock to a handgun with a barrel less than 16 '' long legally turns it into a short-barreled rifle ,  which is in violation of the national firearms act . 
portability and concealability ,  resulting in a weapon almost the size of ,  but less accurate than ,  a long-gun ,  but not much more powerful than a pistol . 
under the national firearms act of 1934, firearms with shoulder stocks or originally manufactured as a rifle and barrels less than in length are classified as short-barreled rifles . 
the original sterling semi-auto would be classed a `` short barrel rifle '' under the u . s .  national firearms act ,  but fully legal long-barrel versions of the sterling have been made for the u . s .  collector market . 
later ,  even lighter carbines variants of many of these short-barreled assault rifles came to be adopted as the standard infantry weapon . 
carbines without a stock and not originally manufactured as a rifle are not classified as rifles or short barreled rifles . 
the shorter the barrel ,  the more difficult it is to hide the flash; the aks-74u has a complex ,  effective muzzle-booster/flash suppressor ,  yet it still suffers from extreme muzzle flash . 
the carbine was originally a lighter ,  shortened weapon developed for the cavalry . 
rice is a major staple food for people from rice farming areas in southern china . 
glutinous rice  -lrb-  `` sticky rice ''  -rrb-  is a variety of rice used in specialty dishes such as lotus leaf rice and glutinous rice balls . 
stinky tofu is fermented tofu . 
as the pace of life increases in modern china ,  fast food like fried noodles ,  fried rice and `` gaifan ''  -lrb-  dish over rice  -rrb-  become more and more popular . 
gao or guo are rice based snacks that are typically steamed and may be made from glutinous or normal rice . 
there are many kinds of soybean products ,  including tofu skin ,  smoked tofu ,  dried tofu ,  fried tofu and so on . 
noodles are commonly made with rice flour or wheat flour ,  but other flours such as soybean are also used in minor groups . 
chinese food staples such as rice ,  soy sauce ,  noodles ,  tea ,  and tofu ,  and utensils such as chopsticks and the wok ,  can now be found worldwide . 
tofu is made of soybeans and is another popular food product that supplies protein . 
when it comes to sauces ,  china is home to soy sauce ,  which is made from fermented soybeans and wheat . 
other products such as soy milk ,  soy paste ,  soy oil ,  and fermented soy sauce are also important in chinese cooking . 
doufuru can be used as a spread on steamed buns ,  or paired with rice congee . 
foreign westerners made and sold sesame cakes in china during the tang dynasty . 
brâncuși died on march 16, 1957, aged 81.
in 1903, brâncuși traveled to munich ,  and from there to paris . 
brâncuși was cared for in his later years by a romanian refugee couple . 
at his death brâncuși left 1200 photographs and 215 sculptures . 
brâncuși always dressed in the simple ways the romanian peasants did . 
brâncuși would cook his own food ,  traditional romanian dishes ,  with which he would treat his guests . 
after leaving rodin's workshop ,  brâncuși began developing the revolutionary style for which he is known . 
constantin brâncuși  -lrb-  ; february 19, 1876 – march 16, 1957 -rrb- was a romanian sculptor ,  painter and photographer who made his career in france . 
brâncuși held a large spectrum of interests ,  from science to music . 
claus sluter  -lrb-  1340s in haarlem – 1405 or 1406 in dijon  -rrb-  was a sculptor of dutch origin . 
sluter's most significant work is the so-called `` well of moses ''  -lrb-  1395–1403 -rrb- ,  or the great cross was created for the carthusian monastery of champmol ,  which was founded by philip the bold right outside dijon in 1383.
cadillac was incorporated as a city in 1877.
in 1899, the cadillac club formed ,  the forerunner of the cadillac area chamber of commerce . 
on the western portion of lake cadillac ,  where m-55 intersects m-115, is what is locally referred to as cadillac west . 
the city has two high schools: cadillac high school and innovation high school . 
in october 1975 the rock group kiss visited cadillac and performed at the cadillac high school gymnasium . 
the lake cadillac is entirely within the city limits . 
railroad had reached the area in 1872—on little clam lake ,  in cadillac . 
in 1871, cadillac's first sawmill began operations . 
cadillac was originally named clam lake and was incorporated as a village in 1874.
the class of 2006 was the largest class to go through cadillac public schools . 
cadillac is also known as chestnut town ,  usa . 
cadillac maintains a number of state historic landmarks . 
the commercial center of the city is located on the eastern edge of lake cadillac . 
cadillac is a city in the u . s .  state of michigan ,  located in haring township . 
the area surrounding cadillac is primarily rural ,  and is considered to be part of northern michigan . 
the geographic center of michigan is approximately five miles  -lrb-  8.05 km  -rrb-  north-northwest of cadillac . 
cadillac also has an alternative high school ,  located in the building that formerly housed cooley elementary school . 
the intended effect of the fbi's cointelpro was to `` expose ,  disrupt ,  misdirect ,  or otherwise neutralize '' groups that the fbi officials believed were `` subversive '' by instructing fbi field operatives to:
recently ,  documents show that the fbi still engages in cointelpro behavior by surveilling the black lives matter movement . 
fbi director j .  edgar hoover issued directives governing cointelpro ,  ordering fbi agents to `` expose ,  disrupt ,  misdirect ,  discredit ,  or otherwise neutralize '' the activities of these movements and especially their leaders . 
the black panther party was another targeted organization ,  wherein the fbi collaborated to destroy the party from the inside out . 
soon after ,  the fbi was systematically bugging king's home and his hotel rooms ,  as they were now aware that king was growing in stature daily as the most prominent leader of the civil rights movement . 
the program was secret until 1971, when the citizens' commission to investigate the fbi burgled an fbi field office in media ,  pennsylvania ,  took several dossiers ,  and exposed the program by passing this material to news agencies . 
black hate established the ghetto informant program and instructed 23 fbi offices to `` disrupt ,  misdirect ,  discredit ,  or otherwise neutralize the activities of black nationalist hate type organizations '' . 
under pressure from hoover to focus on king ,  sullivan wrote:
a hypersonic speed cruise missile would travel at least five times the speed of sound  -lrb-  mach 5 -rrb- . 
these missiles travel faster than the speed of sound ,  usually using ramjet engines . 
the united states air force's first operational surface-to-surface missile was the winged ,  mobile ,  nuclear-capable mgm-1 matador ,  also similar in concept to the v-1.
during the cold war period both the united states and the soviet union experimented further with the concept ,  deploying early cruise missiles from land ,  submarines and aircraft . 
cruise missiles can be categorized by size ,  speed  -lrb-  subsonic or supersonic  -rrb-  ,  and range ,  and whether launched from land ,  air ,  surface ship ,  or submarine . 
guidance systems also vary greatly . 
in the soviet union ,  sergei korolev headed the gird-06 cruise missile project from 1932 to 1939, which used a rocket-powered boost-glide bomb design . 
