through these artists and others ,  blues music influenced the development of rock music . 
blues musical styles ,  forms  -lrb-  12-bar blues  -rrb-  ,  melodies ,  and the blues scale have influenced many other genres of music ,  such as rock and roll ,  jazz ,  and popular music . 
like jazz ,  rock and roll ,  heavy metal music ,  hip hop music ,  reggae ,  rap ,  country music ,  and pop music ,  blues has been accused of being the `` devil's music '' and of inciting violence and other poor behavior . 
it was the low-down music played by rural blacks . 
by the beginning of the 1960s ,  genres influenced by african american music such as rock and roll and soul were part of mainstream popular music . 
expressive guitar solos were a key feature of this music . 
the american sheet music publishing industry produced a great deal of ragtime music . 
early country music was infused with the blues . 
r&b music can be traced back to spirituals and blues . 
in the 1960s and 1970s ,  a hybrid form called blues rock developed ,  which blended blues styles with rock music . 
the music of the civil rights movement and free speech movement in the u . s .  prompted a resurgence of interest in american roots music and early african american music . 
blues is a music genre and musical form which was originated in the deep south of the united states around the 1870s by african americans from roots in african musical traditions ,  african-american work songs ,  spirituals ,  and the folk music of white americans of european heritage . 
in the 1950s ,  blues had a huge influence on mainstream american popular music . 
handy was the first to popularize blues-influenced music among non-black americans . 
the blues' 12-bar structure and the blues scale was a major influence on rock and roll music . 
bebop marked a major shift in the role of jazz ,  from a popular style of music for dancing ,  to a `` high-art '' ,  less-accessible ,  cerebral `` musician's music '' . 
this commercial stream had important consequences for blues music ,  which ,  together with jazz and gospel music ,  became a component of r&b . 
the blues form is a cyclic musical form in which a repeating progression of chords mirrors the call and response scheme commonly found in african and african-american music . 
gospel music was nevertheless using musical forms that were compatible with christian hymns and therefore less marked by the blues form than its secular counterpart . 
no specific african musical form can be identified as the single direct ancestor of the blues . 
his style of music was not exactly rockabilly but it has been often called real rock and roll  -lrb-  this is a label he shares with several african american rock and roll performers  -rrb-  . 
depending on the religious community a musician belonged to ,  it was more or less considered a sin to play this low-down music: blues was the devil's music . 
several record companies ,  such as the american record corporation ,  okeh records ,  and paramount records ,  began to record african-american music . 
these artists all began their musical careers in the 1970s but they did not achieve international success until the next decade . 
during this period ,  freddie king and albert king often played with rock and soul musicians  -lrb-  eric clapton and booker t & the mgs  -rrb-  and had a major influence on those styles of music . 
santana ,  which was originally called the `` carlos santana blues band '' ,  also experimented with latin-influenced blues and blues rock music around this time . 
the origins of the blues are closely related to the religious music of afro-american community ,  the spirituals . 
reports of blues music in southern texas and the deep south were written at the dawn of the 20th century . 
many elements ,  such as the call-and-response format and the use of blue notes ,  can be traced back to the music of africa . 
this particular music style was popularized in the 1970s by j .  j .  cale and the cover versions performed by eric clapton of `` after midnight '' and `` cocaine '' . 
there are few characteristics common to all blues music ,  because the genre took its shape from the idiosyncrasies of individual performers . 
berlin had 788 hotels with 134,399 beds in 2014.
about 0.9% of berliners belong to other religions . 
the two largest banks headquartered in the capital are `` investitionsbank berlin '' and landesbank berlin . 
in 1709, berlin merged with the four cities of cölln ,  friedrichswerder ,  friedrichstadt and dorotheenstadt under the name berlin ,  `` haupt- und residenzstadt berlin '' . 
the thirty years' war between 1618 and 1648 devastated berlin . 
berlin has two commercial international airports . 
berlin is subdivided into 12 boroughs or districts  -lrb-  `` bezirke ''  -rrb-  . 
berlin maintains official partnerships with 17 cities . 
german is the official and predominant spoken language in berlin . 
more than 60% of berlin residents have no registered religious affiliation . 
some of these congress events take place on venues such as citycube berlin or the berlin congress center  -lrb-  bcc  -rrb-  . 
berlin is an important centre in the european and german film industry . 
in 2006, the fifa world cup final was held in berlin . 
the messe berlin  -lrb-  also known as berlin expocenter city  -rrb-  is the main convention organizing company in the city . 
berlin has three of the top 40 tallest buildings in germany . 
the bridge has an upper deck for the berlin u-bahn line  . 
berlin is the seat of the roman catholic archbishop of berlin and ekbo's elected chairperson is titled the bishop of ekbo . 
all four allies shared administrative responsibilities for berlin . 
berlin  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of germany by both area and population . 
the new berlin brandenburg airport  -lrb-  ber  -rrb-  ,  currently under construction ,  will replace tegel as single commercial airport of berlin . 
following german reunification in 1990, berlin once again became the capital of all of germany . 
the `` exberliner '' ,  a monthly magazine ,  is berlin's english-language periodical and la gazette de berlin a french-language newspaper . 
the borough of spandau lies partly within the berlin glacial valley and partly on the nauen plain ,  which stretches to the west of berlin . 
the oberbaumbrücke is berlin's most iconic bridge ,  crossing the river spree . 
berlin is a world city of culture ,  politics ,  media and science . 
the sectors of the western allies  -lrb-  the united states ,  the united kingdom and france  -rrb-  formed west berlin ,  while the soviet sector formed east berlin . 
on 30 june 2017 the city-state of berlin had a population of 3.69 million registered inhabitants in an area of  . 
st .  hedwig's cathedral is berlin's roman catholic cathedral . 
since the 2000s berlin has seen the emergence of a cosmopolitan entrepreneurial scene . 
daimler manufactures cars ,  and bmw builds motorcycles in berlin . 
unter den linden is a tree-lined east–west avenue from the brandenburg gate to the site of the former berliner stadtschloss ,  and was once berlin's premier promenade . 
siemens ,  a global 500 and dax-listed company is partly headquartered in berlin . 
since 2017, the digital television standard in berlin and germany is dvb-t2.
english ,  vietnamese ,  russian ,  and polish have more native speakers in east berlin . 
in 2014, the city state berlin had 37,368 live births  -lrb-  +6,6%  -rrb-  ,  a record number since 1991.
berlin is well known for its highly developed bicycle lane system . 
in 2002, the german parliament voted to allow the reconstruction of the berlin palace ,  which started in 2013 and will be finished in 2019.
more than 80 mosques ,  ten synagogues ,  and two buddhist temples are located in berlin . 
 ,  berlin had 878 schools ,  teaching 340,658 children in 13,727 classes and 56,787 trainees in businesses and elsewhere . 
researchgate ,  a global social networking site for scientists ,  is based in berlin . 
the charité is a joint institution of the freie universität berlin and the humboldt university of berlin ,  including a wide range of institutes and specialized medical centers . 
airline service to west berlin was granted only to american ,  british and french airlines . 
 -lrb-  whorf ,  1940 -rrb-
sapir had a profound influence on whorf's thinking . 
in late 1938, whorf's own health declined . 
around 1924 whorf first became interested in linguistics . 
the son of harry church whorf and sarah edna lee whorf ,  benjamin lee whorf was born on april 24, 1897 in winthrop ,  massachusetts . 
whorf took sapir's first course at yale on `` american indian linguistics '' . 
sapir also encouraged whorf to continue his work on the historical and descriptive linguistics of uto-aztecan . 
in 1996 penny lee's reappraisal of whorf's writings was published ,  reinstating whorf as a serious and capable thinker . 
whorf's work served to further cement the foundations of the comparative uto-aztecan studies . 
whorf's ideas have also been interpreted as a radical critique of positivist science . 
whorf took on a central role among sapir's students and was well respected . 
by comparison ,  whorf's other work in linguistics ,  the development of such concepts as the allophone and the cryptotype ,  and the formulation of `` whorf's law '' in uto-aztecan historical linguistics ,  have met with broad acceptance . 
whorf's study of hopi time has been the most widely discussed and criticized example of linguistic relativity . 
central to whorf's inquiries was the approach later described as metalinguistics by g .  l .  trager ,  who in 1950 published four of whorf's essays as `` four articles on metalinguistics '' . 
has argued ,  that in this report whorf's linguistic theories exist in a condensed form ,  and that it was mainly through this report that whorf exerted influence on the discipline of descriptive linguistics . 
in the late 20th century ,  interest in whorf's ideas experienced a resurgence ,  and a new generation of scholars began reading whorf's works ,  arguing that previous critiques had only engaged superficially with whorf's actual ideas ,  or had attributed to him ideas he had never expressed . 
whorf conducted important work on the uto-aztecan languages ,  which sapir had conclusively demonstrated as a valid language family in 1915.
in the late 1980s ,  with the advent of cognitive linguistics and psycholinguistics some linguists sought to rehabilitate whorf's reputation ,  as scholarship began to question whether earlier critiques of whorf were justified . 
clinton ,  a baptist ,  has been open about his faith . 
in 1964 and 1965, clinton won elections for class president . 
the senate later acquitted clinton on both charges . 
some of clinton's pardons remain a point of controversy . 
in 1978, clinton entered the arkansas gubernatorial primary . 
during the 2008 democratic presidential primary campaign ,  clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife ,  hillary clinton . 
forty-seven percent of the respondents identified themselves as being clinton supporters . 
after hillary clinton's presidential campaign was over ,  bill clinton continued to raise funds to help pay off her campaign debt . 
as clinton once joked ,  he was the youngest ex-governor in the nation's history . 
since then ,  clinton has been assigned a number of other diplomatic missions . 
many military events occurred during clinton's presidency . 
in september 2004, clinton underwent quadruple bypass surgery . 
during the 2016 presidential election ,  clinton again encouraged voters to support hillary clinton ,  including a campaign stop in wilmington ,  nc . 
the failure of the bill was the first major legislative defeat of the clinton administration . 
clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd president of the united states on january 20, 1993.
throughout clinton's first term ,  his job approval rating fluctuated in the 40s and 50s . 
clinton was selected as `` time '' `` man of the year '' in 1992, and again in 1998, along with ken starr . 
during the eight years of the clinton administration ,  the u . s .  abortion rate declined by about 18.4 percent . 
in 1994, paula jones initiated a sexual harassment lawsuit against clinton ,  claiming that he made unwanted advances towards her in 1991; clinton denied the allegations . 
on january 1, 1994, clinton signed the north american free trade agreement into law . 
during the vietnam war ,  clinton received educational draft deferments while he was in england in 1968 and 1969.
sonia sotomayor was one of the judges who clinton appointed to the court of appeals . 
according to their findings ,  clinton ranked eighth overall ,  with a rating of 70 percent . 
clinton's november 2000 visit to vietnam was the first by a u . s .  president since the end of the vietnam war . 
in 2009, clinton travelled to north korea on behalf of two american journalists imprisoned there . 
under clinton ,  the united states had a projected federal budget surplus for the first time since 1969.
in november 1993, david hale—the source of criminal allegations against bill clinton in the whitewater controversy—alleged that while he was governor of arkansas ,  clinton pressured him to provide an illegal $300,000 loan to susan mcdougal ,  the clintons' partner in the whitewater land deal . 
robert reich has suggested that clinton is in a state of `` permanent election '' ,  due to the impeachment proceedings during his presidency and his continuing support in the campaigns of his wife hillary clinton . 
clinton also spoke in favor of california proposition 87 on alternative energy ,  which was voted down . 
the lewinsky scandal has had an enduring impact on clinton's legacy ,  beyond his impeachment in 1998.
gallup polls in 2007 and 2011 showed that clinton was regarded by 13 percent of americans as the greatest president in u . s .  history . 
during his time at oxford ,  clinton befriended fellow american rhodes scholar frank aller . 
with only minor opposition in the primary and no opposition at all in the general election ,  clinton was elected . 
u . s .  president barack obama awarded clinton the presidential medal of freedom on november 20, 2013.
after oxford ,  clinton attended yale law school and earned a juris doctor  -lrb-  j . d .   -rrb- 
after extensive investigation over several years ,  no indictments were made against the clintons related to the years in arkansas . 
the clinton administration also launched the first official white house website ,  whitehouse . gov ,  on october 21, 1994.
ken gormley ,  author of `` the death of american virtue: clinton vs .  starr '' ,  reveals in his book that clinton narrowly escaped possible assassination in the philippines in november 1996.
in common law legal systems ,  black letter laws are the well-established legal rules that are no longer subject to reasonable dispute . 
the phrase is nearly synonymous with the phrase `` hornbook law '' . 
christmas day and easter sunday are non-trading days . 
blue laws may also prohibit retail activity on days other than sunday . 
the sunday trading act 1994 relaxed restrictions on sunday trading . 
from 2020, stores may only be open on 7 sundays in the year: palm sunday ,  the 3rd and 4th advent sundays ,  the last sunday of january ,  april ,  june and august as well as trading until 14.00 for easter saturday and christmas eve . 
blue laws ,  also known as sunday laws ,  are laws designed to restrict or ban some or all sunday activities for religious reasons ,  particularly to promote the observance of a day of worship or rest . 
another feature of blue laws in the united states restricts the purchase of particular items on sundays . 
most blue laws have been repealed in the united states ,  although indiana banned the sale of alcoholic beverages on sundays until repealed on february 28, 2018, and many states ban selling cars on sundays . 
contrary to popular belief ,  there is no evidence that blue laws were originally printed on blue paper . 
shops with a floor area of over 280 square metres may only open from 1 to 6pm on sundays . 
since 2007, blue laws were enacted and resulted in stores closing on the 13 state holidays in poland - these are both religious and secular days of rest . 
in march 2006, texas judges upheld the state blue law that requires car dealerships to close either saturday or sunday each weekend . 
beer is one of the world's oldest prepared drinks . 
some of humanity's earliest known writings refer to the production and distribution of beer: the code of hammurabi included laws regulating beer and beer parlours ,  and `` the hymn to ninkasi '' ,  a prayer to the mesopotamian goddess of beer ,  served as both a prayer and as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people . 
beer forms part of the culture of many nations and is associated with social traditions such as beer festivals ,  as well as a rich pub culture involving activities like pub crawling and pub games . 
bits are transmitted one at a time in serial transmission ,  and by a multiple number of bits in parallel transmission . 
bits can be implemented in several forms . 
the bit is not defined in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
a bit can be stored by a digital device or other physical system that exists in either of two possible distinct states . 
the bit  -lrb-  a portmanteau of binary digit  -rrb-  is a basic unit of information used in computing and digital communications . 
a less confusing terminology is to refer to bits as shannons  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
certain bitwise computer processor instructions  -lrb-  such as `` bit set ''  -rrb-  operate at the level of manipulating bits rather than manipulating data interpreted as an aggregate of bits . 
confusion often arises because the words bit and binary digit are used interchangeably . 
data transfer rates are usually measured in decimal si multiples of the unit bit per second  -lrb-  bit/s  -rrb-  ,  such as kbit/s . 
in quantum computing ,  a `` quantum bit '' or qubit is a quantum system that can exist in superposition of two classical  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  non-quantum  -rrb-  bit values; see also two-state quantum system . 
the term `` octet '' is used to unambiguously specify a size of eight bits . 
in this era ,  bytes in the instruction stream were often referred to as `` syllables '' ,  before the term byte became common . 
internationally ,  the unit `` octet '' ,  symbol `` o '' ,  explicitly denotes a sequence of eight bits ,  eliminating the ambiguity of the byte . 
the unit symbol for the byte is specified in iec 80000-13, ieee 1541 and the metric interchange format as the upper-case character `` b '' . 
in contrast ,  ieee 1541 specifies the lower case character `` b '' as the symbol for the bit ,  but iec 80000-13 and metric-interchange-format specify the symbol as `` bit '' ,  providing disambiguation from b for byte . 
modern architectures typically use 32- or 64-bit words ,  built of four or eight bytes . 
boron nitride is a heat and chemically resistant refractory compound of boron and nitrogen with the chemical formula bn . 
the rare wurtzite bn modification is similar to lonsdaleite and may even be harder than the cubic form . 
the album reached no . 
since its initial reception ,  `` blood on the tracks '' has been viewed by critics as one of dylan's best albums . 
one of bob and sara dylan's children ,  jakob dylan ,  has said ,  `` when i'm listening to `` blood on the tracks '' ,  that's about my parents . `` 
dylan played the test pressing for his brother ,  david zimmerman ,  who persuaded dylan the album would not sell because the overall sound was too stark . 
the album was also included in the book `` 1001 albums you must hear before you die '' . 
blood on the tracks is the 15th studio album by american singer-songwriter bob dylan ,  released on january 20, 1975 by columbia records . 
5 on `` pitchfork ''<nowiki>'</nowiki>s list of the top 100 albums of the 1970s . 
in 2012, the album was ranked #385 on rolling stone's 500 greatest albums of all time ,  while `` newsweek '' magazine pronounced it the second best album of its decade . 
 ''love and theft ''  -lrb-  generally referred to as love and theft  -rrb-  is the 31st studio album by american singer-songwriter bob dylan ,  released on september 11, 2001, by columbia records . 
the album won the grammy award for best contemporary folk album at the 44th annual grammy awards . 
 ''kludge '' ranked it at number eight on their list of best albums of 2001.
in an interview conducted by alan jackson for `` the times '' magazine in 2001, before the album was released ,  dylan said `` these so-called connoisseurs of bob dylan music .  .  . 
it was nominated for album of the year and the track `` honest with me '' was nominated for best male rock vocal performance . 
jethro  -lrb-  max baer jr .  in 272 episodes  -rrb-  is the son of jed's cousin ,  pearl bodine  -lrb-  though he addresses jed as `` uncle jed ''  -rrb-  . 
jed was one of the three characters to appear in all 274 episodes of the series . 
jane hathaway  -lrb-  nancy kulp in 246 episodes  -rrb-  ,  whom the clampetts address as miss jane ,  is drysdale's loyal and efficient secretary . 
the series starts as jed clampett ,  an impoverished and widowed mountaineer ,  is living alongside an oil-rich swamp with his daughter and mother-in-law . 
although he has little formal education ,  jed clampett  -lrb-  buddy ebsen  -rrb-  has a good deal of common sense . 
beryllium is non-magnetic . 
no beryllium silicide has been identified . 
solutions of beryllium salts ,  such as beryllium sulfate and beryllium nitrate ,  are acidic because of hydrolysis of the be -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  ion . 
beryllium mirrors are of particular interest . 
a beryllium atom has the electronic configuration he 2s . 
organoberyllium chemistry is limited to academic research due to the cost and toxicity of beryllium ,  beryllium derivatives and reagents required for the introduction of beryllium ,  such as beryllium chloride . 
beryllium hydroxide created using either the sinter or melt method is then converted into beryllium fluoride or beryllium chloride . 
beryllium also dissolves in alkali solutions . 
the high thermal conductivities of beryllium and beryllium oxide have led to their use in thermal management applications . 
beryllium is found in over 100 minerals ,  but most are uncommon to rare . 
electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride was used to isolate beryllium during the 19th century . 
beryllium is a chemical element with symbol be and atomic number 4.
beryllium is a p-type dopant in iii-v compound semiconductors . 
the 2s electrons of beryllium may contribute to chemical bonding . 
mixing about 2.0% beryllium into copper forms an alloy called beryllium copper that is six times stronger than copper alone . 
the shortest-lived known isotope of beryllium is be which decays through neutron emission . 
electrolysis of molten beryllium chloride is then used to obtain the metal . 
naturally occurring beryllium ,  save for slight contamination by the cosmogenic radioisotopes ,  is isotopically pure beryllium-9, which has a nuclear spin of  . 
in stream water ,  however ,  beryllium is more abundant with a concentration of 0.1 ppb . 
it is also the best-selling debut album by any artist ever . 
spears' music also has been described as
 ,  she has sold over 100 million records worldwide ,  making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time . 
before she turned 20 in 2001, spears sold more than 37 million albums worldwide '' . 
in december 2008, spears's sixth studio album `` circus '' was released . 
in doing so ,  it became spears's lowest-charting and lowest-selling album in the country . 
spears premiered songs from her upcoming second album during the show . 
spears's version of the song leaked in 2012.
spears is known for her performances and music videos . 
five of spears's singles have reached number one in the united states: ``  .  .  . baby one more time '' ,  `` womanizer '' ,  `` 3 '' ,  `` hold it against me '' and `` s&m '' . 
it became the biggest selling album ever by a teenage artist . 
in october 2007, spears released her fifth studio album ,  `` blackout '' . 
the album's lead single `` hold it against me '' debuted at number-one on the `` billboard '' hot 100, becoming spears's fourth number-one single on the chart and making her the second artist in history to have two consecutive singles debut at number one ,  after mariah carey . 
it has sold over 1 million copies worldwide . 
the album as well as the title track received grammy nominations for best pop vocal album and best female pop vocal performance ,  respectively . 
the title track was released as the lead single from the album . 
in march 2011, spears released her seventh studio album `` femme fatale '' . 
spears began work on her eighth studio album ,  `` britney jean '' ,  in december 2012, and enlisted will . i . am as its executive producer in may 2013.
in 2016, spears confirmed via social media that she had begun recording her ninth studio album . 
with a gross of u . s .  $131.8 million ,  it became the fifth highest-grossing tour of the year . 
spears adopted more mature and provocative themes for her next two studio albums ,  `` britney ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- and `` in the zone ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- ,  and made her feature film debut in a starring role in `` crossroads ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- . 
 ''crossroads '' ,  which had a $12 million budget ,  went on to gross over $61.1 million worldwide . 
lana del rey has said that the music video for `` toxic '' inspires her . 
the album's first single ,  `` i'm a slave 4 u '' ,  became a top-ten hit worldwide . 
the purchasing power in brazil is eroded by the so-called brazil cost . 
the most popular sport in brazil is football . 
brazil  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  officially the federative republic of brazil  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  is the largest country in both south america and latin america . 
brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world . 
brazil has not been invaded since 1865 during the paraguayan war . 
brazil is a democracy ,  according to the democracy index 2010.
brazil is considered an advanced emerging economy . 
the first census in brazil was carried out in 1872 and recorded a population of 9,930,478.
brazil pegged its currency ,  the real ,  to the u . s .  dollar in 1994.
brazil also has a large number of outstanding scientific personalities . 
the colonial architecture of brazil dates to the early 16th century when brazil was first explored ,  conquered and settled by the portuguese . 
brazil is the only country in the world that has the equator and the tropic of capricorn running through it . 
an equatorial climate characterizes much of northern brazil . 
bounded by the atlantic ocean on the east ,  brazil has a coastline of  . 
brazil is the seventh most important country in the auto industry . 
brazil is the fifth largest country in the world ,  and third largest in the americas ,  with a total area of  ,  including of water . 
in 2012, brazil had 1.85 doctors and 2.3 hospital beds for every 1,000 inhabitants . 
the architecture of brazil is influenced by europe ,  especially portugal . 
there are about 2,500 airports in brazil ,  including landing fields: the second largest number in the world ,  after the united states . 
brazil is the first country in south america to offer esperanto to secondary students . 
brazil is a federation composed of 26 states ,  one federal district ,  and the 5570 municipalities . 
the music of brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of european and african elements . 
brazil's navy ,  the second-largest in the americas ,  once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two dreadnoughts ,  which sparked a south american dreadnought race between argentina ,  brazil ,  and chile . 
brazil also has a large cooperative sector that provides 50% of the food in the country . 
at the 1963 event ,  the brazil national basketball team won one of its two world championship titles . 
then in the 20th century especially in brasilia ,  brazil experimented with modernist architecture . 
in total ,  brazil ranks 23rd worldwide in value of exports . 
over central brazil rainfall is more seasonal ,  characteristic of a savanna climate . 
a month later ,  prince pedro was declared the first emperor of brazil ,  with the royal title of dom pedro i ,  resulting in the foundation of the empire of brazil . 
the national beverage is coffee and cachaça is brazil's native liquor . 
some sport variations have their origins in brazil: beach football ,  futsal  -lrb-  indoor football  -rrb-  and footvolley emerged in brazil as variations of football . 
in 2018, 62% of the population on a poll claimed that corruption was brazil's biggest problem . 
brazil's conscription policy gives it one of the world's largest military forces ,  estimated at more than 1.6 million reservists annually . 
the armed forces of brazil are the largest in latin america by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment . 
it is likely that the word `` brazil '' comes from the portuguese word for brazilwood ,  a tree that once grew plentifully along the brazilian coast . 
according to the world tourism organization  -lrb-  wto  -rrb-  ,  international travel to brazil accelerated in 2000, particularly during 2004 and 2005.
with the enactment of the amnesty law in 1979, brazil began a slow return to democracy ,  which was completed during the 1980s . 
the worlds largest healthcare cooperative unimed is also located in brazil ,  and accounts for 32% of the healthcare insurance market in the country . 
tourism in brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country . 
brazil is the largest national economy in latin america ,  the world's eighth largest economy and the eighth largest in purchasing power parity  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  according to the 2017 estimates . 
in the guarani language ,  an official language of paraguay ,  brazil is called `` pindorama '' . 
brazil's railway system has been declining since 1945, when emphasis shifted to highway construction . 
the legal system is based on the federal constitution ,  promulgated on 5 october 1988, and is the fundamental law of brazil . 
the brazilian health system was ranked 125th among the 191 countries evaluated by the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  in 2000.
notable film festivals in brazil include the são paulo and rio de janeiro international film festivals and the gramado festival . 
brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers ,  one of the world's most extensive ,  with eight major drainage basins ,  all of which drain into the atlantic . 
according to the global information technology report 2009-2010 of the world economic forum ,  brazil is the world's 61st largest developer of information technology . 
in addition ,  brazil manages a peacekeeping mission in haiti  -lrb-  $350 million  -rrb-  and makes in-kind contributions to the world food programme  -lrb-  $300 million  -rrb-  . 
the highest point in brazil is the pico da neblina at  ,  and the lowest is the atlantic ocean . 
its gdp  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  per capita was $15,919 in 2017 putting brazil in the 77th position according to imf data . 
brazil is one of the largest producer of oranges ,  coffee ,  sugar cane ,  cassava and sisal ,  soybeans and papayas . 
the brazilian press had its beginnings in 1808 with the arrival of the portuguese royal family to brazil ,  hitherto forbidden any activity of the press – was the publication of newspapers or books . 
there he swore an oath to the new constitution ,  leaving his son ,  prince pedro de alcântara ,  as regent of the kingdom of brazil . 
in 2007, the national indian foundation estimated that brazil has 67 different uncontacted tribes ,  up from their estimate of 40 in 2005.
television in brazil began officially on 18 september 1950, with the founding of tv tupi by assis chateaubriand . 
brazil's foreign policy is a by-product of the country's unique position as a regional power in latin america ,  a leader among developing countries ,  and an emerging world power . 
in the brazilian gdp ,  the forest sector represents just over 1% and fishing 0.4% . 
the political-administrative organization of the federative republic of brazil comprises the union ,  the states ,  the federal district ,  and the municipalities . 
the last portuguese soldiers surrendered on 8 march 1824; portugal officially recognized brazil on 29 august 1825.
brazil is the only portuguese-speaking nation in the americas ,  making the language an important part of brazilian national identity and giving it a national culture distinct from those of its spanish-speaking neighbors . 
in addition to its participation in the battle of the atlantic ,  brazil also sent an expeditionary force to fight in the italian campaign . 
the population of brazil ,  as recorded by the 2008 pnad ,  was approximately 190 million  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  with a ratio of men to women of 0.95:1 and 83.75% of the population defined as urban . 
the black forest stretches from the high rhine in the south to the in the north . 
the black sea has an area of  -lrb-  not including the sea of azov  -rrb-  ,  a maximum depth of  ,  and a volume of  . 
some texts are found in the septuagint but are not present in the hebrew . 
the masoretic text is the authoritative hebrew text of the hebrew bible . 
the septuagint is the basis for the old latin ,  slavonic ,  syriac ,  old armenian ,  old georgian and coptic versions of the christian old testament . 
the hebrew names of the books are derived from the first words in the respective texts . 
in most ancient copies of the bible which contain the septuagint version of the old testament ,  the book of daniel is not the original septuagint version ,  but instead is a copy of theodotion's translation from the hebrew ,  which more closely resembles the masoretic text . 
parallel to the solidification of the hebrew canon  -lrb-  c .  3rd century bce  -rrb-  ,  only the torah first and then the tanakh began to be translated into greek and expanded ,  now referred to as the septuagint or the greek old testament . 
it includes 46 books for the old testament  -lrb-  45 if jeremiah and lamentations are counted as one  -rrb-  and 27 for the new . 
the torah consists of the following five books:
the three poetic books  -lrb-  `` sifrei emet ''  -rrb-  the five megillot  -lrb-  `` hamesh megillot ''  -rrb-  other books
one of two old greek texts of the book of daniel has been recently rediscovered and work is ongoing in reconstructing the original form of the book . 
it defines the books of the jewish canon ,  and also the precise letter-text of these biblical books ,  with their vocalization and accentuation . 
the five relatively short books of song of songs ,  book of ruth ,  the book of lamentations ,  ecclesiastes and book of esther are collectively known as the `` hamesh megillot ''  -lrb-  five megillot  -rrb-  . 
most protestants term these books as apocrypha . 
significant versions of the christian bible in english include the douay-rheims bible ,  the authorized king james version ,  the english revised version ,  the american standard version ,  the revised standard version ,  the new american standard version ,  the new king james version ,  the new international version ,  and the english standard version . 
besides the three poetic books and the five scrolls ,  the remaining books in ketuvim are daniel ,  ezra–nehemiah and chronicles . 
the collection is broken up to form twelve individual books in the christian old testament ,  one for each of the prophets:
latin `` biblia sacra '' `` holy books '' translates greek `` tà biblía tà ágia '' ,  `` the holy books '' . 
the jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in ketuvim . 
the name tanakh  -lrb-  hebrew:   -rrb-  reflects the threefold division of the hebrew scriptures ,  torah  -lrb-  `` teaching ''  -rrb-  ,  nevi'im  -lrb-  `` prophets ''  -rrb-  and ketuvim  -lrb-  `` writings ''  -rrb-  . 
british columbia evolved from british possessions that were established in what is now british columbia by 1871.
queen victoria chose `` british '' columbia to distinguish what was the british sector of the columbia district from the united states  -lrb-  `` american columbia '' or `` southern columbia ''  -rrb-  ,  which became the oregon territory on august 8, 1848, as a result of the treaty . 
ultimately ,  the `` columbia '' in the name `` british columbia '' is derived from the name of the `` columbia rediviva '' ,  an american ship which lent its name to the columbia river and later the wider region; the `` columbia '' in the name `` columbia rediviva '' came from the name `` columbia '' for the new world or parts thereof ,  a reference to christopher columbus . 
the exception to british columbia's wet and cloudy winters is el niño . 
 -lrb-  before colonization ,  british columbia had the densest aboriginal population of any region in what is now called canada .   -rrb- 
british columbia's capital is victoria ,  located at the southeastern tip of vancouver island . 
british columbia contains seven of canada's national parks and national park reserves:
the province's name was chosen by queen victoria ,  when the colony of british columbia  -lrb-  1858–1866 -rrb- ,  i . e .  ,  `` the mainland '' ,  became a british colony in 1858.
british columbia  -lrb-  bc;   -rrb-  is the westernmost province of canada ,  located between the pacific ocean and the rocky mountains . 
other wine regions in british columbia include the cowichan valley on vancouver island and the fraser valley . 
12.5%  -lrb-    -rrb-  of british columbia is considered protected under one of the 14 different designations that includes over 800 distinct areas . 
the buddha relented and agreed to teach . 
the christian saint josaphat is based on the buddha . 
kondañña ,  the youngest ,  and later to be the first arhat other than the buddha ,  was reputed to be the only one who unequivocally predicted that siddhartha would become a buddha . 
the buddhist tradition regards lumbini ,  in present-day nepal to be the birthplace of the buddha . 
in the pali canon ,  the buddha uses many brahmanical devices . 
in the bahá'í faith ,  buddha is regarded as one of the manifestations of god . 
in such a state ,  a being is said to possess the ten characteristics ,  belonging to every buddha . 
after a reputed 49 days of meditation ,  at the age of 35, he is said to have attained enlightenment ,  and became known as the `` buddha '' or `` awakened one ''  -lrb-  `` buddha '' is also sometimes translated as `` the enlightened one ''  -rrb-  . 
a disciple named vakkali ,  who later became an arahant ,  was so obsessed by the buddha's physical presence that the buddha is said to have felt impelled to tell him to desist ,  and to have reminded him that he should know the buddha through the dhamma and not through physical appearances . 
although there are no extant representations of the buddha in human form until around the 1st century ce  -lrb-  see buddhist art  -rrb-  ,  descriptions of the physical characteristics of fully enlightened buddhas are attributed to the buddha in the digha nikaya's ``  ''  -lrb-  d ,  i:142 -rrb- . 
the times of gautama's birth and death are uncertain . 
the nine virtues of the buddha appear throughout the tipitaka ,  and include:
at his death ,  the buddha is famously believed to have told his disciples to follow no leader . 
among the 32 main characteristics it is mentioned that buddha has blue eyes . 
the day of the buddha's birth is widely celebrated in theravada countries as vesak . 
according to the mahāsaccakasutta ,  from the fourth `` jhana '' the buddha gained `` bodhi '' . 
some early chinese taoist-buddhists thought the buddha to be a reincarnation of laozi . 
mahakasyapa was chosen by the sangha to be the chairman of the first buddhist council ,  with the two chief disciples maudgalyayana and sariputta having died before the buddha . 
an extensive and colourful physical description of the buddha has been laid down in scriptures . 
historically ,  the life of the buddha also coincided with the achaemenid conquest of the indus valley during the rule of darius i from about 517/516 bce . 
norman supposes that these terms were already in use at the buddha's time ,  and were familiar to his listeners . 
scholars are hesitant to make unqualified claims about the historical facts of the buddha's life . 
andrew skilton writes that the buddha was never historically regarded by buddhist traditions as being merely human:
according to buddhist tradition ,  the buddha died at kuśināra  -lrb-  present-day kushinagar ,  india  -rrb-  ,  which became a pilgrimage centre . 
gautama buddha  -lrb-  c .  563/480 – c .  483/400 bce  -rrb-  ,  also known as siddhārtha gautama  -lrb-  सिद्धार्थ गौतम  -rrb-  in sanskrit or siddhattha gotama  -lrb-  शिद्धत्थ गोतम  -rrb-  in pali  ,  shakyamuni  -lrb-  i . e . 
of the buddha's disciples ,  sariputta ,  maudgalyayana ,  mahakasyapa ,  ananda and anuruddha are believed to have been the five closest to him . 
disciples of the cao đài religion worship the buddha as a major religious teacher . 
recollection of nine virtues attributed to the buddha is a common buddhist meditation and devotional practice called buddhānusmṛti . 
in the fifth vassana ,  the buddha was staying at mahavana near vesali when he heard news of the impending death of his father . 
it used cast iron for the first time as arches to cross the river severn . 
the failure of bridges first assumed national interest during the victorian era when many new designs were being built ,  often using new materials . 
the simplest type of a bridge is stepping stones ,  so this may have been one of the earliest types . 
the western span of the san francisco–oakland bay bridge also has two levels . 
brick and mortar bridges were built after the roman era ,  as the technology for cement was lost  -lrb-  then later rediscovered  -rrb-  . 
in 1927 welding pioneer stefan bryła designed the first welded road bridge in the world ,  the maurzyce bridge which was later built across the river słudwia at maurzyce near łowicz ,  poland in 1929.
the arkadiko bridge dating from the 13th century bc ,  in the peloponnese ,  in southern greece is one of the oldest arch bridges still in existence and use . 
most likely the earliest bridges were fallen trees and stepping stones ,  while neolithic people built boardwalk bridges across marshland . 
double-decked  -lrb-  or double-decker  -rrb-  bridges have two levels ,  such as the george washington bridge ,  connecting new york city to bergen county ,  new jersey ,  us ,  as the world's busiest bridge ,  carrying 102 million vehicles annually; truss work between the roadway levels provided stiffness to the roadways and reduced movement of the upper level when the lower level was installed three decades after the upper level . 
the materials used to build the structure are also used to categorize bridges . 
to create a beautiful image ,  some bridges are built much taller than necessary . 
among the oldest timber bridges is the holzbrücke rapperswil-hurden crossing upper lake zürich in switzerland; the prehistoric timber piles discovered to the west of the seedamm date back to 1523 bc . 
although large chinese bridges of wooden construction existed at the time of the warring states ,  the oldest surviving stone bridge in china is the zhaozhou bridge ,  built from 595 to 605 ad during the sui dynasty . 
these beads predate glass beads and were probably a forerunner of glass making . 
glass beads were being made in murano by the end of the 14th century . 
peyote stitch is stitched using only one end of the nylon thread . 
the result is a hard bead covered in bluish glass . 
beadwork techniques are broadly divided into loom and off-loom weaving ,  stringing ,  bead embroidery ,  bead crochet ,  bead knitting ,  and bead tatting . 
in fact ,  it is not uncommon for cross stitch patterns to be beaded in peyote stitch technique . 
in peyote stitch ,  beads are woven into the piece in a very similar fashion to knitting or cross stitching . 
and to the present day ,  faience beads have been made in the same way . 
3d beading generally uses the techniques of bead weaving ,  which can be further divided into right angle weave and peyote stitch . 
most native beadwork is created for tribal use ,  but beadworkers also create conceptual work for the art world . 
there are many varieties of board games . 
additionally ,  board games can be therapeutic . 
a 1991 estimate for the global board game market was over $1.2 billion . 
german-style board games are notable for often having less luck element than many north american board games . 
board game venues are also growing in popularity; for example board game cafes are reported to be very popular in china . 
games cost as little as us$ . 25 for a small boxed card game to $3.00 for more elaborate games . 
the earliest known games list is the buddha games list . 
board games have been played in most cultures and societies throughout history . 
a board game is a tabletop game that involves counters or moved or placed on a pre-marked surface or `` board '' ,  according to a set of rules . 
while the board gaming market is estimated to be smaller than that for video games ,  it has also experienced significant growth from the late 1990s . 
many board games are now available as video games ,  which can include the computer playing as one or more opponents . 
although many board games have a jargon all their own ,  there is a generalized terminology to describe concepts applicable to basic game mechanics and attributes common to nearly all board games . 
most glass beads are pressed glass ,  mass-produced by preparing a molten batch of glass of the desired color and pouring it into molds to form the desired shape . 
in modern manufacturing ,  the most common bead materials are wood ,  plastic ,  glass ,  metal ,  and stone . 
this is also true of most plastic beads . 
there are also paper beads . 
most of these glass subtypes are some form of fused glass ,  although goldstone is created by controlling the reductive atmosphere and cooling conditions of the glass batch rather than by fusing separate components together . 
conversely ,  glass artisans may make beads by lampworking the glass on an individual basis; once formed ,  the beads undergo little or no further shaping after the layers have been properly annealed . 
dichroic glass beads incorporate a semitransparent microlayer of metal between two or more layers . 
when weaving on a loom ,  the beads are locked in between the warp threads by the weft threads . 
the most difficult part of loomwork is finishing off the warp threads . 
the fairy shrimp of the order anostraca are usually long  -lrb-  exceptionally up to   -rrb-  . 
the order notostraca comprises the single family triopsidae ,  containing the tadpole shrimp or shield shrimp . 
branchiopoda is a class of crustaceans . 
clam shrimp are bivalved animals which have lived since at least the devonian . 
spinoza's father ,  miguel ,  died in 1654 when spinoza was 21.
spinoza was raised in a portuguese-jewish community in amsterdam . 
spinoza argued that god exists and is abstract and impersonal . 
 ''he who loves god cannot strive that god should love him in return , ``  says spinoza  -lrb-  5p19 -rrb- . 
spinoza has had influence beyond the confines of philosophy . 
it is a widespread belief that spinoza equated god with the material universe . 
bloom writes of spinoza ,  `` he appears to have had no sexual life . `` 
spinoza corresponded with oldenburg for the rest of his short life . 
leibniz disagreed harshly with spinoza in his own manuscript `` refutation of spinoza , ``  but he is also known to have met with spinoza on at least one occasion  -lrb-  as mentioned above  -rrb-  ,  and his own work bears some striking resemblances to specific important parts of spinoza's philosophy  -lrb-  see: monadology  -rrb-  . 
spinoza adopted the latin name benedictus de spinoza ,  began boarding with van den enden ,  and began teaching in his school . 
however ,  nietzsche never read spinoza's works themselves ,  but learned about spinoza from kuno fischer's `` history of modern philosophy '' . 
nothing happens by chance in spinoza's world ,  and nothing is contingent . 
in 1660 or 1661, spinoza moved from amsterdam to rijnsburg  -lrb-  near leiden  -rrb-  ,  the headquarters of the collegiants . 
three of spinoza's ideas strongly appealed to them: by 1879, spinoza’s pantheism was praised by many ,  but was considered by some to be alarming and dangerously inimical . 
although he wrote in latin ,  spinoza learned the language only late in his youth . 
spinoza has been associated with leibniz and descartes as `` rationalists '' in contrast to `` empiricists . `` 
the writings of rené descartes have been described as `` spinoza's starting point . `` 
baruch spinoza  -lrb-  ; ; born benedito de espinosa ,  ; 24 november 1632 – 21 february 1677, later benedict de spinoza  -rrb-  was a jewish-dutch philosopher of portuguese sephardi origin . 
first ,  there were spinoza's radical theological views that he was apparently expressing in public . 
spinoza engaged in correspondence from december 1664 to june 1665 with willem van blijenbergh ,  an amateur calvinist theologian ,  who questioned spinoza on the definition of evil . 
spinoza inspired the poet shelley to write his essay `` the necessity of atheism '' . 
spinoza's `` magnum opus '' ,  the `` ethics '' ,  was published posthumously in the year of his death . 
spinoza spent his remaining 21 years writing and studying as a private scholar . 
spinoza also corresponded with peter serrarius ,  a radical protestant and millenarian merchant . 
the most remarkable aspect of the censure may be not so much its issuance ,  or even spinoza's refusal to submit ,  but the fact that spinoza's expulsion from the jewish community did not lead to his conversion to christianity . 
according to spinoza ,  the highest virtue is the intellectual love or knowledge of god/nature/universe . 
nevertheless ,  once branded as a heretic ,  spinoza's clashes with authority became more pronounced . 
of the scholastics he says: ''yet they will have us beleeve ,  that by the almighty power of god ,  one body may be at one and the same time in many places the problem of the universals; and many bodies at one and the same time in one place the whole and the parts;  .  .  .  and these are but a small part of the incongruencies they are forced to ,  from their disputing philosophically ,  instead of admiring ,  and adoring of the divine and incomprehensible nature  .  .  . `` 
one might expect a solution to follow from such certain language but none does . 
its conjugation ,  turns `` hast '' back into a copula . 
the words `` is ,  or bee ,  or are ,  and the like '' add no meaning to an argument nor do derived words such as `` entity ,  essence ,  essentially ,  essentiality '' ,  which `` are the names of nothing '' but are mere `` signes '' connecting `` one name or attribute to another: as when we say ,  ``  ''a man is a living body '' '' ,  we mean not that the `` man '' is one thing ,  the `` living body '' another ,  and the `` is '' ,  or `` being '' a third: but that the `` man '' ,  and the `` living body '' ,  is the same thing;  .  .  . ``  metaphysiques ,  hobbes says ,  is `` far from the possibility of being understood '' and is `` repugnant to natural reason . `` 
in philosophy ,  being means the existence of a thing . 
eventually from such linguistic analyses ,  it appears that while `` astī ''  -lrb-  is-ness  -rrb-  would resemble the world of heraclitus ,  `` hastī ''  -lrb-  existence  -rrb-  would rather approaches a metaphysical concept resembling the parmenidas's interpretation of `` existence '' . 
it therefore exploits the persian `` hast ''  -lrb-  existential `` is ''  -rrb-  versus `` ast ''  -lrb-  predicative `` is '' or copula  -rrb-  to address both western and islamic ontological arguments on `` being '' and `` existence '' . 
the argument has a theological echos as well: assuming that god is the `` existence '' ,  beyond time and space ,  a question is raised by philosophers of the islamic world as how he ,  as a transcendental existence ,  may ever create or contact a world of `` is-ness '' in space-time . 
existences are not things; they do not themselves exist ,  they lend themselves to essences ,  which do not intrinsically have them . 
 ''ast ''  -lrb-  `` is '' ,  as a copula  -rrb-  and `` hast ''  -lrb-  as an existential `` is ''  -rrb-  examines the linguistic properties of the two lexemes in the first place ,  then evaluates how the statements made by other languages with regard to `` being '' can stand the test of persian frame of reference . 
but this universal agent ,  whilst it is not univocal ,  nevertheless is not altogether equivocal ,  otherwise it could not produce its own likeness ,  but rather it is to be called an analogical agent ,  as all univocal predications are reduced to one first non-univocal analogical predication ,  which is being . ``  ''
the stage is set for the concept of god as the cause of all existence ,  who ,  as the almighty ,  holds everything actual without reason or explanation as an act purely of will . 
as an example of efforts in recent times ,  martin heidegger  -lrb-  who himself drew on ancient greek sources  -rrb-  adopted after german terms like `` dasein '' to articulate the topic . 
existentialist philosophers such as sartre ,  as well as continental philosophers such as hegel and heidegger have also written extensively on the concept of being . 
birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups . 
while some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family groups ,  other birds may form large flocks . 
bird eggs are usually laid in a nest . 
birds are often important to island ecology . 
birds sometimes also form associations with non-avian species . 
birds have two sexes: either female or male . 
some species may use more than one system depending on the circumstances . 
feathers are a feature characteristic of birds  -lrb-  though also present in some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds  -rrb-  . 
chicks may also follow their parents during their first migration . 
the classification of birds is a contentious issue . 
most birds cannot move their eyes ,  although there are exceptions ,  such as the great cormorant . 
the nervous system is large relative to the bird's size . 
with the advent of scientific interest in birds ,  many paintings of birds were commissioned for books . 
avivores are animals that are specialised at preying on birds . 
some birds have also demonstrated the capacity to fall into slow-wave sleep one hemisphere of the brain at a time . 
bird calls and songs ,  which are produced in the syrinx ,  are the major means by which birds communicate with sound . 
the skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation . 
variation in plumage also allows for the identification of birds ,  particularly between species . 
birds communicate using primarily visual and auditory signals . 
cladogram of modern bird relationships based on prum ,  r . o . 
birds have been domesticated by humans both as pets and for practical purposes . 
the most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss . 
chicks at neither extreme but favoring one or the other may be termed or  . 
the scales of birds are thought to be homologous to those of reptiles and mammals . 
male birds have two z chromosomes  -lrb-  zz  -rrb-  ,  and female birds have a w chromosome and a z chromosome  -lrb-  wz  -rrb-  . 
birds have a very efficient system for diffusing oxygen into the blood; birds have a ten times greater surface area to gas exchange volume than mammals . 
the bird retina has a fan shaped blood supply system called the pecten . 
wing shape and size generally determine a bird's flight style and performance; many birds combine powered ,  flapping flight with less energy-intensive soaring flight . 
other birds are scavengers; some of these ,  like vultures ,  are specialised carrion eaters ,  while others ,  like gulls ,  corvids ,  or other birds of prey ,  are opportunists . 
birds occupy a wide range of ecological positions . 
perceptions of bird species vary across cultures . 
bird feeding has grown into a multimillion-dollar industry; for example ,  an estimated 75% of households in britain provide food for birds at some point during the winter . 
it has been suggested that there may be certain kinds of sleep which are possible even when in flight . 
feathers being critical to the survival of a bird ,  require maintenance . 
most birds can fly ,  which distinguishes them from almost all other vertebrate classes . 
in heraldry ,  birds ,  especially eagles ,  often appear in coats of arms . 
some of these are zoonotic diseases that can also be transmitted to humans . 
these birds do not exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination ,  but temperature-dependent sex mortality . 
visual communication among birds may also involve ritualised displays ,  which have developed from non-signalling actions such as preening ,  the adjustments of feather position ,  pecking ,  or other behaviour . 
most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat . 
because birds have no teeth ,  their digestive system is adapted to process unmasticated food items that are swallowed whole . 
this may be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid from ants ,  which birds receive through a behaviour known as anting ,  to remove feather parasites . 
it is not considered a direct ancestor of birds ,  though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor . 
 '' .  .  . baby one more time '' was ranked as the 41st best album of all time on the `` billboard top 200 albums of all time '' . 
the album has listed as the 16th best female album of all time on billboard 200 ``  . 
 .  .  . baby one more time is the debut studio album by american pop singer britney spears . 
 '' .  .  . baby one more time '' was released as spears' debut album on january 12, 1999.
the album debuted at number one on the canadian albums chart ,  totaling nine non-consecutive weeks at the top . 
 '' .  .  . baby one more time '' is spears' most successful album with sales of over 32 million copies worldwide ,  making it one of the best-selling albums of all-time . 
in 2010, the music video for ``  .  .  . baby one more time '' was voted the third-most influential video in the history of pop music . 
 '' .  .  . baby one more time '' received mixed reviews from critics . 
 '' .  .  . baby one more time '' is spears' most successful album to date ,  with worldwide sales of 32 million copies ,  and also the best-selling album by a teenage solo artist . 
in 2010, the album was included in the book `` 1001 albums you must hear before you die '' . 
in card games ,  a burn card is a playing card dealt from the top of a deck ,  and discarded  -lrb-  `` burned ''  -rrb-  ,  unused by the players . 
burn cards are usually not shown to the players . 
