the father's older age is also a risk factor in women older than 35, but not in women younger than 35, and may partly explain the increase in risk as women age . 
in those who reach 60 years of age ,  50–70% have the disease . 
some after 30 years of age may lose their ability to speak . 
leukemia is 10 to 15 times more common in children with down syndrome . 
children and adults with down syndrome are at increased risk of epileptic seizures ,  which occur in 5–10% of children and up to 50% of adults . 
the extra chromosome 21 material may also occur due to a robertsonian translocation in 2–4% of cases . 
some proposed treatments may also be harmful . 
type 1 diabetes mellitus is also more common . 
at birth ,  all children should get an electrocardiogram and ultrasound of the heart . 
higher rates of tooth wear and bruxism are also common . 
celiac disease affects about 7–20% and gastroesophageal reflux disease is also more common . 
tympanostomy tubes are often needed and often more than one set during the person's childhood . 
those who have one child with down syndrome have about a 1% risk of having a second child with the syndrome ,  if both parents are found to have normal karyotypes . 
age-related hearing loss of the sensorineural type occurs at a much earlier age and affects 10–70% of people with down syndrome . 
one exception is testicular germ cell cancer which occurs at a higher rate in ds . 
between 5 and 15% of children with down syndrome in sweden attend regular school . 
the risk from the procedure is greater the earlier it is performed ,  thus amniocentesis is not recommended before 15 weeks gestational age and chorionic villus sampling before 10 weeks gestational age . 
people with ds have a lower risk of all major solid cancers including those of lung ,  breast ,  cervix ,  with the lowest relative rates occurring in those aged 50 years or older . 
most individuals with down syndrome have mild  -lrb-  iq: 50–69 -rrb- or moderate  -lrb-  iq: 35–50 -rrb- intellectual disability with some cases having severe  -lrb-  iq: 20–35 -rrb- difficulties . 
according to a biomarker of tissue age known as epigenetic clock ,  trisomy 21 increases the age of blood and brain tissue  -lrb-  on average by 6.6 years  -rrb-  . 
problems of the thyroid gland occur in 20–50% of individuals with down syndrome . 
the term `` trisomy 21 '' is also commonly used . 
without assisted reproductive technologies ,  around half of the children of someone with down syndrome will also have the syndrome . 
those with ds also lack a normal number of lymphocytes and produce less antibodies which contributes to their increased risk of infection . 
central dyslexias include surface dyslexia ,  semantic dyslexia ,  phonological dyslexia ,  and deep dyslexia . 
forms of alexia include pure alexia ,  surface dyslexia ,  semantic dyslexia ,  phonological dyslexia ,  and deep dyslexia . 
there is some variability in the definition of dyslexia . 
the `` continuum '' hypothesis claims that deep dyslexia develops from phonological dyslexia . 
research into potential genetic causes of dyslexia has its roots in post-autopsy examination of the brains of people with dyslexia . 
pure ,  or phonologically-based ,  dyslexia ,  also known as agnosic dyslexia ,  dyslexia without agraphia ,  and pure word blindness ,  is dyslexia due to difficulty in recognizing written sequences of letters  -lrb-  such as words  -rrb-  ,  or sometimes even letters . 
dyslexia was identified by oswald berkhan in 1881, but the term `` dyslexia '' was coined in 1887 by rudolf berlin ,  an ophthalmologist in stuttgart . 
there is some evidence that the use of specially-tailored fonts may help with dyslexia . 
the terms are applied to developmental dyslexia and inherited dyslexia along with developmental aphasia and inherited alexia ,  which are considered synonymous . 
there have been many studies conducted regarding intervention in dyslexia . 
acquired dyslexia or alexia may be caused by brain damage due to stroke or atrophy . 
there are different definitions of dyslexia used throughout the world ,  but despite significant differences in writing systems ,  dyslexia occurs in different populations . 
dyslexia ,  also known as reading disorder ,  is characterized by trouble with reading despite normal intelligence . 
peripheral dyslexias have been described as affecting the visual analysis of letters as a result of brain injury . 
instead it includes dyslexia in a category called specific learning disorders . 
delft is a popular tourist attraction in the country . 
delft artist egbert van der poel painted several pictures of delft showing the devastation . 
delft  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city and municipality in the province of south holland ,  netherlands . 
the city of delft came into being beside a canal ,  the 'delf' ,  which comes from the word `` delven '' ,  meaning delving or digging ,  and led to the name delft . 
according to the duesberg hypothesis ,  aids is not found in africa . 
duesberg also rejects the involvement of retroviruses and other viruses in cancer . 
moreover ,  in addition to recreational drugs ,  duesberg argues that anti-hiv drugs such as zidovudine  -lrb-  azt  -rrb-  can cause aids . 
according to duesberg ,  common diseases are easily misdiagnosed as aids in africa because `` the diagnosis of african aids is arbitrary '' and does not include hiv testing . 
duesberg argues that retroviruses like hiv must be harmless to survive: they do not kill cells and they do not cause cancer ,  he maintains . 
duesberg argued in 1989 that a significant number of aids victims had died without proof of hiv infection . 
duesberg does not suggest that hiv is an endogenous retrovirus ,  a virus integrated into the germ line and genetically heritable:
an early study of his claims ,  published in `` nature '' in 1993, found duesberg's drug abuse-aids hypothesis to have `` no basis in fact . `` 
cohort studies have found that only hiv-positive drug users develop opportunistic infections; hiv-negative drug users do not develop such infections ,  indicating that hiv rather than drug use is the cause of aids . 
the sauropods were the largest and heaviest dinosaurs . 
some dinosaurs are known to have used gizzard stones like modern birds . 
this article deals primarily with non-avian dinosaurs . 
dinosaurs belong to a group known as archosaurs ,  which also includes modern crocodilians . 
non-avian dinosaur remains are occasionally found above the cretaceous–paleogene boundary . 
 ''archaeopteryx '' was the first fossil found that revealed a potential connection between dinosaurs and birds . 
dinosaur fossils have been known for millennia ,  although their true nature was not recognized . 
dinosaurs are a diverse group of reptiles of the clade dinosauria . 
after non-avian dinosaurs were discovered ,  paleontologists first posited that they were ectothermic . 
the discovery that birds are a type of dinosaur showed that dinosaurs in general are not ,  in fact ,  extinct as is commonly stated . 
because feathers are often associated with birds ,  feathered dinosaurs are often touted as the missing link between birds and dinosaurs . 
there were three general dinosaur faunas in the late cretaceous . 
a variety of other skeletal features are shared by dinosaurs . 
in 2016, it was reported that a dinosaur tail with feathers had been found enclosed in amber . 
by september 17, 2008, 1,047 different species of dinosaurs had been named . 
when dinosaurs appeared ,  they were not the dominant terrestrial animals . 
since the first dinosaur fossils were recognized in the early 19th century ,  mounted fossil dinosaur skeletons have been major attractions at museums around the world ,  and dinosaurs have become an enduring part of world culture . 
comparisons between the scleral rings of dinosaurs and modern birds and reptiles have been used to infer daily activity patterns of dinosaurs . 
the smallest dinosaur known is the bee hummingbird ,  with a length of only and mass of around  . 
many dinosaurs were quite small: `` xixianykus '' ,  for example ,  was only about long . 
two topics of particular interest and study have been dinosaur size and behavior . 
feathers are one of the most recognizable characteristics of modern birds ,  and a trait that was shared by all other dinosaur groups . 
the description of feathered dinosaurs has not been without controversy; perhaps the most vocal critics have been alan feduccia and theagarten lingham-soliar ,  who have proposed that some purported feather-like fossils are the result of the decomposition of collagenous fiber that underlaid the dinosaurs' skin ,  and that maniraptoran dinosaurs with vaned feathers were not actually dinosaurs ,  but convergent with dinosaurs . 
there were larger dinosaurs ,  but knowledge of them is based entirely on a small number of fragmentary fossils . 
from a behavioral standpoint ,  one of the most valuable dinosaur fossils was discovered in the gobi desert in 1971.
after 1897, the search for dinosaur fossils extended to every continent ,  including antarctica . 
birds are now recognized as being the sole surviving lineage of theropod dinosaurs . 
public enthusiasm for dinosaurs first developed in victorian england ,  where in 1854, three decades after the first scientific descriptions of dinosaur remains ,  a menagerie of lifelike dinosaur sculptures were unveiled in london's crystal palace park . 
the possibility that dinosaurs were the ancestors of birds was first suggested in 1868 by thomas henry huxley . 
the smallest herbivorous non-avialan dinosaurs included `` microceratus '' and `` wannanosaurus '' ,  at about long each . 
scholarly descriptions of what would now be recognized as dinosaur bones first appeared in the late 17th century in england . 
scientists disagree as to whether non-avian dinosaurs were endothermic ,  ectothermic ,  or some combination of both . 
diamagnets  -lrb-  which induce a negative moment  -rrb-  are attracted to field minima ,  and there can be a field minimum in free space . 
note that because χ is derived from the ratio of the internal magnetic field to the applied field ,  it is a dimensionless value . 
diamagnetic materials are repelled by a magnetic field; an applied magnetic field creates an induced magnetic field in them in the opposite direction ,  causing a repulsive force . 
the eddy currents then produce an induced magnetic field opposite the applied field ,  resisting the conductor's motion . 
all conductors exhibit an effective diamagnetism when they experience a changing magnetic field . 
where formula_11 is the fermi energy . 
diamagnets may be levitated in stable equilibrium in a magnetic field ,  with no power consumption . 
if a powerful magnet  -lrb-  such as a supermagnet  -rrb-  is covered with a layer of water  -lrb-  that is thin compared to the diameter of the magnet  -rrb-  then the field of the magnet significantly repels the water . 
additionally ,  for strong magnetic fields ,  the susceptibility of delocalized electrons oscillates as a function of the field strength ,  a phenomenon known as the de haas–van alphen effect ,  also first described theoretically by landau . 
duke of marlborough  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a title in the peerage of england . 
the earldom of marlborough was held by the family of ley from its creation 1626 until its extinction with the death of the 4th earl in 1679.
when henrietta died in 1733, the marlborough titles passed to her nephew charles spencer  -lrb-  1706–1758 -rrb- ,  the third son of her late sister anne  -lrb-  1683–1716 -rrb- ,  who had married the 3rd earl of sunderland in 1699.
the difference engine consists of a number of columns ,  numbered from 1 to n .  the machine is able to store one decimal number in each column . 
the sequence of operations for column formula_2 is thus:
the table below is constructed as follows: the second column contains the values of the polynomial ,  the third column contains the differences of the two left neighbors in the second column ,  and the fourth column contains the differences of the two neighbors in the third column:
column `` n '' can only store a constant ,  column 1 displays  -lrb-  and possibly prints  -rrb-  the value of the calculation on the current iteration . 
each of the columns from 3 to `` n '' is set to a value derived from the formula_1 first and higher derivatives of the polynomial . 
with the goal of tabulating the values `` p '' -lrb-  0 -rrb- ,  `` p '' -lrb-  1 -rrb- ,  `` p '' -lrb-  2 -rrb- ,  `` p '' -lrb-  3 -rrb- ,  `` p '' -lrb-  4 -rrb- ,  and so forth . 
steps 1,2,3,4 occur for every odd column ,  while steps 3,4,1,2 occur for every even column . 
col formula_8 is the difference between formula_9 and formula_7. .  . 
the numbers in the third values-column are constant . 
the best machines from scheutz could store 4 numbers with 15 digits each . 
the engine is programmed by setting initial values to the columns . 
col formula_6 gets the value of the function at the start of computation formula_7.
to tabulate polynomials of degree `` n '' ,  one needs sufficient storage to hold `` n '' numbers . 
the initial values of columns can be calculated by first manually calculating n consecutive values of the function and by backtracking ,  i . e . 
in the babbage design ,  one iteration  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  one full set of addition and carry operations  -rrb-  happens for each rotation of the main shaft . 
the taylor series expresses the function as a sum obtained from its derivatives at one point . 
draupnir was forged by the dwarven brothers brokkr and eitri  -lrb-  or sindri  -rrb-  . 
after substituting ,  the formula becomes:
in vector calculus ,  divergence is a vector operator that produces a scalar field ,  giving the quantity of a vector field's source at each point . 
 -lrb-  note that we are imagining the vector field to be like the velocity vector field of a fluid  -lrb-  in motion  -rrb-  when we use the terms `` flux '' and so on .   -rrb- 
in physical terms ,  the divergence of a three-dimensional vector field is the extent to which the vector field flux behaves like a source at a given point . 
the divergence can then be written via the voss-weyl formula ,  as:
for a vector expressed in local unit cylindrical coordinates as where is the unit vector in direction  ,  the divergence is
where formula_17 is the local coefficient of the volume element and are the components of with respect to the local unnormalized covariant basis  -lrb-  sometimes written as formula_18 -rrb- . 
every function problem can be turned into a decision problem; the decision problem is just the graph of the associated function . 
every decision problem can be converted into the function problem of computing the characteristic function of the set associated to the decision problem . 
there are standard techniques for transforming function and optimization problems into decision problems . 
the halting problem is an important undecidable decision problem; for more examples ,  see list of undecidable problems . 
decision problems are closely related to function problems ,  which can have answers that are more complex than a simple 'yes' or 'no' . 
a function problem consists of a partial function `` f ''; the informal `` problem '' is to compute the values of `` f '' on the inputs for which it is defined . 
the domain name system delegates the responsibility of assigning domain names and mapping those names to internet resources by designating authoritative name servers for each domain . 
domain name resolvers determine the domain name servers responsible for the domain name in question by a sequence of queries starting with the right-most  -lrb-  top-level  -rrb-  domain label . 
name servers in delegations are identified by name ,  rather than by ip address . 
an authoritative name server can either be a `` master '' server or a `` slave '' server . 
mockapetris instead created the domain name system . 
this set of servers is stored in the parent domain zone with name server  -lrb-  ns  -rrb-  records . 
a dns name server is a server that stores the dns records for a domain; a dns name server responds with answers to queries against its database . 
the diagram illustrates this process for the host that is named by the fully qualified domain name `` www . wikipedia . org '' . 
a glue record is a combination of the name server and ip address . 
the right-most label conveys the top-level domain; for example ,  the domain name www . example . com belongs to the top-level domain `` com '' . 
the domain name space consists of a tree data structure . 
an additional rule requires that top-level domain names should not be all-numeric . 
in theory ,  authoritative name servers are sufficient for the operation of the internet . 
the domain name itself consists of the label ,  possibly concatenated with the name of its parent node on the right ,  separated by a dot . 
some large isps have configured their dns servers to violate rules ,  such as by disobeying ttls ,  or by indicating that a domain name does not exist just because one of its name servers does not respond . 
for proper operation of its domain name resolver ,  a network host is configured with an initial cache  -lrb-  `` hints ''  -rrb-  of the known addresses of the root name servers . 
the domain name system  -lrb-  dns  -rrb-  is a hierarchical decentralized naming system for computers ,  services ,  or other resources connected to the internet or a private network . 
in this case ,  the name server providing the delegation must also provide one or more ip addresses for the authoritative name server mentioned in the delegation . 
the domain name system is maintained by a distributed database system ,  which uses the client–server model . 
a reverse dns lookup is a query of the dns for domain names when the ip address is known . 
the internet maintains two principal namespaces ,  the domain name hierarchy and the internet protocol  -lrb-  ip  -rrb-  address spaces . 
on june 23, 1980, letterman was given his own morning comedy show on nbc ,  `` the david letterman show '' . 
in ``  '' ,  letterman was parodied as `` david litterbin '' . 
on december 4, 2006, cbs revealed that letterman signed a new contract to host `` late show with david letterman '' through the fall of 2010.
in 2002, `` the late show with david letterman '' was ranked seventh on tv guide's 50 greatest tv shows of all time . 
carson later made a few cameo appearances as a guest on letterman's show . 
oprah winfrey appeared on letterman's show when he was hosting nbc's `` late night '' on may 2, 1989.
letterman was born in indianapolis ,  indiana . 
letterman is also a television and film producer . 
letterman currently hosts the netflix series `` my next guest needs no introduction with david letterman '' . 
in total ,  letterman hosted 6,028 episodes of `` late night '' and `` late show '' ,  surpassing friend and mentor johnny carson as the longest-serving late night talk show host in american television history . 
letterman could not recall the incident but apologized . 
in 2016, letterman joined the climate change documentary show `` years of living dangerously '' as one of the show's celebrity correspondents . 
during the taping of his april 3, 2014, show ,  letterman announced that he had informed cbs president leslie moonves that he would retire from hosting `` late show '' by may 20, 2015.
the feud apparently ended in 2005 when winfrey appeared on cbs's `` late show with david letterman '' on december 2, in an event letterman jokingly referred to as `` the super bowl of love '' . 
letterman credits carson as the person who influenced his career the most . 
letterman's biggest influence and his mentor was johnny carson . 
on the february 3, 2011, edition of the `` late show '' ,  during an interview with howard stern ,  letterman said he would continue to do his talk show for `` maybe two years ,  i think . `` 
in april 2012, cbs announced it had extended its contract with letterman through 2014.
his beard was shaved off during the show on january 7, 2008.
leno was higher than letterman on that poll three times during the same period ,  in 1998, 2007, and 2008.
letterman and baldwin introduced seven films for the series . 
philbin again interviewed letterman  -lrb-  and shaffer  -rrb-  while guest-hosting cbs' `` the late late show ''  -lrb-  between the tenures of craig ferguson and james corden  -rrb-  on january 27, 2015.
his dry ,  sarcastic humor caught the attention of scouts for `` the tonight show starring johnny carson '' ,  and letterman was soon a regular guest on the show . 
letterman interviewed mario andretti ,  who had just crashed out of the race . 
in 1992, johnny carson retired ,  and many fans believed that letterman would become host of `` the tonight show '' . 
winfrey interviewed letterman in january 2013 on `` oprah's next chapter '' . 
the show ,  `` my next guest needs no introduction with david letterman '' ,  premiered january 12, 2018, featuring barack obama . 
lindo's film debut came in 1976 with the british comedy `` find the lady '' ,  followed by two other roles in films ,  including an army sergeant in `` more american graffiti ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- . 
delroy george lindo  -lrb-  born 18 november 1952 -rrb- is a british-american actor and theatre director . 
delroy lindo was born in 1952 in lewisham ,  south east london ,  the son of jamaican parents who had emigrated to britain . 
david janssen  -lrb-  born david harold meyer ,  march 27, 1931 – february 13, 1980 -rrb- was an american film and television actor who is best known for his starring role as richard kimble in the television series `` the fugitive ''  -lrb-  1963–1967 -rrb- . 
janssen was born in 1931 in naponee ,  a village in franklin county in southern nebraska ,  to harold edward meyer ,  a banker  -lrb-  may 12, 1906 – november 4, 1990 -rrb- and berniece graf  -lrb-  may 11, 1910 – november 26, 1995 -rrb- . 
docetism's origin within christianity is obscure . 
broadly it is taken as the belief that jesus only seemed to be human ,  and that his human form was an illusion . 
modern theories did away with `` seeming '' . 
since arthur drews published his `` the christ myth ''  -lrb-  die christusmythe  -rrb-  in 1909, occasional connections have been drawn between docetist theories and the modern idea that christ was a myth . 
drachma  -lrb-    ,  ; pl . 
the first distinctively roman silver coin appeared around 226 bc . 
it formed the backbone of roman currency throughout the roman republic . 
on june 6, 2011, this was about us$3.62 in value if the silver were 0.999 pure . 
by the reign of gallienus ,  the `` antoninianus '' was a copper coin with a thin silver wash . 
the silver content of the denarius under the roman empire  -lrb-  after nero  -rrb-  was about 50 grains ,  3.24 grams ,  or  -lrb-  0.105ozt  -rrb-  troy ounce . 
 -lrb-  'denarius' ,  in `` a dictionary of ancient roman coins '' ,  by john r .  melville-jones  -lrb-  1990 -rrb-  -rrb-  . 
guidobaldo da montefeltro adopted francesco maria i della rovere ,  his sister's child and nephew of pope julius ii . 
francesco della rovere was born into a poor family in liguria in north-west italy in 1414, the son of leonardo della rovere of savona . 
in 2002, mamet was inducted into the american theater hall of fame . 
this represented the beginning of mamet's lifelong involvement with the theater . 
mamet was born in 1947 in chicago to lenore june  -lrb-  née silver  -rrb-  ,  a teacher ,  and bernard morris mamet ,  a labor attorney . 
not all real numbers are computable . 
the algebraic numbers form a subfield of the real numbers . 
informally ,  a definable real number is a real number that can be uniquely specified by its description . 
there are only countably many algebraic numbers ,  but there are uncountably many real numbers ,  so in the sense of cardinality most real numbers are not algebraic . 
non-algebraic numbers are called transcendental numbers . 
specific examples of noncomputable real numbers include the limits of specker sequences ,  and algorithmically random real numbers such as chaitin's ω numbers . 
the algebraic numbers also have the property ,  which goes beyond being a subfield of the reals ,  that for each positive integer `` n '' and each algebraic number `` a '' ,  all of the `` n ''th roots of `` a '' that are real numbers are also algebraic . 
the origins of diego de almagro remain obscure . 
de almagro joined pizarro soon afterward ,  bringing more men and arms . 
during this expedition ,  which lasted 14 months ,  de almagro ,  pizarro and hernando de luque became close friends . 
after his return ,  de almagro was surprised to learn of the inca manco's rebellion . 
upon this point ,  de almagro determined everything was a failure . 
after occupying cuzco ,  de almagro confronted an army sent by francisco pizarro to liberate his brothers . 
also during this time de almagro established a friendship with vasco núñez de balboa ,  who was in charge of acla . 
de almagro would remain in panama to recruit men and gather supplies for the expeditions led by pizarro . 
after peru fell to the spanish ,  both pizarro and de almagro initially worked together in the founding of new cities to consolidate their dominions . 
however ,  de almagro's troops quickly took the city and imprisoned the pizarro brothers ,  hernando and gonzalo ,  on the night of 8 april 1537.
espinosa decided to undertake a new expedition ,  which departed in december 1515 with 200 men ,  including de almagro and francisco pizarro ,  who for the first time was designated as a captain . 
in an attempt to claim quito ahead of belalcázar ,  in august 1534 de almagro founded a city on the shores of laguna de colta  -lrb-  colta lake  -rrb-  in the foothills of chimborazo ,  some south of present-day quito ,  and named it `` santiago de quito . `` 
after splitting the treasure of inca emperor atahualpa ,  both pizarro and almagro left towards cuzco and took the city in 1533.
in monotheistic faiths ,  the word `` divinity '' is often used to refer to the singular god central to that faith . 
the word `` divine '' in the new testament is the greek word θείας  -lrb-  `` theias ''  -rrb-  ,  and is the adjective form of `` divinity '' . 
lorenzo snow succinctly summarized this using a couplet ,  which is often repeated within the lds church: `` as man now is ,  god once was: as god now is ,  man may be . `` 
in these latter cases the faiths do not promote deference ,  as happens in monotheisms; rather each suggests a path of action that will bring the practitioner into conformance with the divine law: `` ahimsa '' — 'no harm' — for buddhist and hindu faiths; `` de '' or `` te '' — 'virtuous action' — in taoism; and any of numerous practices of peace and love in new age thinking . 
the word translated as either `` deity '' ,  `` godhead '' ,  or `` divinity '' in the greek new testament is also the greek word θεότητος  -lrb-  `` theotētos ''  -rrb-  ,  and the one verse that contains it is this: colossians 2:9
in the christian greek scriptures of the bible ,  the greek word θεῖον  -lrb-  `` theion ''  -rrb-  in the douay version ,  is translated as `` divinity '' . 
the terms `` divinity '' and `` divine '' — uncapitalized ,  and lacking the definite article — are sometimes used as to denote 'god -lrb-  s  -rrb-  or certain other beings and entities which fall short of absolute godhood but lie outside the human realm . 
divinity as a quality has two distinct usages: overlap occurs between these usages because deities or godly entities are often identical with or identified by the powers and forces that are credited to them — in many cases a deity is merely a power or force personified — and these powers and forces may then be extended or granted to mortal individuals . 
some cameras have the dof scale not on lens barrel ,  but on focusing knob or dial; for example ,  the rolleiflex tlr has its dof scale on the focusing knob; the subminiature camera tessina has dof a scale on the focusing dial . 
it is the change in focal length that then affects the dof . 
the dof limits can be determined visually ,  by focusing on the farthest object to be within the dof and noting the distance mark on the lens distance scale ,  and repeating the process for the nearest object to be within the dof . 
when the lens is set to a given f-number ,  the dof extends between the distances that align with the f-number markings . 
if the marks for the near and far distances fall outside the marks for the largest f-number on the dof scale ,  the desired dof cannot be obtained; for example ,  with the 35 mm lens above ,  it is not possible to have the dof extend from 0.7 m to infinity . 
in cinematography ,  a large dof is often called deep focus ,  and a small dof is often called shallow focus . 
many lenses for small- and medium-format cameras include scales that indicate the dof for a given focus distance and f-number; the 35 mm lens in the image is typical . 
in some cases ,  it may be desirable to have the entire image sharp ,  and a large dof is appropriate . 
alternatively ,  rotating the pof ,  in combination with a small f-number ,  can minimize the part of an image that is within the dof . 
in some cases ,  rotating the pof can better fit the dof to the scene ,  and achieve the required sharpness at a smaller f-number . 
the latin name for exeter is isca dumnoniorum  -lrb-  `` water of the dumnonii ''  -rrb-  . 
the roman name of the town of exeter ,  `` isca dumnoniorum ''  -lrb-  `` isca of the dumnonii ''  -rrb-  ,  contains the root `` *iska- '' `` water '' for `` water of the dumnonii '' . 
as well as isca dumnoniorum ,  ptolemy's 2nd century `` geography '' names three other towns:
this is reflected in the welsh name for exeter: `` caerwysg '' meaning `` fortified settlement on the river uisc '' . 
another group with a similar name but with no known links were the fir domnann of connacht . 
the standard distance of a drag race is 1,320 feet ,  402 m ,  or 1/4 mile . 
in bracket racing with a breakout  -lrb-  stock ,  super stock ,  but also the nhra's super classes  -rrb-  ,  the closest to the index is favourable . 
each driver then backs up to and stages at the starting line . 
even if both drivers leave early ,  the green light is automatically lit for the driver that left last ,  and they still may win the pass  -lrb-  as in the 2014 nhra auto club pro stock final ,  erica enders-stevens and jason line both committed red light infractions; only line was assessed with a red light ,  as he was - . 011 versus enders-stevens' - . 002 -rrb- . 
several measurements are taken for each race: reaction time ,  elapsed time ,  and speed . 
once one competitor is staged ,  their opponent has a set amount of time to stage or they will be instantly disqualified ,  indicated by a red light on the tree . 
modern races are started electronically by a system known as a `` christmas tree '' ,  which consists of a column of lights for each driver/lane ,  and two light beam sensors per lane on the track at the starting line . 
in the `` eyrbyggja saga '' ,  a shepherd is assaulted by a blue-black draugr . 
draugr can also kill people with bad luck . 
the shepherd rises the next night as a draugr . 
the draugr's victims were not limited to trespassers in its home . 
in `` eyrbyggja saga '' ,  draugar are driven off by holding a `` door-doom '' . 
one of the best-known draugar is glámr ,  who is defeated by the hero in `` grettis saga '' . 
the draugr could also move magically through the earth ,  swimming through solid stone as does killer-hrapp:
the draugr's motivation was primarily jealousy and greed . 
the draugr or draug  -lrb-   ,  plural ; modern  ,  and danish ,  swedish ,  and   -rrb-  is an undead creature from norse mythology ,  also called  ,  literally `` again-walker ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
such visits are supposed to be horrible events that often end in death for one or more of the living ,  which would then warrant the exhumation of the draugr by a hero . 
a draugr's presence might be shown by a great light that glowed from the mound like foxfire . 
such a day may be referred to as a calendar day . 
a day ,  a unit of time ,  is approximately the period of time during which the earth completes one rotation around its axis with respect to the sun  -lrb-  `` solar day ''  -rrb-  . 
in recent decades ,  the average length of a solar day on earth has been about 86 400.002 seconds  -lrb-  24.000 000 6 hours  -rrb-  and there are about 365.2422 solar days in one mean tropical year . 
other planets and moons have stellar and solar days of different lengths from earth's . 
therefore ,  although typically 86 400 si seconds in duration ,  a civil day can be either 86 401 or 86 399 si seconds long on such a day . 
the length of day for the earth before the moon was created is still unknown . 
the second is the base unit of time in si units . 
the two main early navigational data models were the hierarchical model and the codasyl model  -lrb-  network model  -rrb- 
databases are used to hold administrative information and more specialized data ,  such as engineering data or economic models . 
the system remained in production until 1998.
the dominant database language ,  standardised sql for the relational model ,  has influenced database languages for other data models . 
 ''database system '' refers collectively to the database model ,  database management system ,  and database . 
later on ,  entity–relationship constructs were retrofitted as a data modeling construct for the relational model ,  and the difference between the two have become irrelevant . 
a database is an organized collection of data ,  generally stored and accessed electronically from a computer system . 
another data model ,  the entity–relationship model ,  emerged in 1976 and gained popularity for database design as it emphasized a more familiar description than the earlier relational model . 
in 1970, he wrote a number of papers that outlined a new approach to database construction that eventually culminated in the groundbreaking `` a relational model of data for large shared data banks '' . 
as well as providing a simple system for finding and returning `` sets '' of data in a single operation . 
thus ,  a relational model can express both hierarchical and navigational models ,  as well as its native tabular model ,  allowing for pure or combined modeling in terms of these three models ,  as the application requires . 
ibm itself did one test implementation of the relational model ,  prtv ,  and a production one ,  business system 12, both now discontinued . 
formally ,  a `` database '' refers to a set of related data and the way it is organized . 
examples include computerized library systems ,  flight reservation systems ,  computerized parts inventory systems ,  and many content management systems that store websites as collections of webpages in a database . 
ibm also had their own dbms in 1966, known as information management system  -lrb-  ims  -rrb-  . 
the codasyl approach relied on the `` manual '' navigation of a linked data set which was formed into a large network . 
this chills the beer down to temperatures between  . 
draught beer ,  also spelt draft ,  is beer served from a cask or keg rather than from a bottle or can . 
draught beer served from a pressurised keg is also known as
cask beer should be stored and served at a cellar temperature of  . 
the carbonation method of serving beer subsequently spread to the rest of the world; by the early 1970s the term `` draught beer '' almost exclusively referred to beer served under pressure as opposed to the traditional cask or barrel beer . 
pressurised co in the keg's headspace maintains carbonation in the beer . 
some antidepressants may also cause insomnia due to their stimulating effect . 
eating large amounts of fish may also reduce the risk . 
major depressive disorder is classified as a mood disorder in dsm-iv-tr . 
those currently or previously affected may be stigmatized . 
no biological tests confirm major depression . 
also ,  it is suggested that folate supplements may have a role in depression management . 
the cause of major depressive disorder is unknown . 
major depressive episodes often resolve over time whether or not they are treated . 
depression is a major cause of disability worldwide . 
at least one of these must be present to make a diagnosis of major depressive episode . 
depression may also come secondary to a chronic or terminal medical condition ,  such as hiv/aids or asthma ,  and may be labeled `` secondary depression . `` 
major depression frequently co-occurs with other psychiatric problems . 
both symptoms and treatment among the elderly differ from those of the rest of the population . 
depressed children may often display an irritable mood rather than a depressed one ,  and show varying symptoms depending on age and situation . 
historical figures were often reluctant to discuss or seek treatment for depression due to social stigma about the condition ,  or due to ignorance of diagnosis or treatments . 
a round of ect is effective for about 50% of people with treatment-resistant major depressive disorder ,  whether it is unipolar or bipolar . 
social stigma of major depression is widespread ,  and contact with mental health services reduces this only slightly . 
the risks involved with treatment of depression among the elderly as opposed to benefits are not entirely clear . 
besides exercise ,  sleep and diet may play a role in depression ,  and interventions in these areas may be an effective add-on to conventional methods . 
major depressive disorder  -lrb-  mdd  -rrb-  ,  also known simply as depression ,  is a mental disorder characterized by at least two weeks of low mood that is present across most situations . 
preventative efforts may result in decreases in rates of the condition of between 22 and 38% . 
the course is claimed to be the most successful of psychoeducational interventions for the treatment and prevention of depression  -lrb-  both for its adaptability to various populations and its results  -rrb-  ,  with a risk reduction of 38% in major depression and an efficacy as a treatment comparing favorably to other psychotherapies . 
delay or failure in seeking treatment after relapse and the failure of health professionals to provide treatment are two barriers to reducing disability . 
a major depressive episode is characterized by the presence of a severely depressed mood that persists for at least two weeks . 
other disorders need to be ruled out before diagnosing major depressive disorder . 
the three most common treatments for depression are psychotherapy ,  medication ,  and electroconvulsive therapy . 
the icd-10 system does not use the term `` major depressive disorder '' but lists very similar criteria for the diagnosis of a depressive episode  -lrb-  mild ,  moderate or severe  -rrb- ; the term `` recurrent '' may be added if there have been multiple episodes without mania . 
studies have shown that 80% of those suffering from their first major depressive episode will suffer from at least one more during their life ,  with a lifetime average of 4 episodes . 
ect is considered one of the least harmful treatment options available for severely depressed pregnant women . 
after treatment ,  drug therapy is usually continued ,  and some patients receive maintenance ect . 
exercise may be recommended to people who are willing ,  motivated ,  and physically healthy enough to participate in an exercise program as treatment . 
treatment options are much more limited in developing countries ,  where access to mental health staff ,  medication ,  and psychotherapy is often difficult . 
the authors concluded that maintenance treatment reduced the risk of relapse by 52% compared to placebo ,  and that this effect was primarily due to recurrent depression in the placebo group rather than a drug withdrawal effect . 
stronger evidence supports the usefulness of antidepressants in the treatment of depression that is chronic  -lrb-  dysthymia  -rrb-  or severe . 
ect is used with informed consent as a last line of intervention for major depressive disorder . 
diagnosis may be delayed or missed when symptoms are interpreted as `` normal moodiness . `` 
diana was often considered an aspect of a triple goddess ,  known as `` diana triformis '': diana ,  luna ,  and hecate . 
diana was an ancient goddess common to all latin tribes . 
diana was known as the virgin goddess of childbirth and women . 
 .  .  .  people regard diana and the moon as one and the same . 
the first major temple dedicated primarily to diana in the vicinity of rome was the temple of diana aventina  -lrb-  diana of the aventine hill  -rrb-  . 
diana is the only pagan goddess mentioned by name in the new testament  -lrb-  acts 19 -rrb- . 
diana was particularly important in the region in and around the black forest ,  where she was conflated with the local goddess abnoba and worshiped as `` diana abnoba '' . 
diana's worship may have originated at an open-air sanctuary overlooking lake nemi in the alban hills near aricia ,  where she was worshiped as diana nemorensis ,  or  -lrb-  `` diana of the sylvan glade ''  -rrb-  . 
diana was initially a hunting goddess and goddess of the local woodland at nemi ,  but as her worship spread ,  she acquired attributes of other similar goddesses . 
diana was not only regarded as a goddess of the wilderness and the hunt ,  but was often worshiped as a patroness of families . 
in the roman provinces ,  diana was widely worshiped alongside local deities . 
images of diana and her associated myths have been found on sarcophagi of wealthy romans . 
diana was often considered to be a goddess associated with fertility and childbirth ,  and the protection of women during labor . 
the plot deals with sylvia ,  one of diana's nymphs and sworn to chastity ,  and diana's assault on sylvia's affections for the shepherd amyntas . 
diana  -lrb-  classical latin:   -rrb-  is a roman goddess of the hunt ,  the moon ,  and nature ,  associated with wild animals and woodland . 
since the renaissance ,  diana's myths have often been represented in the visual and dramatic arts ,  including the opera `` l'arbore di diana '' . 
once greek influence had caused diana to be considered identical to the greek goddess artemis ,  diana acquired artemis' physical description ,  attributes ,  and variants of her myths as well . 
the persona of diana is complex ,  and contains a number of archaic features . 
the title of juno may also have had an independent origin as it applied to diana ,  with the literal meaning of `` helper '' - diana as `` juno lucina '' would be the `` helper of childbirth '' . 
a few wiccan traditions would elevate diana to a more prominent position of worship ,  and there are two distinct modern branches of wicca focused primarily on diana . 
 -lrb-  in `` aradia '' ,  diana is also credited as the creatrix of the material world and queen of faeries  -rrb-  . 
in campania ,  diana had a major temple at mount tifata ,  near capua . 
diana is revered in modern neopagan religions including roman neopaganism ,  stregheria ,  and wicca . 
worship of diana probably spread into the city of rome beginning around 550 bce ,  during her hellenization and combination with the greek goddess artemis . 
elfman's film scores were featured in the 2017 production `` score: a film music documentary '' . 
in 1976, elfman entered the film industry as an actor . 
he is the uncle of actor bodhi elfman ,  who is married to actress jenna elfman . 
elfman has been an atheist since the age of 11 or 12.
elfman continues to compose his film scores in addition to these other projects . 
in 1998, elfman scored `` a simple plan '' ,  starring fonda . 
elfman composed the score for all three of the `` fifty shades '' films  -lrb-  2015–2018 -rrb- . 
elfman's scores for `` batman '' and `` edward scissorhands '' were nominated for afi's 100 years of film scores . 
the dimension of euclidean -space is  . 
the dimension of a vector space is the number of vectors in any basis for the space ,  i . e . 
they may be parameter spaces or configuration spaces such as in lagrangian or hamiltonian mechanics; these are abstract spaces ,  independent of the physical space we live in . 
in physics ,  three dimensions of space and one of time is the accepted norm . 
in classical mechanics ,  space and time are different categories and refer to absolute space and time . 
immanuel kant ,  in 1783, wrote: `` that everywhere space  -lrb-  which is not itself the boundary of another space  -rrb-  has three dimensions and that space in general cannot have more dimensions is based on the proposition that not more than three lines can intersect at right angles in one point . 
while these notions agree on  ,  they turn out to be different when one looks at more general spaces . 
 -lrb-  see space and cartesian coordinate system .   -rrb- 
every hilbert space admits an orthonormal basis ,  and any two such bases for a particular space have the same cardinality . 
it is perceived differently from the three spatial dimensions in that there is only one of it ,  and that we cannot move freely in time but subjectively move in one direction . 
one of the most heralded science fiction stories regarding true geometric dimensionality ,  and often recommended as a starting point for those just starting to investigate such matters ,  is the 1884 novella `` flatland '' by edwin a .  abbott . 
for connected differentiable manifolds ,  the dimension is also the dimension of the tangent vector space at any point . 
for example ,  the dimension of a point is zero; the dimension of a line is one ,  as a point can move on a line in only one direction  -lrb-  or its opposite  -rrb- ; the dimension of a plane is two ,  etc . 
the dimension is an intrinsic property of an object ,  in the sense that it is independent of the dimension of the space in which the object is or can be embedded . 
a connected topological manifold is locally homeomorphic to euclidean -space ,  in which the number is the manifold's dimension . 
the inside of a cube ,  a cylinder or a sphere is three-dimensional because three coordinates are needed to locate a point within these spaces . 
languages using duodecimal number systems are uncommon . 
the duodecimal system  -lrb-  also known as base 12 or dozenal  -rrb-  is a positional notation numeral system using twelve as its base . 
the number twelve ,  a superior highly composite number ,  is the smallest number with four non-trivial factors  -lrb-  2, 3, 4, 6 -rrb- ,  and the smallest to include as factors all four numbers  -lrb-  1 to 4 -rrb- within the subitizing range ,  and the smallest abundant number . 
there are also varying proposals of how to distinguish a duodecimal number from a decimal one ,  or one in a different base . 
in a duodecimal place system twelve is written as 10, but there are numerous proposals for how to write ten and eleven . 
in this system ,  the one  -lrb-  usually right  -rrb-  hand counts repeatedly to 12, displaying the number of iterations on the other  -lrb-  usually left  -rrb-  ,  until five dozens ,  i .  e .  the 60, are full . 
an individual article `` mathematica '' by james d .  watt  -lrb-  included in the above publication  -rrb-  exposes a few of the unusual symmetry connections between the duodecimal system and the golden ratio ,  as well as provides numerous number symmetry-based arguments for the universal nature of the base-12 number system . 
the case for the duodecimal system was put forth at length in f .  emerson andrews' 1935 book `` new numbers: how acceptance of a duodecimal base would simplify mathematics '' . 
although the trigesimal and sexagesimal systems  -lrb-  where the reciprocals of all 5-smooth numbers terminate  -rrb-  do even better in this respect ,  this is at the cost of unwieldy multiplication tables and a much larger number of symbols to memorize . 
david hayes agnew  -lrb-  november 24, 1818march 22, 1892 -rrb- was an american surgeon . 
agnew caught a severe attack of epidemic influenza in 1890.
this procedure helped create agnew's reputation . 
there are rules governing the scoring of a dive . 
plain diving was first introduced into the olympics at the 1904 event . 
the diver with the highest total score after a sequence of dives is declared the winner . 
in synchronised diving events ,  there is a panel of seven ,  nine ,  or eleven judges; two or three to mark the execution of one diver ,  two or three to mark the execution of the other ,  and the remaining three or five to judge the synchronisation . 
in the 1928 olympics ,  'plain' and 'fancy' diving was amalgamated into one event – 'highboard diving' . 
most diving competitions consist of three disciplines: 1 m and 3 m springboards ,  and the platform . 
diving is one of the most popular olympic sports with spectators . 
the score is computed similarly to the scores from other diving events ,  but has been modified starting with the 2012 london olympics for the use of the larger judging panels . 
a grammatical `` object '' is an object `` of something '' ,  either an object `` of a preposition '' or an object `` of a verb '' . 
the indirect object of the verb is expressed between the verb and the direct object of the verb: `` he gave me a book '' or `` he wrote me a poem . `` 
an indirect object can often be `` re-worded '' with a prepositional phrase using `` to '' or `` for '' ,  but it is then no longer an indirect object . 
in these examples ,  the dative marks what would be considered the indirect object of a verb in english . 
the modern objective case pronoun whom is derived from the dative case in old english ,  specifically the old english dative pronoun `` hwām ''  -lrb-  as opposed to the modern subjective `` who '' ,  which descends from old english `` hwā ''  -rrb-  — though `` whom '' `` also '' absorbed the functions of the old english accusative pronoun `` hwone '' . 
in english ,  the first sentence can be rendered as `` i sent the book `` to the man '' '' and as `` i sent `` the man '' the book '' ,  where the indirect object is identified in english by standing in front of the direct object . 
likewise ,  some of the object forms of personal pronouns are remnants of old english datives . 
in general ,  the dative  -lrb-  german: `` dativ ''  -rrb-  is used to mark the indirect object of a german sentence . 
all of the articles change in the dative case . 
the convex regular dodecahedron and great stellated dodecahedron are different realisations of the same abstract regular polyhedron; the small stellated dodecahedron and great dodecahedron are different realisations of another abstract regular polyhedron . 
the convex regular dodecahedron is one of the five regular platonic solids and can be represented by its schläfli symbol {5, 3} . 
although regular dodecahedra do not exist in crystals ,  the pyritohedron form occurs in the crystals of the mineral pyrite ,  and it may be an inspiration for the discovery of the regular platonic solid form . 
in 1863, the northern territory was transferred from new south wales to south australia . 
darwin  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the capital city of the northern territory of australia ,  situated on the timor sea . 
the greater darwin area is the ancestral home of the larrakia people . 
darwin's proximity to south east asia makes it a link between australia and countries such as indonesia and east timor . 
dictatorships are often one-party or dominant-party states . 
at the end of the term ,  the dictator's power was returned to normal consular rule whereupon a dictator provided accountability ,  though not all dictators accepted a return to power sharing . 
because of its negative associations ,  modern leaders very rarely  -lrb-  if ever  -rrb-  use the term `` dictator '' in their formal titles . 
like the term `` tyrant ''  -lrb-  which was originally a respectable ancient greek title  -rrb-  ,  and to a lesser degree `` autocrat '' ,  `` dictator '' came to be used almost exclusively as a non-titular term for oppressive ,  even abusive rule . 
a dictator is a political leader who possesses absolute power . 
as late as the second half of the 19th century ,  the term `` dictator '' had occasional positive implications . 
the base-10 logarithm of the ratio of the two power quantities is the number of bels . 
therefore ,  the bel represents the logarithm of a ratio between two power quantities of 10:1, or the logarithm of a ratio between two field quantities of :1.
the decibel scales differ so that the related power and field quantities change by the same number of decibels . 
two signals whose levels differ by one decibel have a power ratio of 10, which is approximately 1.25893, and an amplitude  -lrb-  field quantity  -rrb-  ratio of 10  -lrb-  1.12202 -rrb- . 
thus ,  the ratio of `` p ''  -lrb-  measured power  -rrb-  to `` p ''  -lrb-  reference power  -rrb-  is represented by `` l '' ,  that ratio expressed in decibels ,  which is calculated using the formula:
two different scales are used when expressing a ratio in decibels ,  depending on the nature of the quantities: power and field  -lrb-  root-power  -rrb-  . 
the bel is seldom used ,  as the decibel was the proposed working unit . 
english biologist thomas henry huxley coined the term `` darwinism '' in april 1860.
romanes' definition of darwinism conformed directly with darwin's views and was contrasted with wallace's definition of the term . 
while the term `` darwinism '' had been used previously to refer to the work of erasmus darwin in the late 18th century ,  the term as understood today was introduced when charles darwin's 1859 book `` on the origin of species '' was reviewed by thomas henry huxley in the april 1860 issue of the `` westminster review '' . 
in his 1995 book `` darwinian fairytales '' ,  australian philosopher david stove used the term `` darwinism '' in a different sense than the above examples . 
in his book `` darwinism ''  -lrb-  1889 -rrb- ,  wallace had used the term `` pure-darwinism '' which proposed a `` greater efficacy '' for natural selection . 
doraemon was awarded the first shogakukan manga award for children's manga in 1982.
wasabi mizuta voiced doraemon . 
in addition ,  doraemon has appeared in a variety of manga series by shōgakukan . 
the `` doraemon ``  franchise has had numerous licensed merchandise . 
the doraemon manga series was first published in december 1969 in six different magazines . 
doraemon  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a japanese manga series written and illustrated by fujiko f .  fujio . 
awards for doraemon include the japan cartoonists association award for excellence in 1973, the first shogakukan manga award for children's manga in 1982, and the first osamu tezuka culture award in 1997.
in 1977 `` corocoro comic '' was launched as the flagship magazine of `` doraemon . `` 
in december 1969 the `` doraemon '' manga appeared in six different children's monthly magazines published by shogakukan . 
global retail sales of `` doraemon '' licensed merchandise later generated in 2015, and in 2016.  ,  `` doraemon '' has generated at least in licensed merchandise sales . 
there have been two series of bilingual ,  japanese and english ,  volumes of the manga by shogakukan english comics under the title `` doraemon: gadget cat from the future '' ,  and two audio versions . 
on 22 april 2002, on the special issue of `` asian hero '' in `` time '' magazine ,  doraemon was selected as one of the 22 asian heroes . 
dartmoor preservation association  -lrb-  dpa  -rrb-  is one of the oldest environmental or amenity bodies in the uk . 
the dpa has opposed what it considered to be unsuitable developments on dartmoor throughout its history . 
in 1988, dartmouth's alma mater song's lyrics changed from `` men of dartmouth '' to `` dear old dartmouth '' . 
dartmouth has never had an official mascot . 
dartmouth's alumni are known for their devotion to the college . 
nine of dartmouth's 17 presidents were alumni of the college . 
in 2015, $88.8 million in need-based scholarships were awarded to dartmouth students . 
a number of dartmouth alumni have found success in professional sports . 
by 2008, dartmouth had graduated 238 classes of students and has over 60,000 living alumni in a variety of fields . 
dartmouth is well known for its fierce school spirit and many traditions . 
with these professional schools and graduate programs ,  conventional american usage would accord dartmouth the label of `` dartmouth university ''; however ,  because of historical and nostalgic reasons  -lrb-  such as `` dartmouth college v .  woodward ''  -rrb-  ,  the school uses the name `` dartmouth college '' to refer to the entire institution . 
dartmouth college has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular media . 
 ''the dartmouth '' describes itself as `` america's oldest college newspaper ,  founded 1799. ''
dartmouth's more than 200 student organizations and clubs cover a wide range of interests . 
in the forbes 2018 `` grateful graduate '' rankings ,  dartmouth came 1st . 
dartmouth's motto ,  chosen by eleazar wheelock ,  is `` vox clamantis in deserto '' . 
in 1819, dartmouth college was the subject of the historic dartmouth college case ,  which challenged new hampshire's 1816 attempt to amend the college' charter to make the school a public university . 
in 2005, sponsored project awards to dartmouth faculty research amounted to $169 million . 
on october 28, 1926, the trustees approved a `` dartmouth college shield '' for general use . 
robinson hall ,  next door to both collis and thayer ,  contains the offices of a number of student organizations including the dartmouth outing club and `` the dartmouth '' daily newspaper . 
dartmouth emerged onto the national academic stage at the turn of the 20th century . 
frost ,  who received four pulitzer prizes for poetry in his lifetime ,  attended but did not graduate from dartmouth; he is ,  however ,  the only person to have received two honorary degrees from dartmouth . 
dartmouth's 1769 royal charter required the creation of a seal for use on official documents and diplomas . 
for its graduate programs ,  `` u . s .  news '' ranks dartmouth's mba program 9th overall and 6th for management . 
dartmouth functions on a quarter system ,  operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms . 
the d-plan was instituted in the early 1970s at the same time that dartmouth began accepting female undergraduates . 
for the freshman class entering fall 2018, dartmouth received 22,033 applications of which 1,925 were accepted for an 8.7% admissions rate . 
dartmouth was ranked 11th among undergraduate programs at national universities by `` u . s .  news & world report '' in its 2018 rankings . 
awru ranks dartmouth among the 76–100 best schools in the world for business administration and 101–150 for management and psychology . 
in 1866, the new hampshire college of agriculture and the mechanic arts was incorporated in hanover ,  in connection with dartmouth college . 
the school is also home to a variety of longstanding traditions and celebrations and has a loyal alumni network; dartmouth ranked #2 in `` the princeton review '' in 2006 for best alumni network . 
in 2006, `` the princeton review '' ranked dartmouth third in its `` quality of life '' category ,  and sixth for having the `` happiest students . `` 
dartmouth's sister city is dartmouth ,  massachusetts . 
dartmouth has a non-league football club dartmouth a . f . c . 
dartmouth is a town and civil parish in the english county of devon . 
notable tourist attractions include the dartmouth royal naval college ,  dartmouth castle and the dartmouth steam railway which terminates at kingswear on the opposite bank of the river . 
dartmouth is linked to kingswear ,  on the other side of the river dart ,  by three ferries . 
dartmouth town council is the lowest of three tiers of local government . 
dartmouth has one secondary school — formerly  -lrb-  dartmouth community college  -rrb-  now dartmouth academy — an all-through school for those aged 3–16, and two primary schools:  -lrb-  dartmouth primary school  -lrb-  now part of dartmouth academy  -rrb-  and st john the baptist r . c . 
since 1905 dartmouth has had a greenhouse as part of the royal avenue gardens . 
the earliest street in dartmouth to be recorded by name  -lrb-  in the 13th century  -rrb-  is smith street . 
at the end of august and early september there is the annual port of dartmouth royal regatta . 
the port of dartmouth royal regatta takes place annually over three days at the end of august . 
the a379 road runs through dartmouth ,  linking the town to slapton and kingsbridge to the southwest and to torbay to the east across the higher ferry . 
it remained a municipal borough until 1974, when it was merged into the south hams district ,  and became a successor parish of dartmouth with a town council . 
no railway has ever run to dartmouth ,  but the town does have a railway station ,  opened on 31st march 1890 to replace the original facility on the pontoon ,  although it is now a restaurant . 
the stage and film actress rachel kempson  -lrb-  1910–2003 -rrb- was born in dartmouth . 
in 1086, the domesday book lists `` dunestal '' as the only settlement in the area which now makes up the parish of dartmouth . 
originally dartmouth's only wharf was bayard's cove ,  a relatively small area protected by a fort at the southern end of the town . 
the etymology of the word `` dodo '' is unclear . 
it is the last recorded live dodo in captivity . 
the first recorded mention of the dodo was by dutch sailors in 1598.
until 1860, the only known dodo remains were the four incomplete 17th-century specimens . 
a white dodo was once thought to have existed on the nearby island of réunion ,  but this is now thought to have been confusion based on the réunion ibis and paintings of white dodos . 
little is known of the behaviour of the dodo ,  as most contemporary descriptions are very brief . 
cheke pointed out that some descriptions after 1662 use the names `` dodo '' and `` dodaers '' when referring to the red rail ,  indicating that they had been transferred to it after the disappearance of the dodo itself . 
the dodo was found interesting enough that living specimens were sent to europe and the east . 
subfossil remains show the dodo was about tall and may have weighed in the wild . 
in 1973, the tambalacoque ,  also known as the dodo tree ,  was thought to be dying out on mauritius ,  to which it is endemic . 
the traditional image of the dodo is of a very fat and clumsy bird ,  but this view may be exaggerated . 
it was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the solitaire ,  and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons . 
worldwide ,  26 museums have significant holdings of dodo material ,  almost all found in the mare aux songes . 
dodos were easy to catch ,  but hunters had to be careful not to be bitten by their powerful beaks . 
in 2014, another indian illustration of a dodo was reported ,  but it was found to be derivative of an 1836 german illustration . 
the image shows a particularly fat bird and is the source for many other dodo illustrations . 
the dutch left mauritius in 1710, but by then the dodo and most of the large terrestrial vertebrates there had become extinct . 
a 2017 study examined the histology of thin-sectioned dodo bones ,  modern mauritian birds ,  local ecology ,  and contemporary accounts ,  to recover information about the life history of the dodo . 
most dodo remains from the mare aux songes have a medium to dark brown colouration . 
strickland and melville established that the dodo was anatomically similar to pigeons in many features . 
different stages of moulting may also account for inconsistencies in contemporary descriptions of dodo plumage . 
in 2002, american geneticist beth shapiro and colleagues analysed the dna of the dodo for the first time . 
a 1631 dutch letter  -lrb-  long thought lost ,  but rediscovered in 2017 -rrb- is the only account of the dodo's diet ,  and also mentions that it used its beak for defence . 
whether the dodo survived the journey is unknown ,  and the letter was destroyed by fire in the 19th century . 
even though the rareness of the dodo was reported already in the 17th century ,  its extinction was not recognised until the 19th century . 
subfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to europe in the 17th century show that dodos were very large birds ,  up to tall . 
as no complete dodo specimens exist ,  its external appearance ,  such as plumage and colouration ,  is hard to determine . 
temple's hypothesis that the tree required the dodo has been contested . 
sideroxylon grandiflorum ,  known as tambalacoque or dodo tree ,  is a long-lived tree in the family sapotaceae ,  endemic to mauritius . 
schultz's breakthrough role was the character of captain `` howling mad '' murdock on `` the a-team '' . 
in the early 1990s ,  he had a recurring role as lieutenant reginald barclay in ``  '' ,  and reprised the role in ``  '' and the film ``  '' . 
in november 2009, schultz confirmed that he and former `` a-team '' co-star dirk benedict would make cameo appearances in the feature film `` the a-team '' . 
schultz married actress wendy fulton in 1983.
the mass of the body then can be expressed as
this is not the same thing as volumetric mass density . 
where `` ρ '' is the density ,  `` m '' is the mass ,  and `` v '' is the volume . 
from the equation for density  -lrb-  `` ρ '' = `` m ''/ ''v ''  -rrb-  ,  mass density has units of mass divided by volume . 
the density ,  or more precisely ,  the volumetric mass density ,  of a substance is its mass per unit volume . 
to determine volumetric mass density ,  one must first discount the volume of the void fraction . 
mass divided by `` bulk '' volume determines bulk density . 
in the case of non-compact materials ,  one must also take care in determining the mass of the material sample . 
in the case of dry sand ,  sand is so much denser than air that the buoyancy effect is commonly neglected  -lrb-  less than one part in one thousand  -rrb-  . 
the density at all points of a homogeneous object equals its total mass divided by its total volume . 
mathematically ,  density is defined as mass divided by volume:
david mcalister barry  -lrb-  born july 3, 1947 -rrb- is an american author and columnist who wrote a nationally syndicated humor column for the `` miami herald '' from 1983 to 2005.
in 1981 he wrote a humorous guest column ,  about watching the birth of his son ,  in the `` philadelphia inquirer '' ,  which attracted the attention of gene weingarten ,  then an editor of the `` miami herald ''s sunday magazine `` tropic '' . 
in december 2005, barry said in an interview with `` editor and publisher '' that he would not resume his weekly column ,  although he would continue such features as his yearly gift guide ,  his year-in-review feature ,  and his blog ,  as well as an occasional article or column . 
in response to a column in which barry mocked the cities of grand forks ,  north dakota ,  and east grand forks ,  minnesota ,  for calling themselves the `` grand cities '' ,  grand forks named a sewage pumping station after barry in january 2002.
angell and his wife ,  lynn ,  were among the passengers of american airlines flight 11 killed in the september 11 attacks on the world trade center in new york city in 2001.
angell and his wife lynn both died heading home from their vacation on cape cod aboard american airlines flight 11, the first plane to hit the world trade center during the september 11 attacks . 
david lawrence angell  -lrb-  april 10, 1946september 11, 2001 -rrb- was an american television producer and screenwriter . 
westermann is seen as one of the founders of modern african linguistics . 
diedrich hermann westermann  -lrb-  june 24, 1875–may 31, 1956 -rrb- was a german missionary ,  africanist ,  and linguist . 
diacritical marks may appear above or below a letter ,  or in some other position such as within the letter or between two letters . 
french treats letters with diacritical marks the same as the underlying letter for purposes of ordering and dictionaries . 
languages that treat accented letters as variants of the underlying letter usually alphabetize words with such symbols immediately after similar unmarked words . 
in other alphabetic systems ,  diacritical marks may perform other functions . 
the tittle  -lrb-  dot  -rrb-  on the letter `` i '' of the latin alphabet originated as a diacritic to clearly distinguish `` i '' from the minims  -lrb-  downstrokes  -rrb-  of adjacent letters . 
in orthography and collation ,  a letter modified by a diacritic may be treated either as a new ,  distinct letter or as a letter–diacritic combination . 
not all diacritics occur adjacent to the letter they modify . 
the main use of diacritical marks in the latin script is to change the sound-values of the letters to which they are added . 
there are numerous other ,  regional names for the didgeridoo . 
modern didgeridoo designs are distinct from the traditional australian aboriginal didgeridoo ,  and are innovations recognized by musicologists . 
other variations in the didgeridoo's sound can be made by adding vocalizations to the drone . 
the didgeridoo also became a role playing instrument in the experimental and avant-garde music scene . 
 ''didgeridoo '' is considered to be an onomatopoetic word of western invention . 
there are no reliable sources stating the didgeridoo's exact age . 
recordings exist of modern didgeridoo players playing continuously for more than 40 minutes; mark atkins on `` didgeridoo concerto ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- plays for over 50 minutes continuously . 
there are numerous names for the instrument among the aboriginal peoples of northern australia ,  none of which closely resemble the word `` didgeridoo ''  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
a modern didgeridoo is usually cylindrical or conical ,  and can measure anywhere from long . 
the didgeridoo  -lrb-  ; also known as a didjeridu  -rrb-  is a wind instrument developed by indigenous australians of northern australia potentially within the last 1,500 years and still in widespread use today both in australia and around the world . 
more modern approaches to playing the didgeridoo are starting to show up in performances and lessons around the world . 
in addition to growth by cell division ,  a plant may grow through cell elongation . 
plant development is the process by which structures originate and mature as a plant grows . 
it is studied in plant anatomy and plant physiology as well as plant morphology . 
a vascular plant begins from a single celled zygote ,  formed by fertilisation of an egg cell by a sperm cell . 
plant growth and development are mediated by specific plant hormones and plant growth regulators  -lrb-  pgrs  -rrb-   -lrb-  ross et al . 
developmental biology is the study of the process by which animals and plants grow and develop . 
growth in embryos is mostly autonomous . 
the development of plants involves similar processes to that of animals . 
developmental processes are very evident during the process of metamorphosis . 
some dwarf planets ,  too ,  have satellites substantially less massive than the dwarf planets themselves . 
in astronomy ,  a double planet  -lrb-  also binary planet  -rrb-  is a binary system where both objects are of planetary mass . 
one important consideration in defining `` double planet '' is the ratio of the masses of the two bodies . 
where m is the mass of the primary  -lrb-  the larger body  -rrb-  ,  m is the mass of the sun ,  d is the distance between the smaller body and the sun ,  and d is the distance between the smaller body and the primary . 
see the path of earth and moon around sun section in the `` orbit of the moon '' article for a more detailed explanation . 
note that the tug-of-war value does not rely on the mass of the satellite  -lrb-  the smaller body  -rrb-  . 
asimov calculated tug-of-war values for several satellites of the planets . 
