antibodies are secreted by b cells of the adaptive immune system ,  mostly by differentiated b cells called plasma cells . 
the antibody isotype of a b cell changes during cell development and activation . 
in 1948, astrid fagreaus discovered that b cells ,  in the form of plasma cells ,  were responsible for generating antibodies . 
in summary ,  the fab region of the antibody determines antigen specificity while the fc region of the antibody determines the antibody's class effect . 
the regions where the genes are randomly recombined together is the hyper variable region used to recognise different antigens on a clonal basis . 
in humans ,  the cell surface is bare around the b cell receptors for several hundred nanometers ,  which further isolates the bcrs from competing influences . 
the variable region of each heavy chain is approximately 110 amino acids long and is composed of a single ig domain . 
in mammals there are two types of immunoglobulin light chain ,  which are called lambda  -lrb-  λ  -rrb-  and kappa  -lrb-  κ  -rrb-  . 
the ig monomer is a `` y ''-shaped molecule that consists of four polypeptide chains; two identical `` heavy chains '' and two identical `` light chains '' connected by disulfide bonds . 
he was the father of two other composers ,  domenico scarlatti and pietro filippo scarlatti . 
scarlatti's music forms an important link between the early baroque italian vocal styles of the 17th century ,  with their centers in florence ,  venice and rome ,  and the classical school of the 18th century . 
scarlatti was born in palermo  -lrb-  or in trapani  -rrb-  ,  then part of the kingdom of sicily . 
besides the operas ,  oratorios  -lrb-  `` agar et ismaele esiliati '' ,  1684; `` la maddalena '' ,  1685; `` la giuditta '' ,  1693; `` christmas oratorio '' ,  c .  1705; `` s .  filippo neri '' ,  1714; and others  -rrb-  and serenatas ,  which all exhibit a similar style ,  scarlatti composed upwards of five hundred chamber-cantatas for solo voice . 
he died in naples in 1725 and is entombed there at the church of santa maria di montesanto . 
aston martin was founded in 1913 by lionel martin and robert bamford . 
aston martin was often financially troubled . 
in 2013, aston martin signed a deal with daimler ag ,  which owned 5% of aston martin ,  to supply the next generation of aston martin cars with mercedes-amg engines . 
the db7 range was boosted by the addition of v12 vantage models in 1999, and in 2001, aston martin introduced the v12-engined aston martin vanquish . 
aston martin began to build the classic `` db '' series of cars . 
aston martin needed funds to survive in the long term . 
in december 2008, aston martin announced it would cut its workforce from 1,850 to 1,250.
ford kept a stake in aston martin valued at £40m  -lrb-  us$70m  -rrb-  . 
in december 2003, aston martin announced it would return to motor racing in 2005.
in 1982, aston martin was granted a royal warrant of appointment by the prince of wales . 
curtis ,  who had a 42% stake in aston martin ,  also brought about a change in direction from the usual customers who were aston martin fanatics  -lrb-  fans  -rrb-  to successful young married businessmen . 
in october 2018, aston martin announced it was opening a design and brand studio in shanghai . 
the first car to be named `` aston martin '' was created by martin by fitting a four-cylinder coventry-simplex engine to the chassis of a 1908 isotta fraschini . 
between 1926 and 1937 bertelli was both technical director and designer of all new aston martins ,  since known as `` bertelli cars '' . 
although as a result aston martin had to make 60 members of the workforce redundant ,  gauntlett bought a stake in italian styling house zagato ,  and resurrected its collaboration with aston martin . 
in 1992, the vantage version was announced ,  and the following year aston martin renewed the db range by announcing the db7.
since 2015, aston martin has sought to increase its appeal to women as a luxury lifestyle brand . 
while these models helped aston martin establish a good racing pedigree ,  the db4 stood out and yielded the famous db5 in 1963.
in march 2008, aston martin announced a partnership with magna steyr to outsource manufacture of over 2,000 cars annually to graz ,  austria ,  reassuringly stating: `` the continuing growth and success of aston martin is based upon gaydon as the focal point and heart of the business ,  with the design and engineering of all aston martin products continuing to be carried out there . `` 
the authorship of `` the old canoe '' was attributed to pike . 
additionally ,  pike wrote on several legal subjects . 
in 1861, pike penned the lyrics to `` dixie to arms ! `` 
pike has become a key figure for conspiracy theorists . 
pike was born in boston ,  massachusetts ,  the son of benjamin and sarah  -lrb-  andrews  -rrb-  pike ,  and spent his childhood in byfield and newburyport ,  massachusetts . 
after the war ,  pike returned to the practice of law ,  moving to new orleans for a time beginning in 1853.
pike first joined the fraternal independent order of odd fellows in 1840.
as a young man of letters ,  pike wrote poetry ,  and he continued to do so for the rest of his life . 
albert pike  -lrb-  december 29, 1809 – april 2, 1891 -rrb- was an american attorney ,  soldier ,  writer ,  and freemason . 
for instance cowan once told alf who was readying for a medieval themed episode that `` less than 2% of our audience lives in the dark ages '' . 
following the rise of the taliban and their capture of kabul ,  dostum aligned himself with the northern alliance  -lrb-  united front  -rrb-  against the taliban . 
after dostum briefly regained control of mazar-e-sharif ,  the taliban returned in 1998 and he again fled to turkey . 
dostum is considered to be liberal and somewhat leftist . 
dostum returned to afghanistan in 2001 and joined the northern alliance after the us invasion ,  leading his faction in the fall of mazar-i-sharif . 
dostum was born in 1954 in khwaja du koh near sheberghan in jowzjan province ,  afghanistan . 
dostum's men would become an important force in the fall of kabul in 1992.
in the aftermath of taliban's removal from northern afghanistan ,  forces loyal to dostum frequently clashed with tajik forces loyal to atta muhammad nur . 
dostum returned to afghanistan in may 2001 to open up an new front before the u . s . -led campaign against the taliban joined him ,  along with commander massoud ,  ismail khan and mohammad mohaqiq . 
by the mid-1980s ,  he commanded around 20,000 militia men and controlled the northern provinces of afghanistan . 
due to his efforts in the army ,  dostum was awarded the title `` hero of the republic of afghanistan '' by president najibullah . 
andhra pradesh  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the 29 states of india . 
in 1947 vizianagaram was the largest hindu princely state in andhra pradesh . 
the official language of andhra pradesh is telugu . 
the marathi-speaking areas of hyderabad state merged with bombay state and the kannada-speaking areas were merged with mysore state . 
on 2 june 2014, the north-western portion of andhra pradesh was separated to form the new state telangana and the longtime capital of andhra pradesh ,  hyderabad ,  was transferred to telangana as part of the division . 
buddhism spread to andhra pradesh early in its history . 
they did not refer themselves as `` andhra '' in any of their coins or inscriptions; it is possible that they were termed as `` andhras '' because of their ethnicity or because their territory included the andhra region . 
the state is made up of the two major regions of rayalaseema ,  in the inland southwestern part of the state ,  and coastal andhra to the east and northeast ,  bordering the bay of bengal . 
andhra pradesh ranks tenth of all indian states in the human development index scores with a score of 0.416.
the economy of andhra pradesh is the seventh-largest state economy in india with in gross domestic product and a per capita gdp of  . 
kakatiyas ruled andhra pradesh state for nearly two hundred years and constructed several forts . 
in february 2014, the andhra pradesh reorganisation act ,  2014 bill was passed by the parliament of india for the formation of the telangana state comprising ten districts . 
census of india ,  the state had a population of with a population density of  . 
intel released `` agp specification 1.0 '' in 1997.
agp is heavily based on pci ,  and in fact the agp bus is a superset of the conventional pci bus ,  and agp cards must act as pci cards . 
the maximum amount of system memory available to agp is defined as the `` agp aperture '' . 
this results in improved overall agp data throughput . 
finally ,  agp allows  -lrb-  optional in agp 1.0 and 2.0, mandatory in agp 3.0 -rrb- `` sideband addressing '' ,  meaning that the address and data buses are separated so the address phase does not use the main address/data  -lrb-  ad  -rrb-  lines at all . 
rivers originating near aalen are the rems  -lrb-  near essingen ,  west of aalen  -rrb-  and the jagst  -lrb-  near unterschneidheim ,  east of aalen  -rrb-  ,  both being tributaries of the neckar ,  just like the kocher . 
with a population of about 66,000, aalen is the 15th most-populated settlement in baden-württemberg . 
the following municipalities border on aalen . 
the kocher enters the town's territory from oberkochen to the south ,  crosses the district of unterkochen ,  then enters the town centre ,  where the `` aal '' flows into it . 
the west of aalen's territory is on the foreland of the eastern swabian jura ,  and the north and north-west is on the swabian-franconian forest ,  both being part of the swabian keuper-lias plains . 
with an area of 146.63 km ,  aalen is ranked 7th in baden-württemberg and 2nd within the government region of stuttgart ,  after stuttgart . 
while at the frankfurt asylum ,  alzheimer also met emil kraepelin ,  one of the best-known german psychiatrists of the time . 
in 1901, alzheimer observed a patient at the frankfurt asylum named auguste deter . 
frau deter remained at the frankfurt asylum ,  where alzheimer had made a deal to receive her records and brain upon her death . 
on 8 april 1906, frau deter died ,  and alzheimer had her medical records and brain brought to munich where he was working in kraepelin's laboratory . 
he was buried on december 23, 1915 next to his wife in the hauptfriedhof in frankfurt am main . 
these brain anomalies would become identifiers of what later became known as alzheimer's disease . 
aloysius alzheimer  -lrb-  also known as alois alzheimer; ; ; june 14, 1864 – december 19, 1915 -rrb- was a german psychiatrist and neuropathologist and a colleague of emil kraepelin . 
plebeian aediles were elected by the plebeian council ,  usually while under the presidency of a plebeian tribune . 
they also had powers to enforce public order . 
the plebeian aediles were created in the same year as the tribunes of the people  -lrb-  494 bc  -rrb-  . 
american had a direct role in the development of the dc-3, which resulted from a marathon telephone call from american airlines ceo c .  r .  smith to donald douglas ,  when smith persuaded a reluctant douglas to design a sleeper aircraft based on the dc-2 to replace american's curtiss condor ii biplanes . 
american airlines was started in 1930 via a union of more than eighty small airlines . 
the two organizations from which american airlines was originated were robertson aircraft corporation and colonial air transport . 
methods of prevention include gradually decreasing the dose among those who wish to stop ,  though it is possible for symptoms to occur with tapering . 
auger electron spectroscopy involves the emission of auger electrons by bombarding a sample with either x-rays or energetic electrons and measures the intensity of auger electrons that result as a function of the auger electron energy . 
auger recombination is a similar auger effect which occurs in semiconductors . 
upon ejection ,  the kinetic energy of the auger electron corresponds to the difference between the energy of the initial electronic transition into the vacancy and the ionization energy for the electron shell from which the auger electron was ejected . 
akio morita was born in nagoya ,  aichi ,  japan . 
morita suffered a stroke in 1993, during a game of tennis . 
on october 3, 1999, morita died of pneumonia at the age of 78.
morita ,  25 years old joined `` tokyo tsushin kogyo kabushiki kaisha '' shortly after its inception ,  with morita's family investing in sony during the early period and being the largest shareholder . 
note electrode naming for diodes is always based on the direction of the forward current  -lrb-  that of the arrow ,  in which the current flows `` most easily ''  -rrb-  ,  even for types such as zener diodes or solar cells where the current of interest is the reverse current . 
in a cathode ray tube ,  the anode is the positive terminal where electrons flow out of the device ,  i . e .  ,  where positive electric current flows in . 
an anode is an electrode through which the conventional current enters into a polarized electrical device . 
when the current through the device is reversed ,  the electrodes switch functions ,  so anode becomes cathode ,  while cathode becomes anode ,  as long as the reversed current is applied ,  with the exception of diodes where electrode naming is always based on the forward current direction . 
it also accelerates the flow of these electrons . 
the current through a recharging battery is opposite to the direction of current during discharge; in other words ,  the electrode which was the cathode during battery discharge becomes the anode while the battery is recharging . 
in a discharging battery or galvanic cell  -lrb-  diagram at right  -rrb-  ,  the anode is the negative terminal because it is where conventional current flows into `` the device ''  -lrb-  i . e . 
note: in a galvanic cell ,  contrary to what occurs in an electrolytic cell ,  no anions flow to the anode ,  the internal current being entirely accounted for by the cations flowing away from it  -lrb-  cf drawing  -rrb-  . 
in a recharging battery ,  or an electrolytic cell ,  the anode is the positive terminal ,  which receives current from an external generator . 
broadcasters of analog television encode their signal using different systems . 
all broadcast television systems used analog signals before the arrival of digital television  -lrb-  dtv  -rrb-  . 
analog broadcast television systems come in a variety of frame rates and resolutions . 
for this reason many people refer to any 625/25 type signal as `` pal '' and to any 525/30 signal as `` ntsc '' ,  even when referring to digital signals; for example ,  on dvd-video ,  which does not contain any analog color encoding ,  and thus no pal or ntsc signals at all . 
analog television or analogue television is the original television technology that uses analog signals to transmit video and audio . 
that concept is true for all analog television standards . 
a color television system is identical except that an additional signal known as chrominance controls the color of the spot . 
in 1750, the first british glue patent was issued for fish glue . 
by 1927, this process was used to produce solvent-based thermoplastic rubber cements for metal to rubber bonding . 
natural rubber was first used as material for adhesives starting in 1830.
in 1876, the first us patent  -lrb-  number 183,024 -rrb- was issued to the ross brothers for the production of casein glue . 
the development of modern adhesives began in 1690 with the founding of the first commercial glue plant in holland . 
the first us postage stamps used starch-based adhesives when issued in 1847.
the romans were also the first people known to have used tar and beeswax as caulk and sealant between the wooden planks of their boats and ships . 
 ''contact adhesives '' are used in strong bonds with high shear-resistance like laminates ,  such as bonding formica to a wooden counter ,  and in footwear ,  as in attaching outsoles to uppers . 
this plant produced glues from animal hides . 
in europe ,  glue fell into disuse until the period ad 1500–1700.
this is thought to be the oldest discovered human use of tar-hafted stones . 
the first references to adhesives in literature first appeared in approximately 2000 bc . 
natural rubber-based sticky adhesives were first used on a backing by henry day  -lrb-  us patent 3,965 -rrb- in 1845.
pressure-sensitive adhesive is used in post-it notes . 
masonite ,  a wood hardboard ,  was originally bonded using natural wood lignin ,  an organic polymer ,  though most modern particle boards such as mdf use synthetic thermosetting resins . 
all of these can be used manually or automated as part of a machine . 
the first us patent  -lrb-  number 61,991 -rrb- on dextrin  -lrb-  a starch derivative  -rrb-  adhesive was issued in 1867.
 ''ultraviolet ''  -lrb-  uv  -rrb-  `` light curing adhesives '' ,  also known as `` light curing materials ''  -lrb-  lcm  -rrb-  ,  have become popular within the manufacturing sector due to their rapid curing time and strong bond strength . 
they work well in a close-fitting space ,  as when used as a thread-locking fluid . 
they are also used with fabrics and fabric-based components ,  and in engineered products such as loudspeaker cones . 
in 2008, he received the bafta academy fellowship award ,  the highest award the british film academy can bestow . 
in the mid-1970s ,  richard attenborough ,  who would direct five hopkins films ,  called him `` the greatest actor of his generation . `` 
both of these films were directed by richard attenborough ,  who described hopkins as “unquestionably the greatest actor of his generation” . 
hopkins starred as lear in the 2018 television film `` king lear '' broadcast on bbc two on 28 may 2018.
sir philip anthony hopkins  -lrb-  born 31 december 1937 -rrb- is a welsh actor ,  director ,  and producer . 
i don't care one way or the other . `` 
due to his contributions to snowdonia ,  in addition to his film career ,  in 2004 hopkins was named among the 100 welsh heroes in a welsh poll . 
in 2015, he starred in the bbc television film `` the dresser '' ,  and since 2016, he has starred in the hbo television series `` westworld '' . 
in 1978 he starred in the psychological horror film `` magic '' about a demonic ventriloquist's puppet . 
perhaps hopkins' most famous role is as the cannibalistic serial killer hannibal lecter in `` the silence of the lambs '' ,  for which he won the academy award for best actor in 1991, with jodie foster as clarice starling ,  who also won for best actress . 
he was made a freeman of his home town ,  port talbot ,  in 1996.
olivier later noted in his memoir ,  `` confessions of an actor '' ,  that
this is unlike others who usually remember their lines from a film ,  even years later . 
hopkins is perhaps best known for his portrayal of hannibal lecter in `` the silence of the lambs , ``  for which he won the academy award for best actor ,  its sequel `` hannibal '' ,  and the prequel `` red dragon '' . 
ardal o'hanlon  -lrb-  ; born 8 october 1965 -rrb- is an irish comedian and actor . 
ardal o'hanlon was born on 8 october 1965 in carrickmacross ,  county monaghan ,  the son of politician and doctor rory o'hanlon and teresa ward . 
he was spotted by graham linehan ,  who was to cast him as father dougal mcguire in `` father ted ''  -lrb-  1995–98 -rrb- . 
both programmes went some way towards freeing o'hanlon from his association with the character of dougal in the minds of irish audiences . 
amd returned to the server chipsets market with the amd 800s series server chipsets . 
amd went public in september 1972.
amd's first in-house x86 processor was the k5, which was launched in 1996.
amd has also introduced 64-bit processors into its embedded product line starting with the amd opteron processor . 
in may 2012, amd announced the amd embedded r-series accelerated processing unit . 
in january 2011, amd announced the amd embedded g-series accelerated processing unit . 
in 1990, intel also countersued amd ,  renegotiating amd's right to use derivatives of intel's microcode for its cloned processors . 
throughout 2007 and into 2008, amd has continued to add both single-core mobile amd sempron and amd athlon processors and dual-core amd athlon x2 and amd turion processors to its embedded product line and now offers embedded 64-bit solutions starting with 8w tdp mobile amd sempron and amd athlon processors for fan-less designs up to multi-processor systems leveraging multi-core amd opteron processors all supporting longer than standard availability . 
llano was amd's first apu built for laptops . 
bulldozer was amd's microarchitecture codename for server and desktop amd fx processors first released on october 12, 2011.
on november 15, 2007, amd announced a new chipset series portfolio ,  the amd 7-series chipsets ,  covering from enthusiast multi-graphics segment to value igp segment ,  to replace the amd 480/570/580 chipsets and amd 690 series chipsets ,  marking amd's first enthusiast multi-graphics chipset . 
in 2014, amd also announced the k12 custom core for release in 2016.
creating its own chips ,  amd began to compete directly with intel . 
amd released new chipsets in 2017 to support the release of their new ryzen products . 
several sources took amd's news of the vulnerability to gpz variant 2 as a change from amd's prior claim ,  though amd maintained that their position had not changed . 
amd builds graphic processors for use in embedded systems . 
before the launch of athlon 64 processors in 2003, amd designed chipsets for their processors spanning the k6 and k7 processor generations . 
on august 30, 2010, amd announced that it would retire the ati brand name for its graphics chipsets in favor of the amd brand name . 
recessionary losses necessitated amd cutting 1,100 jobs in 2009.
in november 2017, amd and intel announced that intel would market a product combining in a single package an intel core cpu ,  a semi-custom amd radeon gpu ,  and hbm2 memory . 
thus amd completed its dual-core product portfolio for each market segment . 
the main result of the 1982 agreement was that amd became a second-source manufacturer of intel's x86 microprocessors and related chips ,  and intel provided amd with database tapes for its 8086, 80186, and 80286 chips . 
in 2012, amd announced it was working on an arm architecture products ,  both as a semi-custom product and server product . 
on april 21, 2005, amd released the first dual core opteron ,  an x86-based server cpu . 
the initiative went further with the release of opteron server processors as amd stopped the design of server chipsets in 2004 after releasing the amd-8111 chipset ,  and again opened the server platform for firms to develop chipsets for opteron processors . 
amd had some success in the mid-1980s with the amd7910 and amd7911 `` world chip '' fsk modem ,  one of the first multi-standard devices that covered both bell and ccitt tones at up to 1200 baud half duplex or 300/300 full duplex . 
amd is the second-largest supplier and only significant rival to intel in the market for x86-based microprocessors . 
in all these ,  dürer shows the objects as nets . 
dürer may have worked on some of these ,  as the work on the project began while he was with wolgemut . 
from 1512, maximilian i became dürer's major patron . 
dürer's later works have also been claimed to show protestant sympathies . 
on his return to nuremberg in 1495, dürer opened his own workshop  -lrb-  being married was a requirement for this  -rrb-  . 
as for engravings ,  dürer's work was restricted to portraits and illustrations for his treatise . 
dürer probably also visited padua and mantua on this trip . 
dürer also made several portraits of the emperor ,  including one shortly before maximilian's death in 1519.
dürer has never fallen from critical favour ,  and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in germany in the `` dürer renaissance '' of about 1570 to 1630, in the early nineteenth century ,  and in german nationalism from 1870 to 1945.
during the same period dürer trained himself in the difficult art of using the burin to make engravings . 
this last great work ,  the four apostles ,  was given by dürer to the city of nuremberg—although he was given 100 guilders in return . 
for those of the cardinal ,  melanchthon ,  and dürer's final major work ,  a drawn portrait of the nuremberg patrician ulrich starck ,  dürer depicted the sitters in profile ,  perhaps reflecting a more mathematical approach . 
dürer the elder married barbara holper ,  daughter of his master when he himself qualified as a master in 1467.
dürer's first painted self-portrait  -lrb-  now in the louvre  -rrb-  was painted at this time ,  probably to be sent back to his fiancée in nuremberg . 
the venetian artist jacopo de' barbari ,  whom dürer had met in venice ,  visited nuremberg in 1500, and dürer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective ,  anatomy ,  and proportion from him . 
in architecture dürer cites vitruvius but elaborates his own classical designs and columns . 
despite the regard in which he was held by the venetians ,  dürer returned to nuremberg by mid-1507, remaining in germany until 1520.
notably ,  dürer had contacts with various reformers ,  such as zwingli ,  andreas karlstadt ,  melanchthon ,  erasmus and cornelius grapheus from whom dürer received luther's `` babylonian captivity '' in 1520.
apart from free kicks ,  marks or when the ball is in the possession of an umpire for a `` ball up '' or `` throw in '' ,  the ball is always in dispute and any player from either side can take possession of the ball . 
if the ball is not in the possession of one player it can be moved on with any part of the body . 
no more than 18 players of each team  -lrb-  or ,  in afl women's ,  16 players  -rrb-  are permitted to be on the field at any time . 
a `` behind '' ,  worth 1 point ,  is scored when the ball passes between a goal post and a behind post at any height ,  or if the ball hits a goal post ,  or if any player sends the ball between the goal posts by touching it with any part of the body other than a foot . 
the team that has scored the most points at the end of play wins the game . 
during general play ,  players may position themselves anywhere on the field and use any part of their bodies to move the ball . 
there are different styles of kicking depending on how the ball is held in the hand . 
up to four interchange  -lrb-  reserve  -rrb-  players may be swapped for those on the field at any time during the game . 
a player may run with the ball ,  but it must be bounced or touched on the ground at least once every 15 metres . 
if the ball travels out of bounds in any other circumstances  -lrb-  for example ,  contested play results in the ball being knocked out of bounds  -rrb-  a boundary umpire will stand with his back to the infield and return the ball into play with a `` throw-in '' ,  a high backwards toss back into the field of play . 
if a player takes possession of the ball that has travelled more than from another player's kick ,  by way of a catch ,  it is claimed as a `` mark ''  -lrb-  meaning that the game stops while he prepares to kick from the point at which he marked  -rrb-  . 
once a player has chosen to play on ,  normal play resumes and the player who took the mark is again able to be tackled . 
the game features frequent physical contests ,  spectacular marking ,  fast movement of both players and the ball and high scoring . 
games are officiated by umpires . 
both world war i and world war ii had a devastating effect on australian football and on australian sport in general . 
as of the 2009 afl season ,  a free kick is awarded against any player who deliberately rushes a behind . 
aon built a global presence through purchases . 
the next year aon sold most of its holdings in endurance . 
on 22 august 2008, aon announced that it had acquired london-based benfield group . 
in late 2007, aon announced the divestiture of its underwriting business . 
on 31 october 2016, aon's aon risk solutions completed acquisition of stroz friedberg llc ,  a specialised risk management firm focusing on cybersecurity . 
in 2011, aon was ranked as the largest insurance broker in the world based on revenue . 
in 1987, that company was renamed aon ,  a gaelic word meaning `` one '' . 
in january 2012, aon announced that its headquarters would be moved from chicago to london . 
aon has approximately 500 offices worldwide ,  serving 120 countries with 50,000 employees . 
aon was created in 1982 when the ryan insurance group merged with the combined insurance company of america . 
on 22 october 2012, aon announced that it agreed to buy omnipoint ,  inc ,  a workday consulting firm . 
berg was born in vienna ,  the third of four children of johanna and konrad berg . 
before he died ,  berg had completed the orchestration of only the first two of the three acts of `` lulu '' . 
in 1924, three excerpts from `` wozzeck '' were performed ,  which brought berg his first public success . 
from 1915–18, berg served in the austro-hungarian army and during a period of leave in 1917, he accelerated work on his first opera ,  `` wozzeck '' . 
berg had little formal music education before he became a student of arnold schoenberg in october 1904.
berg had a particular interest in the number 23, using it to structure several works . 
in 1913, two of berg's `` altenberg lieder ''  -lrb-  1912 -rrb- were premièred in vienna ,  conducted by schoenberg in the infamous `` skandalkonzert '' . 
with modern instrumentation these tests are rarely used but can be useful for educational purposes and in field work or other situations where access to state-of-the-art instruments are not available or expedient . 
chromatography ,  electrophoresis and field flow fractionation are representative of this field . 
these titrations may use different types of indicators to reach some equivalence point . 
mass spectrometry measures mass-to-charge ratio of molecules using electric and magnetic fields . 
also ,  mass spectrometry is categorized by approaches of mass analyzers: magnetic-sector ,  quadrupole mass analyzer ,  quadrupole ion trap ,  time-of-flight ,  fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance ,  and so on . 
analytical chemistry studies and uses instruments and methods used to separate ,  identify ,  and quantify matter . 
analytical chemistry consists of classical ,  wet chemical methods and modern ,  instrumental methods . 
although modern analytical chemistry is dominated by sophisticated instrumentation ,  the roots of analytical chemistry and some of the principles used in modern instruments are from traditional techniques ,  many of which are still used today . 
a slash is sometimes used instead of hyphen ,  especially if the name of one of the methods contains a hyphen itself . 
a common example used in undergraduate education is the determination of the amount of water in a hydrate by heating the sample to remove the water such that the difference in weight is due to the loss of water . 
in december 2016, in transit became the first a cappella musical on broadway . 
it is not clear exactly where collegiate a cappella began . 
a cappella music was originally used in religious music ,  especially church music as well as anasheed and zemirot . 
in addition ,  all women's a cappella groups can send their strongest song tracks to the women's a cappella association  -lrb-  waca  -rrb-  for its annual best of women's a cappella album . 
this has led to a tradition of a cappella singing sometimes known as `` sefirah '' music . 
increased interest in modern a cappella  -lrb-  particularly collegiate a cappella  -rrb-  can be seen in the growth of awards such as the contemporary a cappella recording awards  -lrb-  overseen by the contemporary a cappella society  -rrb-  and competitions such as the international championship of collegiate a cappella for college groups and the harmony sweepstakes for all groups . 
voice print is also a professional a cappella music group in sri lanka . 
many a cappella groups can be found in high schools and colleges . 
a cappella styles range from gospel music to contemporary to barbershop quartets and choruses . 
in 2013, an artist by the name smooth mcgroove rose to prominence with his style of a cappella music . 
he is best known for his a cappella covers of video game music tracks on youtube . 
peter christian lutkin ,  dean of the northwestern university school of music ,  helped popularize a cappella music in the united states by founding the northwestern a cappella choir in 1906.
the a cappella choir was `` the first permanent organization of its kind in america . `` 
each year ,  hundreds of collegiate a cappella groups submit their strongest songs in a competition to be on the best of college a cappella  -lrb-  boca  -rrb-  ,  an album compilation of tracks from the best college a cappella groups around the world . 
the musical show `` strepsils stereo '' is credited for introducing the art of a cappella in pakistan . 
jewish and christian music were originally a cappella ,  and this practice has continued in both of these religions as well as in islam . 
movements in modern a cappella over the past century include barbershop and doo wop . 
a cappella group naturally seven recreates entire songs using vocal tones for every instrument . 
a cappella can also describe the isolated vocal track -lrb-  s  -rrb-  from a multitrack recording that originally included instrumentation . 
a cappella is gaining popularity among south asians with the emergence of primarily hindi-english college groups . 
a string section can be utilized on its own  -lrb-  this is referred to as a string orchestra  -rrb-  or in conjunction with any of the other instrumental sections . 
the string section in a multi-sectioned orchestra is referred sometimes to as the `` string choir . `` 
the string section is a body of instruments composed of various stringed instruments . 
more than one string orchestra can be utilized . 
a string trio consists of three players ,  a string quartet four ,  a string quintet five ,  and so on . 
while any combination and number of string instruments is possible in a section ,  a traditional string section sound is achieved with a violin-heavy balance of instruments . 
the electric bass and upright string bass—depending on the circumstance—can be treated by the arranger as either string section or rhythm section instruments . 
a standard string section  -lrb-  vln .  ,  vln 2. ,  vla .  ,  vcl ,  cb .   -rrb- 
it differs from the nicene-constantinopolitan and apostles' creeds in the inclusion of anathemas ,  or condemnations of those who disagree with the creed  -lrb-  like the original nicene creed  -rrb-  . 
the oldest surviving manuscripts of the athanasian creed date from the late 8th century . 
the athanasian creed ,  also known as pseudo-athanasian creed or quicunque vult  -lrb-  also quicumque vult  -rrb-  ,  is a christian statement of belief focused on trinitarian doctrine and christology . 
it has since been widely accepted by modern scholars that the creed was not authored by athanasius ,  that it was not originally called a creed at all ,  nor was athanasius' name originally attached to it . 
it plays in the centro de tecnificación de alicante . 
alicante airport outranks its valencian counterpart ,  being among the busiest airports in spain after madrid ,  barcelona ,  palma de mallorca and málaga . 
alicante  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  both the spanish and valencian being official names ,  is a city and port in spain on the costa blanca ,  the capital of the province of alicante and of the comarca of alacantí ,  in the south of the valencian community . 
 ''barrio de la santa cruz '' is a colourful quarter of the old city ,  situated on the south-west of santa bárbara castle . 
at the end of the promenade is a monument by the artist bañuls of the 19th century . 
the area around alicante has been inhabited for over 7000 years . 
until the global recession which started in 2008, alicante was one of the fastest-growing cities in spain . 
seasonal variations in temperature are also relatively small ,  meaning that winters are mild and summers are hot . 
since 2005 ciudad de la luz ,  one of the largest film studios in europe ,  has had its base in alicante . 
also ,  the old airfield at rabassa was closed and air traffic moved to the new el altet airport ,  which made a more convenient and modern facility for charter flights bringing tourists from northern european countries . 
the moves to develop the port for more tourism have been welcomed by the city and its residents ,  but the latest plans to develop an industrial estate in the port have caused great controversy . 
the nightlife social scene tends to shift to nearby playa de san juan  -lrb-  st .  john's beach  -rrb-  during the summer months . 
until her retirement at the 2010 general election ,  widdecombe divided her time between her two homes – one in london and one in the village of sutton valence ,  kent ,  in her constituency . 
in the 2005 leadership election ,  she initially supported kenneth clarke again . 
over the years ,  widdecombe has expressed her support for a reintroduction of the death penalty ,  which was abolished in the uk in 1965.
widdecombe was one of the 98 mps who voted to keep their expense details secret . 
in 2002, she took part in the itv programme `` celebrity fit club '' . 
in an interview with `` metro '' in september 2006 she stated that if parliament were of a normal length ,  it was likely she would retire at the next general election . 
she made it through to the second ballot but came last and was eliminated . 
during the 2001 conservative leadership election ,  she could not find sufficient support amongst conservative mps for her leadership candidacy . 
she supported the argument that the death penalty would have deterrent value ,  as within five years of its abolition the national murder rate had more than doubled . 
in 2017, widdecombe took part in itv's `` sugar free farm '' . 
she is a convert from anglicanism to roman catholicism . 
upon the announcement ,  widdecombe told the voters that the ira would be `` toasting their success '' . 
she is a committed animal lover and one of the few conservative mps to have consistently voted for the ban on fox hunting . 
the previous year ,  she voted to support a parliamentary motion supporting homeopathy ,  criticising the science and technology committee's report on the subject . 
in october 2010, she appeared on bbc one's `` strictly come dancing '' ,  partnered by anton du beke ,  winning the support of some viewers despite low marks from the judges . 
merton later revealed that he thought widdecombe had been `` the worst ever presenter '' of the show ,  particularly on her second appearance where merton claimed she `` thought she was victoria wood '' . 
she worked for unilever  -lrb-  1973–75 -rrb- and then as an administrator at the university of london  -lrb-  1975–87 -rrb- before entering parliament . 
ann noreen widdecombe ,  dsg  -lrb-  born 4 october 1947 -rrb- is a british former politician . 
although she supported the uk's partial decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1967, widdecombe has consistently opposed lgbt rights while in parliament ,  saying in 1999 that `` i do not think that homosexuality can be promoted as an equally valid lifestyle to heterosexual marriage ,  but i would say the same about irregular heterosexual arrangements . `` 
aurangzeb was appointed viceroy of the deccan in 1636.
aurangzeb was an orthodox muslim ruler . 
his head was sent to aurangzeb as proof . 
under aurangzeb's reign ,  hindus rose to represent 31.6% of mughal nobility ,  the highest in the mughal era . 
aurangzeb was known to be of a more austere nature than his predecessors . 
in 1658, aurangzeb arranged his formal coronation in delhi . 
aurangzeb was born on 3 november 1618, in dahod ,  gujarat . 
in 1689, aurangzeb's forces captured and executed sambhaji . 
in 1664, aurangzeb appointed shaista khan subedar  -lrb-  governor  -rrb-  of bengal . 
unlike his father ,  aurangzeb was not much interested in architecture . 
the mughals set out in november 1661.
other scholars point out that aurangzeb also built many temples . 
other sources tell us that aurangzeb was dismissed from his position because aurangzeb left the life of luxury and became a faqir . 
on 28 may 1633, aurangzeb escaped death when a powerful war elephant stampeded through the mughal imperial encampment . 
during his reign ,  aurangzeb ordered the destruction of many temples and some mosques . 
the sultan urged aurangzeb to wage holy war against christians . 
aurangzeb displayed a particular animus towards hindus and their temples . 
aurangzeb's imperial bureaucracy employed significantly more hindus than that of his predecessors . 
aurangzeb is accused of poisoning his imprisoned nephew sulaiman shikoh . 
this event was celebrated in persian and urdu verses ,  and aurangzeb said:
the mughal emperor aurangzeb is known to have patronised works of islamic calligraphy during his reign particularly syed ali tabrizi . 
aurangzeb's shift from conventional warfare to anti-insurgency in the deccan region shifted the paradigm of mughal military thought . 
aurangzeb became viceroy of the deccan again after he was replaced by dara shukoh in the attempt to recapture kandahar . 
in 1689, the second maratha chhatrapati  -lrb-  king  -rrb-  sambhaji was brutally executed by aurangzeb . 
like his father ,  aurangzeb was not willing to acknowledge the ottoman claim to the caliphate . 
aurangzeb then broke his arrangement with murad baksh ,  which probably had been his intention all along . 
françois bernier ,  the personal physician to aurangzeb ,  observed versatile mughal gun-carriages each drawn by two horses . 
on the other hand ,  aurangzeb's third son akbar left the mughal court along with a few muslim mansabdar supporters and joined muslim rebels in the deccan . 
shivaji captured forts belonging to both mughals and bijapur . 
aurangzeb was a notable expansionist during his reign ,  and the mughal empire reached its greatest extent ,  ruling over nearly all of the indian subcontinent . 
aurangzeb received the embassy of abbas ii of persia in 1660 and returned them with gifts . 
early in aurangzeb's reign ,  various insurgent groups of sikhs engaged mughal troops in increasingly bloody battles . 
aurangzeb's incursions into the pashtun areas were described by khushal khan khattak as `` black is the mughal's heart towards all of us pathans '' . 
aurangzeb responded by organising a mughal army of 10,000 troops and artillery ,  and dispatched detachments of his own personal mughal imperial guards to carry out several tasks . 
 -lrb-  lines 354-357 -rrb- </poem>
the spanish `` alejandrino '' is a line of 7+7 syllables ,  probably developed in imitation of the french alexandrine . 
unlike many similar lines ,  the polish alexandrine developed not from french verse but from latin ,  specifically ,  the 13-syllable goliardic line:
the structure of the classical french alexandrine is
whereas the french alexandrine is syllabic ,  the english is accentual-syllabic; and the central caesura  -lrb-  a defining feature of the french  -rrb-  is not always rigidly preserved in english . 
around the mid-16th century stricter alexandrines were popular as the first line of poulter's measure couplets ,  fourteeners  -lrb-  strict iambic heptameters  -rrb-  providing the second line . 
the alexandrine  -lrb-  strictly iambic with a consistent medial caesura  -rrb-  became the dominant long line of the german baroque . 
thus a line that is metrical in one tradition may be unmetrical in another . 
educational analog computers illustrated the principles of analog calculation . 
other computing elements include analog multipliers ,  nonlinear function generators ,  and analog comparators . 
more information on analog and hybrid computers is also available in this link
analog computer designs were published in electronics magazines . 
however ,  the difference between these systems is what makes analog computing useful . 
any physical process which models some computation can be interpreted as an analog computer . 
in the history of electronic analog computers ,  there were some special high-speed types . 
in the early 1970s analog computer manufacturers tried to tie together their analog computer with a digital computer to get the advantages of the two techniques . 
systems for process control and protective relays used analog computation to perform control and protective functions . 
integrating with respect to another variable is the nearly exclusive province of mechanical analog integrators; it is almost never done in electronic analog computers . 
the drawback of the mechanical-electrical analogy is that electronics are limited by the range over which the variables may vary . 
the advent of digital computing made simple analog computers obsolete as early as the 1950s and 1960s ,  although analog computers remained in use in some specific applications ,  like the flight computer in aircraft ,  and for teaching control systems in universities . 
analog computers are especially well-suited to representing situations described by differential equations . 
56 gun fire control system . 
instead ,  results from analog computers are subject to continuous error caused by electronic noise . 
after 1980, purely digital computers progressed more and more rapidly and were fast enough to compete with analog computers . 
in industrial process control ,  thousands of analog loop controllers were used to automatically regulate temperature ,  flow ,  pressure ,  or other process conditions . 
in the 1970s every big company and administration concerned with problems in dynamics had a big analog computing center ,  for example:
analog computers were widely used in scientific and industrial applications where digital computers of the time lacked sufficient performance . 
the technology of these controllers ranged from purely mechanical integrators ,  through vacuum-tube and solid-state devices ,  to emulation of analog controllers by microprocessors . 
the accuracy of an analog computer is limited by its computing elements as well as quality of the internal power and electrical interconnections . 
most practical mechanical analog computers of any significant complexity used rotating shafts to carry variables from one mechanism to another . 
in the 1960s ,  the major manufacturer was electronic associates of princeton ,  new jersey ,  with its 231r analog computer  -lrb-  vacuum tubes ,  20 integrators  -rrb-  and subsequently its 8800 analog computer  -lrb-  solid state operational amplifiers ,  64 integrators  -rrb-  . 
setting up an analog computer required scale factors to be chosen ,  along with initial conditions—that is ,  starting values . 
the fermiac was an analog computer invented by physicist enrico fermi in 1947 to aid in his studies of neutron transport . 
world war ii era gun directors ,  gun data computers ,  and bomb sights used mechanical analog computers . 
a minute of arc is of a radian . 
a second of arc ,  arcsecond  -lrb-  arcsec  -rrb-  ,  or arc second is of an arcminute ,  of a degree ,  of a turn ,  and  -lrb-  about   -rrb-  of a radian . 
a minute of arc ,  arcminute  -lrb-  arcmin  -rrb-  ,  arc minute ,  or minute arc is a unit of angular measurement equal to of one degree . 
during wwii giacometti took refuge in switzerland . 
giacometti was one of the most important sculptors of the 20th century . 
in giacometti's whole body of work ,  his painting constitutes only a small part . 
giacometti was a key player in the surrealist art movement ,  but his work resists easy categorization . 
when she died in 1993, the fondation giacometti was set up by the french state . 
both were ordered to pay €850,000 to the alberto and annette giacometti foundation . 
in his later years giacometti's works were shown in a number of large exhibitions throughout europe . 
between 1936 and 1940, giacometti concentrated his sculpting on the human head ,  focusing on the sitter's gaze . 
between 1938 and 1944 giacometti's sculptures had a maximum height of seven centimeters  -lrb-  2.75 inches  -rrb-  . 
the adjectival form is `` anthemic '' . 
although anthems are used to distinguish states and territories ,  there are instances of shared anthems . 
further ,  some songs are artistically styled as anthems ,  whether or not they are used as such ,  including marilyn manson's `` irresponsible hate anthem '' ,  silverchair's `` anthem for the year 2000 '' ,  and toto's `` child's anthem '' . 
anthems were originally a form of liturgical music . 
was the anthem of both romania and moldova ,  but was replaced by the current moldovan anthem ,  `` limba noastră '' . 
it was the only canadian province with its own anthem until 2010, when prince edward island adopted the 1908 song `` the island hymn '' as its provincial anthem . 
the word `` anthem '' is commonly used to describe any celebratory song or composition for a distinct group ,  as in national anthems . 
 ''esta é a nossa pátria bem amada '' is the national anthem of guinea-bissau and was also the national anthem of cape verde until 1996.
an anthem is a musical composition of celebration ,  usually used as a symbol for a distinct group ,  particularly the national anthems of countries . 
 ''anthem '' is derived from the greek  -lrb-  `` antíphōna ''  -rrb-  via old english  . 
albrecht altdorfer  -lrb-  c .  1480 – 12 february 1538 -rrb- was a german painter ,  engraver and architect of the renaissance working in regensburg ,  bavaria . 
the house of ascania  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a dynasty of german rulers . 
it is also known as the house of anhalt ,  which refers to its longest-held possession ,  anhalt . 
in 1320, the brandenburg ascanian line came to an end . 
the ascanians are named after ascania  -lrb-  or ascaria  -rrb-  castle ,  known as `` schloss askanien '' in german ,  which was located near and named after aschersleben . 
the si unit of acceleration is the metre per second squared  -lrb-  m s  -rrb- ; or `` metre per second per second '' ,  as the velocity in metres per second changes by the acceleration value ,  every second . 
as acceleration is defined as the derivative of velocity ,   ,  with respect to time and velocity is defined as the derivative of position ,   ,  with respect to time ,  acceleration can be thought of as the second derivative of with respect to :
in physics ,  acceleration is the rate of change of velocity of an object with respect to time . 
in the terms of calculus ,  instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of the velocity vector with respect to time:
the scope has widened from art conservation ,  involving protection and care of artwork and architecture ,  to conservation of cultural heritage ,  also including protection and care of a broad set of other cultural and historical works . 
the conservation-restoration of cultural heritage focuses on protection and care of tangible cultural heritage ,  including artworks ,  architecture ,  archaeology ,  and museum collections . 
by may 1904, chekhov was terminally ill with tuberculosis . 
raymond carver ,  who wrote the short story `` errand '' about chekhov's death ,  believed that chekhov was the greatest of all short story writers:
chekhov now assumed responsibility for the whole family . 
ernest hemingway ,  another writer influenced by chekhov ,  was more grudging: `` chekhov wrote about six good stories . 
chekhov was buried next to his father at the novodevichy cemetery . 
chekhov's posthumous reputation greatly exceeded his expectations . 
before long ,  chekhov was attracting literary as well as popular attention . 
chekhov's tone at this stage was harsher than that familiar from his mature fiction . 
suvorin was to become a lifelong friend ,  perhaps chekhov's closest . 
chekhov also enjoyed a series of love affairs ,  one with the wife of a teacher . 
in 1894, chekhov began writing his play `` the seagull '' in a lodge he had built in the orchard at melikhovo . 
in march 1897, chekhov suffered a major haemorrhage of the lungs while on a visit to moscow . 
while a professor of comparative literature at princeton university ,  michael goldman presented his view on defining the elusive quality of chekhov's comedies stating: `` having learned that chekhov is comic  .  .  .  chekhov is comic in a very special ,  paradoxical way . 
the inhabitants of tomsk later retaliated by erecting a mocking statue of chekhov . 
chekhov attended the greek school in taganrog and the taganrog `` gymnasium ''  -lrb-  since renamed the chekhov gymnasium  -rrb-  ,  where he was kept down for a year at fifteen for failing an examination in ancient greek . 
on 25 may 1901, chekhov married olga knipper quietly ,  owing to his horror of weddings . 
chekhov was left behind to sell the family's possessions and finish his education . 
he went on to advise chekhov to slow down ,  write less ,  and concentrate on literary quality . 
in 2017, action against hunger international network is present in 51 countries:
action against hunger partners with leaders from the food and beverage industry to bring attention to global hunger . 
action against hunger  -lrb-  or action contre la faim  -lrb-  acf  -rrb-  in french  -rrb-  is a global humanitarian organization which originated in france and is committed to ending world hunger . 
action against hunger was established in 1979 by a group of french doctors ,  scientists ,  and writers . 
the removal of dead cells by neighboring phagocytic cells has been termed efferocytosis . 
apoptosis in hela cells is inhibited by proteins produced by the cell; these inhibitory proteins target retinoblastoma tumor-suppressing proteins . 
before the apoptotic cell is disposed of ,  there is a process of disassembly . 
an example of this can be seen in hela cells ,  whereby the cells begin to degenerate shortly after they are infected . 
negative regulation of apoptosis inhibits cell death signaling pathways ,  helping tumors to evade cell death and developing drug resistance . 
a cell initiates intracellular apoptotic signaling in response to a stress ,  which may bring about cell suicide . 
two discoveries brought cell death from obscurity to a major field of research: identification of components of the cell death control and effector mechanisms ,  and linkage of abnormalities in cell death to human disease ,  in particular cancer . 
viral induction of apoptosis occurs when one or several cells of a living organism are infected with a virus ,  leading to cell death . 
cells may also die as direct consequences of viral infections . 
it is also important in maintaining the regular functions and activities of cells . 
unlike necrosis ,  apoptosis produces cell fragments called apoptotic bodies that phagocytic cells are able to engulf and remove before the contents of the cell can spill out onto surrounding cells and cause damage to them . 
the oropouche virus also causes disruption in cultured cells – cells that are cultivated in distinct and specific conditions . 
programmed cell death in plants has a number of molecular similarities to that of animal apoptosis ,  but it also has differences ,  notable ones being the presence of a cell wall and the lack of an immune system that removes the pieces of the dead cell . 
there are three recognized steps in apoptotic cell disassembly:
tests for dna laddering differentiate apoptosis from ischemic or toxic cell death . 
defects in the cell cycle are thought to be responsible for the resistance to chemotherapy or radiation by certain tumor cells ,  so a virus that can induce apoptosis despite defects in the cell cycle is useful for cancer treatment . 
the active effector caspases then proteolytically degrade a host of intracellular proteins to carry out the cell death program . 
for many years ,  neither `` apoptosis '' nor `` programmed cell death '' was a highly cited term . 
many pathways and signals lead to apoptosis ,  but these converge on a single mechanism that actually causes the death of the cell . 
control of proapoptotic proteins under normal cell conditions of nonapoptotic cells is incompletely understood ,  but in general ,  bax or bak are activated by the activation of bh3-only proteins ,  part of the bcl-2 family . 
apoptosis  -lrb-  from ancient greek ἀπόπτωσις `` falling off ''  -rrb-  is a form of programmed cell death that occurs in multicellular organisms . 
before the actual process of cell death is precipitated by enzymes ,  apoptotic signals must cause regulatory proteins to initiate the apoptosis pathway . 
however ,  a condom can break or otherwise come off during anal sex ,  and this is more likely to happen with anal sex than with other sex acts because of the tightness of the anal sphincters during friction . 
reports regarding the prevalence of anal sex among gay men and other men who have sex with men vary . 
strong views are often expressed about anal sex . 
some men who have sex with men ,  however ,  believe that being a receptive partner during anal sex questions their masculinity . 
pain during receptive anal sex among gay men  -lrb-  or men who have sex with men  -rrb-  is formally known as `` anodyspareunia . `` 
in a 2010 clinical review article of heterosexual anal sex ,  `` anal intercourse '' is used to specifically denote penile-anal penetration ,  and `` anal sex '' is used to denote any form of anal sexual activity . 
anal sex can exacerbate hemorrhoids and therefore result in bleeding; in other cases ,  the formation of a hemorrhoid is attributed to anal sex . 
the abundance of nerve endings in the anal region and rectum can make anal sex pleasurable for men or women . 
historically ,  anal sex has been commonly associated with male homosexuality . 
because of this ,  men who have sex with men have a high risk of this cancer . `` 
although `` anal sex '' most commonly means penileanal penetration ,  sources sometimes use `` anal intercourse '' to exclusively denote penileanal penetration ,  and `` anal sex '' to denote any form of anal sexual activity ,  especially between pairings as opposed to anal masturbation . 
oral sex and mutual masturbation are more common than anal stimulation among men in sexual relationships with other men . 
while anal sex is commonly associated with male homosexuality ,  research shows that not all gay males engage in anal sex and that it is not uncommon in heterosexual relationships . 
with regard to lesbian sexual practices ,  anal sex includes fingering ,  use of a dildo or other sex toys ,  or anilingus . 
because most research on anal intercourse addresses men who have sex with men ,  little data exists on the prevalence of anal intercourse among heterosexual couples . 
from the earliest records ,  the ancient sumerians had very relaxed attitudes toward sex and did not regard anal sex as taboo . 
anal sex without protection of a condom is considered the riskiest form of sexual activity ,  and therefore health authorities such as the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  recommend safe sex practices for anal sex . 
there is less research on anal sexual activity among women who have sex with women compared to couples of other sexual orientations . 
unprotected receptive anal sex  -lrb-  with an hiv positive partner  -rrb-  is the sex act most likely to result in hiv transmission . 
they used condoms during anal sex 20.9% of the time as compared with 42.9% of the time with vaginal intercourse . 
anal sex or anal intercourse is generally the insertion and thrusting of the erect penis into a person's anus ,  or anus and rectum ,  for sexual pleasure . 
as with most forms of sexual activity ,  anal sex participants risk contracting sexually transmitted infections  -lrb-  stis/stds  -rrb-  . 
 ,  aarau had an unemployment rate of 2.35% . 
a few artifacts from the neolithic period were found in aarau . 
by mid-march 1798 aarau was occupied by french troops . 
at the beginning of 2010 rohr became a district of aarau . 
on 11 august 1712, the peace of aarau was signed into effect . 
aarau was founded around ad 1240 by the counts of kyburg . 
during the 1980s many of the industries left aarau completely . 
beginning in 1820, aarau has been a refuge for political refugees . 
on 27 december 1797, the last tagsatzung of the old swiss confederacy was held in aarau . 
statistically ,  aarau has the most jobs per capita of any swiss city . 
on 22 march 1798 aarau was declared the capital of the helvetic republic . 
in the year 2003, the canton of aargau celebrated its 200th anniversary . 
the contemporary canton of aargau was formed in 1803, a canton of the swiss confederation as a result of the act of mediation . 
during the helvetic republic  -lrb-  1798–1803 -rrb- ,  the county of baden ,  the freie ämter and the area known as the kelleramt were combined into the canton of baden . 
french forces occupied the aargau from 10 march to 18 april 1798; thereafter the bernese portion became the canton of aargau and the remainder formed the canton of baden . 
the southern part ,  the oberen freie ämter  -lrb-  upper freie ämter  -rrb-  ,  were ruled by the previous seven cantons but bern was added to make an eighth . 
bern's portion of the aargau came to be known as the unteraargau ,  though can also be called the berner or bernese aargau . 
the former cantons of baden and fricktal can still be identified with the contemporary districts – the canton of baden is covered by the districts of zurzach ,  baden ,  bremgarten ,  and muri  -lrb-  albeit with the gains and losses of 1803 detailed above  -rrb- ; the canton of fricktal by the districts of rheinfelden and laufenburg  -lrb-  except for hottwil which was transferred to that district in 2010 -rrb- . 
the canton of aargau  -lrb-  german: `` kanton '' ; sometimes latinized as `` argovia ''; see also other names  -rrb-  is one of the more northerly cantons of switzerland . 
including parts of the modern cantons of berne  -lrb-  bernese aargau ,  emmental ,  parts of the bernese oberland  -rrb-  ,   solothurn ,  basel-landschaft ,  lucerne ,  obwalden and nidwalden ,  but not the parts of the modern canton east of the reuss  -lrb-  baden district  -rrb-  ,  which were part of zürichgau . 
the ababda extend from the nile at aswan to the red sea ,  and reach northward to the qena-quseir road ,  thus occupying the southern border of egypt east of the nile . 
they are a subgroup of the beja people who are bilingual in beja and arabic . 
the american quarter horse ,  or quarter horse ,  is an american breed of horse that excels at sprinting short distances . 
the american quarter horse has also been exported worldwide . 
the american quarter horse is the most popular breed in the united states today ,  and the american quarter horse association is the largest breed registry in the world ,  with over 5 million american quarter horses registered worldwide . 
the american quarter horse is the most popular breed in the united states today ,  and the american quarter horse association is the largest breed registry in the world ,  with almost 3 million living american quarter horses registered in 2014.
quarter horses come in nearly all colors . 
since quarter horse/thoroughbred crosses continue to enter the official registry of the american quarter horse breed ,  this creates a continual gene flow from the thoroughbred breed into the american quarter horse breed ,  which has altered many of the characteristics that typified the breed in the early years of its formation . 
the american quarter horse is also shown in english disciplines ,  driving ,  and many other equestrian activities . 
the american quarter horse also benefitted from the addition of arabian ,  morgan ,  and even standardbred bloodlines . 
sinamay is woven chiefly from abacá . 
abacá is vulnerable to a number of pathogens ,  notably abaca bunchy top virus and abaca bract mosaic virus . 
the plant grows to  ,  and averages about  . 
the abacá plant is stoloniferous ,  meaning that the plant produces runners or shoots along the ground that then root at each segment . 
the plant ,  also known as manila hemp ,  has great economic importance ,  being harvested for its fiber ,  also called manila hemp ,  extracted from the leaf-stems . 
the bicol region in the philippines produced 27,885 metric tons of abaca in 2014, the largest of any philippine region . 
the abacá plant belongs to the banana family ,  musaceae; it resembles the closely related wild seeded bananas ,  `` musa acuminata '' and `` musa balbisiana '' . 
abacá cloth is found in museum collections around the world ,  like the boston museum of fine arts and the textile museum of canada . 
the hebrew term abaddon  -lrb-   `` ’abaddon ''  -rrb-  ,  and its greek equivalent apollyon  -lrb-   ,  `` apollýōn ''  -rrb-  appear in the bible as both a place of destruction and an angel of the abyss . 
the text of the thanksgiving hymns—which was found in the dead sea scrolls—tells of `` the sheol of abaddon '' and of the `` torrents of belial that burst into abaddon '' . 
in the new testament book of revelation ,  an angel called abaddon is described as the king of an army of locusts; his name is first transcribed in greek  -lrb-  revelation 9:11— ''whose name in hebrew is abaddon ,  the angel of death . ``   -rrb- 
the term `` abaddon '' appears six times in the masoretic text of the hebrew bible; `` abaddon '' means destruction or `` place of destruction '' ,  or the realm of the dead ,  and is accompanied by sheol . 
expressway 65 passes through abadeh . 
the area is famous for its abadeh rugs . 
the town also produces abadeh rugs . 
a road starts from abadeh ring road to soqad and semirom ,  road 55.
despite destruction of the town ,  the oracle was still consulted ,  e . g . 
abae  -lrb-   ,  `` abai ''  -rrb-  was an ancient town in the northeastern corner of ancient phocis ,  in greece ,  near the frontiers of the opuntian locrians ,  said to have been built by the argive abas ,  son of lynceus and hypermnestra ,  and grandson of danaus . 
the polygonal walls of the acropolis may still be seen in a fair state of preservation on a circular hill standing about above the little plain of exarcho; one gateway remains ,  and there are also traces of town walls below . 
abakan is the capital of the republic . 
abakan  -lrb-  together with tayshet  -rrb-  was a terminal of the major abakan-taishet railway . 
abakansky `` ostrog ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as abakansk  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was built at the mouth of the abakan river in 1675.
after the `` arc de triomphe du carrousel '' and the `` arc de triomphe de l'étoile '' ,  the `` grande arche '' is the third arch built on the same perspective . 
the arc de triomphe should not be confused with a smaller arch ,  the arc de triomphe du carrousel ,  which stands west of the louvre . 
paris's arc de triomphe was the tallest triumphal arch until the completion of the monumento a la revolución in mexico city in 1938, which is high . 
both hitler in 1940 and de gaulle in 1944 observed this custom . 
in the prolongation of the avenue des champs-élysées ,  a new arch ,  the grande arche de la défense ,  was built in 1982, completing the line of monuments that forms paris's `` axe historique '' . 
the arc de triomphe de l'étoile  -lrb-   ,  `` triumphal arch of the star ''  -rrb-  is one of the most famous monuments in paris ,  standing at the western end of the champs-élysées at the center of place charles de gaulle ,  formerly named `` place de l'étoile '' — the `` étoile '' or `` star '' of the juncture formed by its twelve radiating avenues . 
inspired by the arch of titus in rome ,  italy ,  the arc de triomphe has an overall height of  ,  width of  ,  and depth of  ,  while its large vault is high and wide . 
its name is taken from that of the amazon river ,  from which certain green stones were formerly obtained ,  but it is doubtful whether green feldspar occurs in the amazon area . 
a 1985 study suggest that the blue-green color results from small quantities of lead and water in the feldspar . 
ambrosius bosschaert the elder  -lrb-  18 january 1573 – 1621 -rrb- was a still life painter of the dutch golden age . 
when bosschaert died in the hague while on commission there for a flower piece ,  balthasar van der ast took over running his workshop and pupils . 
