proteins or polypeptides are polymers of amino acids . 
by targeting proteins ,  heavy metals have been known to disrupt the function and activity carried out by proteins . 
denatured proteins lose their 3d structure and therefore cannot function . 
denatured proteins can exhibit a wide range of characteristics ,  from loss of solubility to protein aggregation . 
when food is cooked ,  some of its proteins become denatured . 
as a result ,  heavy metals can interfere with folded proteins ,  which can strongly deter protein stability and activity . 
protein folding is key to whether a globular or membrane protein can do its job correctly; it must be folded into the right shape to function . 
the final shape of a protein determines how it interacts with its environment . 
this understanding has led to the notion that all the information needed for proteins to assume their native state was encoded in the primary structure of the protein ,  and hence in the dna that codes for the protein ,  the so-called `` anfinsen's thermodynamic hypothesis '' . 
he was not received as a church member until may 4, 1856.
diets 2 and 3 lost the most weight and fat mass; however ,  low density lipoprotein fell in diet 2 and rose in diet 3.
weight loss diets that manipulate the proportion of macronutrients  -lrb-  low-fat ,  low-carbohydrate ,  etc .   -rrb- 
diets to promote weight loss can be categorized as: low-fat ,  low-carbohydrate ,  low-calorie ,  very low calorie and more recently flexible dieting . 
diets can also be used to maintain a stable body weight and improve health . 
low-fat diets involve the reduction of the percentage of fat in one's diet . 
while there are studies that show the health and medical benefits of weight loss ,  a study in 2005 of around 3000 finns over an 18-year period showed that weight loss from dieting can result in increased mortality ,  while those who maintained their weight fared the best . 
low-calorie diets usually produce an energy deficit of 500–1,000 calories per day ,  which can result in a weight loss per week . 
a meta-analysis by the cochrane collaboration concluded that low glycemic index or low glycemic load diets led to more weight loss and better lipid profiles . 
low-carbohydrate diets are relatively high in protein and fats . 
extreme diets may ,  in some cases ,  lead to malnutrition . 
some weight loss groups aim to make money ,  others work as charities . 
weight loss by dieting ,  while of benefit to those classified as unhealthy ,  may slightly increase the mortality rate for individuals who are otherwise healthy . 
the element was formally named `` dubnium '' in 1997 after the town of dubna ,  the site of the jinr . 
dubnium ,  having an atomic number of 105, is a superheavy element; like all elements with such high atomic numbers ,  it is very unstable . 
dubnium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol db and atomic number 105.
dubnium can only be obtained by artificial production . 
the predicted density of dubnium is 29 g/cm . 
in the early 1970s ,  both teams reported synthesis of the next element ,  element 106, but did not suggest names . 
the short half-life of dubnium limits experimentation . 
according to the periodic law ,  dubnium should belong to group 5, with vanadium ,  niobium ,  and tantalum . 
this greatly limits the extent of research on dubnium . 
the name `` flerovium '' was later used for element 114.
experimental results of the chemistry of dubnium date back to 1974 and 1976.
the ionization potential of dubnium in its maximum +5 oxidation state should be slightly lower than that of tantalum and the ionic radius of dubnium should increase compared to tantalum; this has a significant effect on dubnium's chemistry . 
atoms of dubnium in the solid state should arrange themselves in a body-centered cubic configuration ,  like the previous group 5 elements . 
these results may imply that dubnium behaves more like hafnium than niobium . 
a disaccharide  -lrb-  also called a double sugar or bivose  -rrb-  is the sugar formed when two monosaccharides  -lrb-  simple sugars  -rrb-  are joined by glycosidic linkage . 
the joining of simple sugars into a double sugar happens by a condensation reaction ,  which involves the elimination of a water molecule from the functional groups only . 
hexameters also have a primary caesura—a break between words ,  sometimes  -lrb-  but not always  -rrb-  coinciding with a break in sense—at one of several normal positions: after the first syllable of the second foot; after the first syllable in the third foot  -lrb-  the `` masculine '' caesura  -rrb- ; after the second syllable in the third foot if the third foot is a dactyl  -lrb-  the `` feminine '' caesura  -rrb- ; after the first syllable of the fourth foot  -lrb-  the hephthemimeral caesura  -rrb-  . 
the fifth foot is usually a dactyl  -lrb-  around 95% of the time in homer  -rrb-  . 
the sixth foot can be filled by either a trochee  -lrb-  a long then short syllable  -rrb-  or a spondee . 
dactylic hexameter  -lrb-  also known as `` heroic hexameter '' and `` the meter of epic ''  -rrb-  is a form of meter or rhythmic scheme in poetry . 
r doradus is one of the many variable stars in dorado . 
dorado  -lrb-  english pronunciation:   -rrb-  is a constellation in the southern sky . 
dorado is also the location of the south ecliptic pole ,  which lies near the fish's head . 
the name `` dorado '' ultimately become dominant and was adopted by the iau . 
draco  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` drakōn ''; fl . 
during the 39th olympiad ,  in 622 or 621 bce ,  draco established the legal code with which he is identified . 
in linear algebra ,  the determinant is a value that can be computed from the elements of a square matrix and encodes certain properties of the linear transformation described by the matrix . 
ricardo was a close friend of james mill . 
he had eight children ,  including three sons ,  of whom osman ricardo  -lrb-  1795–1881; mp for worcester 1847–1865 -rrb- and another david ricardo  -lrb-  1803–1864, mp for stroud 1832–1833 -rrb- ,  became members of parliament ,  while the third ,  mortimer ricardo ,  served as an officer in the life guards and was a deputy lieutenant for oxfordshire . 
he was appointed high sheriff of gloucestershire for 1818–19.
he again voted for criminal law reform ,  4 june . 
ricardo became interested in economics after reading adam smith's `` the wealth of nations '' in 1799.
ricardo's most famous work is his `` principles of political economy and taxation ''  -lrb-  1817 -rrb- . 
beta delphini ,  called rotanev . 
gamma delphini is a celebrated binary star among amateur astronomers . 
alpha delphini is a blue-white hued main sequence star of magnitude 3.8, 241 light-years from earth . 
digital disk drives are block storage devices . 
notable types are the hard disk drive  -lrb-  hdd  -rrb-  containing a non-removable disk ,  the floppy disk drive  -lrb-  fdd  -rrb-  and its removable floppy disk ,  and various optical disc drives  -lrb-  odd  -rrb-  and associated optical disc media . 
the drive stores data onto cylinders ,  heads ,  and sectors . 
an hdd with two disks internally will typically store data on all four surfaces . 
the choice of a particular form is frequently historical ,  as in ibm's usage of the `` disk '' form beginning in 1956 with the `` ibm 350 disk storage unit ''  -rrb-  . 
wellesley was born in dublin into the protestant ascendancy in ireland . 
arthur and the 33rd sailed to join them in august . 
wellesley was promoted full colonel by seniority on 3 may 1796 and a few weeks later set sail for calcutta with his regiment . 
in 1798, he changed the spelling of his surname to `` wellesley ''; up to this time he was still known as wesley ,  which his eldest brother considered the ancient and proper spelling . 
a few months later ,  in september ,  his brother lent him more money and with it he purchased a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 33rd . 
returning to england in march 1795, he was returned as a member of parliament for trim for a second time . 
returning in november to india ,  he learnt that his elder brother richard ,  now known as lord mornington ,  had been appointed as the new governor-general of india . 
usually ,  a disk operating system was loaded from a disk . 
some disk operating systems were the operating system for the entire computer system . 
a disk operating system  -lrb-  abbreviated dos  -rrb-  is a computer operating system that can use a disk storage device ,  such as a floppy disk ,  hard disk drive ,  or optical disc . 
doublespeak is often used by politicians for the advancement of their agenda . 
doublespeak is most closely associated with political language . 
doublespeak might also have some connections with contemporary theories . 
thus ,  according to lutz ,  doublespeak is a form of language that defeats the purpose of inventing language because doublespeak does not communicate the truth but seeks to do the opposite and the doublespeak committee is tasked with correcting this problem that doublespeak has created in the world of language . 
the term `` doublespeak '' originates in george orwell's book `` nineteen eighty-four '' . 
similarly ,  herman's theory of doublespeak having an inherent nature to be manipulative and chomsky's theory of `` dichotomization '' relates directly to the practice of doublespeak and how doublespeak is deliberately deceptive in nature . 
william d .  lutz has served as the third chairman of the doublespeak committee since 1975.
he was also the founder of the intensify/downplay pattern that has been widely used to identify instances of doublespeak being used . 
 ''only by using language well will we come to appreciate the perversion inherent in doublespeak . `` 
lutz is one of the main contributors to the committee as well as promoting the term `` doublespeak '' to a mass audience so as to inform them of the deceptive qualities that doublespeak contains . 
examples of the structural nature of the use of doublespeak have been made by modern scholars . 
educating students has been suggested by experts to be one of the ways to counter doublespeak . 
liz and peter scheme to learn bobbi's birth name by getting inside dr .  elliott's office . 
de palma called the elevator killing the best murder scene he has ever done . 
elliott tries to convince dr .  levy ,  the patient's new doctor ,  that bobbi is a danger to herself and others . 
the criterion collection also released the film on blu-ray in 2014.
kate miller  -lrb-  angie dickinson  -rrb-  is a sexually frustrated housewife who is in therapy with new york city psychiatrist dr .  robert elliott  -lrb-  michael caine  -rrb-  . 
dressed to kill is a 1980 american erotic thriller film written and directed by brian de palma and starring michael caine ,  angie dickinson ,  nancy allen ,  and keith gordon . 
these scenes were trimmed when the mpaa originally gave the film an `` x '' rating . 
the work that leaves the system is equal to the work that enters the system plus the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system; in other words ,  net gain of work is equal to the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system . 
the diesel engine is a heat engine: it converts heat into work . 
the diesel cycle is assumed to have constant pressure during the initial part of the combustion phase  -lrb-  formula_1 to formula_2 in the diagram ,  below  -rrb-  . 
once coded ,  the team's game systems did not work as intended . 
the game received critical acclaim ,  including repeatedly being named `` best pc game of all time '' in `` pc gamer ''s `` top 100 pc games '' in 2011 and in a poll carried out by the uk gaming magazine `` pc zone '' . 
loki games worked on a linux version of the game ,  but the company went out of business before releasing it . 
 ''deus ex '' was designed as a single-player game ,  and the initial releases of the windows and macintosh versions of the game did not include multiplayer functionality . 
because of its design focus on player choice ,  `` deus ex '' has been compared with `` system shock '' ,  a game that inspired its design . 
 ''deus ex '' incorporates elements from four video game genres: role-playing ,  first-person shooter ,  adventure ,  and `` immersive simulation '' ,  the last of which being a game where `` nothing reminds you that you're just playing a game '' . 
in early 1998, the `` deus ex '' team grew to 20 people and the game entered a 28-month production phase . 
the game's graphics and sounds were also met with muted enthusiasm . 
gameplay in `` deus ex '' emphasizes player choice . 
a sequel to the game titled ``  '' ,  was released in the united states on december 2, 2003, and then in europe in early 2004 for both the pc and the xbox game console . 
he has said that the game won over 30 `` best of '' awards in 2001, and concluded that their final game was not perfect ,  but that they were much closer for having tried to `` do things right or not at all '' . 
the game led to a series ,  which include the sequel ``  ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- ,  and three prequels: ``  ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  and ``  ''  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- . 
the player's decision determines the course of the future and brings the game to a close . 
the game is also unusual in that two of its boss villains can be killed off early in the game ,  or left alive to be defeated later ,  and this too affects how other characters interact with the player . 
the game was a larger hit in europe; janicki called it a `` blockbuster '' for the region ,  which broke a trend of poor sales for 3d games . 
deus ex is a 2000 action role-playing video game developed by ion storm and published by eidos interactive . 
the website ,  later on ,  stated that `` overall deus ex certainly looks better than your average game . `` 
a playstation 2 port of the game ,  retitled `` deus ex: the conspiracy '' outside of europe ,  was released on march 26, 2002.
the `` deus ex: game of the year edition '' ,  which was released on may 8, 2001, contains the latest game updates and a software development kit ,  a separate soundtrack cd and a page from a fictional newspaper featured prominently in `` deus ex '' titled `` the midnight sun '' ,  which recounts recent events in the game's world . 
according to `` computer gaming world ''s stefan janicki ,  `` deus ex '' had `` sold well in north america '' by early 2001.
a compact disc of the `` deus ex '' soundtrack was included in the `` game of the year '' edition and is not available for separate purchase . 
since its release ,  `` deus ex '' has appeared in a number of `` greatest games of all time '' lists and hall of fame features . 
 ''deus ex '' received over 30 `` best of '' awards in 2001, from outlets such as ign ,  gamespy ,  `` pc gamer '' ,  `` computer gaming world '' ,  and the adrenaline vault . 
the game also collected several `` best story '' accolades ,  including first prize in gamasutra's 2006 `` quantum leap '' awards for storytelling in a video game . 
weapons may be customized through `` weapon modifications '' ,  which can be found or purchased throughout the game . 
maradona did so in 1979 and 1986, which messi emulated in 2005 and 2014.
maradona and villafañe divorced in 2004.
maradona became coach of argentina in november 2008.
maradona was famous for his cunning personality . 
from the mid-1980s until 2004, maradona was addicted to cocaine . 
there are also films ,  such as: `` maradona ,  la mano de dios ''  -lrb-  maradona ,  the hand of god  -rrb-  ,  `` el camino de san diego ''  -lrb-  saint diego's road  -rrb-  ,  `` amando a maradona ''  -lrb-  loving maradona  -rrb-  ,  `` maradona by kusturica '' . 
during his time with the argentina national team ,  maradona scored 34 goals in 91 appearances . 
maradona captained argentina again in the 1990 world cup in italy to yet another world cup final . 
the american newspaper `` the houston chronicle '' wrote about maradona: in argentina ,  maradona is considered a sports hero . 
in 2008, award-winning serbian filmmaker emir kusturica made a documentary about maradona's life ,  entitled `` maradona '' . 
that would be the only title won by maradona in the argentine domestic league . 
maradona signed a contract with boca juniors on 20 february 1981.
maradona played his first world cup tournament in 1982 in his new country of residence ,  spain . 
this turned out to be maradona's last international goal for argentina in what was his last appearance for his country . 
in september 2018 maradona was appointed coach of mexican club dorados . 
after the 1982 world cup ,  in june ,  maradona was transferred to barcelona in spain for a then world record fee of £5 million  -lrb-  $7.6 million  -rrb-  . 
the only match argentina played during maradona's ban was a friendly away to catalonia ,  which they lost 4–2.
maradona was himself given a testimonial match in november 2001, played between an all-star world xi and the argentina national team . 
maradona and his compatriot and heir apparent ,  lionel messi ,  are the only players to win the golden ball at both the fifa u-20 world cup and fifa world cup . 
in the round of 16 match against brazil in turin ,  claudio caniggia scored the only goal after being set up by maradona . 
while maradona was successful on the field during his time in italy ,  his personal problems increased . 
maradona features in the music video to the 2010 world cup song `` waka waka '' by shakira ,  with footage shown of him celebrating argentina winning the 1986 world cup . 
maradona's second goal ,  just four minutes after the hotly disputed hand-goal ,  was later voted by fifa as the greatest goal in the history of the world cup . 
brewster married twice . 
brewster also edited the 18-volume `` edinburgh encyclopædia '' . 
although brewster's own discoveries were important ,  they were not his only service to science . 
in 1819 brewster undertook further editorial work by establishing ,  in conjunction with robert jameson  -lrb-  1774–1854 -rrb- ,  the `` edinburgh philosophical journal '' ,  which took the place of the `` edinburgh magazine '' . 
david brewster was born at the canongate in jedburgh ,  roxburghshire ,  to margaret key  -lrb-  1753–1790 -rrb- and james brewster  -lrb-  c .  1735–1815 -rrb- ,  the rector of jedburgh grammar school and a teacher of high reputation . 
sir david brewster  -lrb-  11 december 178110 february 1868 -rrb- was a british scientist ,  inventor ,  author ,  and academic administrator . 
the book has become one of the standard works on early scottish freemasonry ,  although there is no evidence that brewster was a freemason at the time he wrote the book ,  nor any that he became one later . 
brewster pressed its adoption on those in authority at least as early as 1820, two years before fresnel suggested it ,  and it was finally introduced into lighthouses mainly through brewster's persistent efforts . 
after parting company with jameson ,  brewster started the `` edinburgh journal of science '' in 1824, 16 volumes of which appeared under his editorship during the years 1824–1832, with very many articles from his own pen . 
a bust of brewster is in the hall of heroes of the national wallace monument in stirling . 
it is also known in the uk as `` mf4 '' . 
in the uk ,  it is also known as mf4.
dtmf signaling tones can also be heard at the start or end of some vhs  -lrb-  video home system  -rrb-  cassette tapes . 
dtmf tones are used in some caller id systems to transfer the caller id information ,  but in the united states only bell 202 modulated fsk signaling is used to transfer the data . 
dtmf was originally decoded by tuned filter banks . 
the bell system defined them in the precise tone plan . 
the dtmf telephone keypad is laid out as a matrix of push buttons in which each row represents the low frequency component and each column represents the high frequency component of the dtmf signal . 
the term distinguished these texts both from those that were termed protocanonical books ,  which were the books of the hebrew canon; and from the apocryphal books ,  which were those books of jewish origin that were known sometimes to have been read in church as scripture but which were considered not to be canonical . 
the wind-up sets the tone for the entire throw; the rhythm of the throw is very important . 
starting with age 75, women throw the discus . 
girls throw the 1 kg discus as 11- to 18-year-olds . 
in international competition ,  men throw the 2 kg discus through to age 49.
under iaaf  -lrb-  international  -rrb-  rules ,  youth boys  -lrb-  16–17 years  -rrb-  throw the discus ,  the junior men  -lrb-  18–19 years  -rrb-  throw the unique discus ,  and the girls/women of those ages throw the discus . 
in u . s .  high school track and field ,  boys typically throw a discus weighing 1.6 kg  -lrb-  3 lb 9 oz  -rrb-  and the girls throw the 1 kg  -lrb-  2.2 lb  -rrb-  women's discus . 
for a right handed thrower ,  the next stage is to move the weight over the left foot . 
the discus throw  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a track and field event in which an athlete throws a heavy disc—called a discus—in an attempt to mark a farther distance than his or her competitors . 
the sport of throwing the discus traces back to it being an event in the original olympic games of ancient greece . 
infinitary logic . 
there are also continuous graphs ,  however for the most part research in graph theory falls within the domain of discrete mathematics . 
set theory is the branch of mathematics that studies sets ,  which are collections of objects ,  such as {blue ,  white ,  red} or the  -lrb-  infinite  -rrb-  set of all prime numbers . 
number theory is concerned with the properties of numbers in general ,  particularly integers . 
graph theory ,  the study of graphs and networks ,  is often considered part of combinatorics ,  but has grown large enough and distinct enough ,  with its own kind of problems ,  to be regarded as a subject in its own right . 
the study of mathematical proof is particularly important in logic ,  and has applications to automated theorem proving and formal verification of software . 
in logic ,  the second problem on david hilbert's list of open problems presented in 1900 was to prove that the axioms of arithmetic are consistent . 
algebraic varieties also have a well-defined notion of tangent space called the zariski tangent space ,  making many features of calculus applicable even in finite settings . 
formal verification of statements in logic has been necessary for software development of safety-critical systems ,  and advances in automated theorem proving have been driven by this need . 
as well as the discrete metric there are more general discrete or finite metric spaces and finite topological spaces . 
the history of discrete mathematics has involved a number of challenging problems which have focused attention within areas of the field . 
logic is the study of the principles of valid reasoning and inference ,  as well as of consistency ,  soundness ,  and completeness . 
logical formulas are discrete structures ,  as are proofs ,  which form finite trees or ,  more generally ,  directed acyclic graph structures  -lrb-  with each inference step combining one or more premise branches to give a single conclusion  -rrb-  . 
ddt is an endocrine disruptor . 
some uses of ddt continued under the public health exemption . 
south africa continues to use ddt under who guidelines . 
in many parts of india ,  ddt is ineffective . 
ddt is the best-known of several chlorine-containing pesticides used in the 1940s and 1950s . 
ddt is one of 12 who–approved irs insecticides . 
in some areas resistance reduced ddt's effectiveness . 
most studies of ddt's human health effects have been conducted in developed countries where ddt is not used and exposure is relatively low . 
in a research from 1993 to 1995, ecuador increased its use of ddt and achieved a 61% reduction in malaria rates ,  while each of the other countries that gradually decreased its ddt use had large increases . 
who plans to implement alternatives to ddt to achieve this goal . 
commercial ddt is a mixture of several closely–related compounds . 
ddt ,  dde and ddd are sometimes referred to collectively as ddx . 
by october 1945, ddt was available for public sale in the united states . 
ddt resistant mosquitoes have generally proved susceptible to pyrethroids . 
ddt is similar in structure to the insecticide methoxychlor and the acaricide dicofol . 
because of its lipophilic properties ,  ddt can bioaccumulate ,  especially in predatory birds . 
ddt remains on who's list of insecticides recommended for irs . 
the question of whether ddt or dde are risk factors in breast cancer has not been conclusively answered . 
when it was introduced in world war ii ,  ddt was effective in reducing malaria morbidity and mortality . 
in 2006 who reversed a longstanding policy against ddt by recommending that it be used as an indoor pesticide in regions where malaria is a major problem . 
irs with ddt did not play an important role in mortality reduction in these countries . 
in 2015, the international agency for research on cancer classifies ddt as group 2a `` probably carcinogenic to humans '' . 
ddt was first synthesized in 1874 by othmar zeidler under the supervision of adolf von baeyer . 
a study in the solomon islands found that `` although impregnated bed nets cannot entirely replace ddt spraying without substantial increase in incidence ,  their use permits reduced ddt spraying . `` 
the findings `` support classification of ddt as an endocrine disruptor ,  a predictor of breast cancer ,  and a marker of high risk '' . 
by october 1945, ddt was available for public sale in the united states ,  used both as an agricultural pesticide and as a household insecticide . 
a data set  -lrb-  or dataset  -rrb-  is a collection of data . 
data sets that are so large that traditional data processing applications are inadequate to deal with them are known as big data . 
the data set may comprise data for one or more members ,  corresponding to the number of rows . 
the dsm is in its fifth edition ,  the dsm-5, published on may 18, 2013.
with the advent of the dsm-5 in 2013, the apa eliminated the longstanding multiaxial system for mental disorders . 
beginning with dsm-5, the american psychiatric association will use decimals to identify incremental updates  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  dsm-5.1, dsm-5.2 -rrb- and whole numbers for new editions  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  dsm-5, dsm-6 -rrb- ,  similar to the scheme used for software versioning . 
the fifth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  -lrb-  dsm  -rrb-  ,  the dsm-5, was approved by the board of trustees of the apa on december 1, 2012.
in 1952, the apa listed homosexuality in the dsm as a sociopathic personality disturbance . 
the dsm-5 is the first major edition of the manual in twenty years . 
the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  -lrb-  dsm  -rrb-  ,  published by the american psychiatric association  -lrb-  apa  -rrb-  ,  offers a common language and standard criteria for the classification of mental disorders . 
historically ,  the dsm tended to avoid issues involving religion; the dsm-5 relaxed this attitude somewhat . 
by design ,  the dsm is primarily concerned with the signs and symptoms of mental disorders ,  rather than the underlying causes . 
dsm-5, and the abbreviations for all previous editions ,  are registered trademarks owned by the apa . 
in 1917, together with the national commission on mental hygiene  -lrb-  now mental health america  -rrb-  ,  the apa developed a new guide for mental hospitals called the `` statistical manual for the use of institutions for the insane '' . 
psychiatrist allen frances has been critical of proposed revisions to the dsm-5.
it states `` there is no assumption that each category of mental disorder is a completely discrete entity with absolute boundaries dividing it from other mental disorders or from no mental disorder ''  -lrb-  apa ,  1994 and 2000 -rrb- . 
in addition ,  the publishing of the dsm ,  with tightly guarded copyrights ,  has in itself earned over $100 million for the apa . 
in the 1960s ,  there were many challenges to the concept of mental illness itself . 
although the apa was closely involved in the next significant revision of the mental disorder section of the icd  -lrb-  version 8 in 1968 -rrb- ,  it decided to go ahead with a revision of the dsm . 
the international classification of diseases  -lrb-  icd  -rrb-  is the other common manual for mental disorders . 
during the revision process ,  the apa website periodically listed several sections of the dsm-5 for review and discussion . 
in 1974, the decision to create a new revision of the dsm was made ,  and robert spitzer was selected as chairman of the task force . 
mental health professionals use the manual to determine and help communicate a patient's diagnosis after an evaluation . 
the publication of the dsm ,  with closely held copyrights ,  earns the apa over $5 million a year ,  totaling more than $100 million over its history . 
a client is a person who accesses psychiatric services and may have been given a diagnosis from the dsm ,  while a survivor self-identifies as a person who has endured a psychiatric intervention and the mental health system  -lrb-  which may have involved involuntary commitment and involuntary treatment  -rrb-  . 
revisions since its first publication in 1952 have incrementally added to the total number of mental disorders ,  and removed those no longer considered to be mental disorders . 
after world war ii ,  dar es salaam experienced a period of rapid growth . 
dar es salaam is also the largest and most populous swahili-speaking city in the world . 
the relocation process has not yet been completed ,  and dar es salaam remains tanzania's primary city . 
german east africa was captured by the british during world war i and became tanganyika ,  with dar es salaam remaining the administrative and commercial centre . 
a computer program that runs within a distributed system is called a distributed program  -lrb-  and distributed programming is the process of writing such programs  -rrb-  . 
 ''distributed computing '' also refers to the use of distributed systems to solve computational problems . 
a distributed system may have a common goal ,  such as solving a large computational problem; the user then perceives the collection of autonomous processors as a unit . 
over 15% of dublin's population was foreign-born in 2006.
dublin  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital of ,  and largest city in ,  ireland . 
dublin was the european capital of science in 2012.
it has an urban area population of 1,173,179, while the population of the dublin region  -lrb-  formerly county dublin  -rrb-  ,   ,  was 1,347,359, and the population of the greater dublin area was 1,904,806.
since 1997, the landscape of dublin has changed . 
from 1842, the boundaries of the city were comprehended by the baronies of dublin city and the barony of dublin . 
the road network in ireland is primarily focused on dublin . 
dublin was shortlisted to be world design capital 2014.
for elections to dáil éireann ,  the city is divided into five constituencies: dublin central  -lrb-  3 seats  -rrb-  ,  dublin bay north  -lrb-  5 seats  -rrb-  ,  dublin north-west  -lrb-  3 seats  -rrb-  ,  dublin south-central  -lrb-  4 seats  -rrb-  and dublin bay south  -lrb-  4 seats  -rrb-  . 
dublin connolly to dublin port can be reached via amiens street ,  dublin into store street or by luas via busáras where dublin bus operates services to the ferry terminal . 
the institute of international and european affairs is also in dublin . 
the city of dublin is the area administered by dublin city council ,  but the term `` dublin '' is also used to refer to the contiguous urban area which includes parts of the adjacent local authority areas of dún laoghaire–rathdown ,  fingal and south dublin . 
dublin once had an extensive system of trams but this was largely phased out by 1949.
the 2011 census showed that 5.9 percent of commuters in dublin cycled . 
as the capital city ,  dublin is the seat of the national parliament of ireland ,  the oireachtas . 
following the partition of ireland in 1922, dublin became the capital of the irish free state ,  later renamed ireland . 
the national university of ireland  -lrb-  nui  -rrb-  has its seat in dublin ,  which is also the location of the associated `` constituent university '' of university college dublin  -lrb-  ucd  -rrb-  ,  which has over 30,000 students . 
dublin is also home to the royal irish academy ,  membership of which is considered ireland's highest academic honour . 
in the second quarter of 2018, dublin touched its lowest unemployment rate in a decade ,  when it fell down to 5.7% as reported by the dublin economic monitor . 
dublin is one of the primary centres of education in ireland ,  and is home to three universities ,  dublin institute of technology and a number of other higher education institutions . 
dublin airport is the 11th busiest in the european union ,  and by far the busiest airport on the island of ireland . 
the ha'penny bridge ,  an iron footbridge over the river liffey ,  is one of the most photographed sights in dublin and is considered to be one of dublin's most iconic landmarks . 
dublin airport  -lrb-  owned and operated by daa  -rrb-  is located north of dublin city ,  near swords in the administrative county of fingal . 
in 2014, dublin airport was the 18th busiest airport in europe ,  serving over 21 million passengers . 
dublin is situated at the mouth of the river liffey and encompasses a land area of approximately in east-central ireland . 
heuston and connolly stations are the two main railway stations in dublin . 
with a continuous history dating back to 1887, dublin's principal ,  and ireland's largest ,  institution for technological education and research ,  dublin institute of technology  -lrb-  dit  -rrb-  has over 23,000 students . 
there are many green-spaces around the city ,  and dublin city council manages over of parks . 
the university of dublin is the oldest university in ireland ,  dating from the 16th century ,  and is located in the city centre . 
dublin celebrated its 'official' millennium in 1988, meaning the irish government recognised 988 as the year in which the city was settled and that this first settlement would later become the city of dublin . 
dublin has many landmarks and monuments dating back hundreds of years . 
dublin city centre is a popular shopping destination for both locals and tourists . 
dublin is a historical and contemporary centre for education ,  the arts ,  administration and industry . 
dublin is also the headquarters of national newspapers such as `` the irish times '' and `` irish independent '' ,  as well as local newspapers such as `` the evening herald '' . 
the dublin area hosts greyhound racing at shelbourne park and horse racing at leopardstown . 
dublin was also a victim of the northern irish troubles ,  although during this 30 year conflict ,  violence mainly occurred within northern ireland . 
prior to directx ,  microsoft had included opengl on their windows nt platform . 
in a console-specific version ,  directx was used as a basis for microsoft's xbox ,  xbox 360 and xbox one console api . 
as direct3d is the most widely publicized component of directx ,  it is common to see the names `` directx '' and `` direct3d '' used interchangeably . 
as of april 2005, directshow was removed from directx and moved to the microsoft platform sdk instead . 
slalom is an alpine skiing and alpine snowboarding discipline ,  involving skiing between poles or gates . 
dachshunds can be aggressive to strangers and other dogs . 
about 20–25% of dachshunds will develop ivdd . 
the long-haired dachshund may be a cross among any of the small dog breeds in the spaniel group ,  including the german stoeberhund ,  and the smooth-haired dachshund . 
dachshunds may not be the best pets for small children . 
the dachshund  -lrb-  uk: /ˈdakshʊnd/ or or   -rrb-   -lrb-  ; also known as the sausage dog or wiener dog  -rrb-  is a short-legged ,  long-bodied ,  hound-type dog breed . 
some people train and enter their dachshund to compete in dachshund races ,  such as the wiener nationals . 
there are two theories about how the standard longhair dachshund came about . 
 ''dachshund '' may be mispronounced as `` dash-hound '' by some english speakers . 
the exact origins of the dachshund are therefore unknown . 
the name `` dachshund '' is of german origin and literally means `` badger dog , ``  from `` dachs ''  -lrb-  `` european badger ''  -rrb-  and `` hund ''  -lrb-  `` hound ,  dog ''  -rrb-  . 
there are huge differences of opinion as to when dachshunds were specifically bred for their purpose of badger hunting ,  as the american kennel club states the dachshund was bred in the 15th century ,  while the dachshund club of america states that foresters bred the dogs in the 18th or 19th century . 
dachshunds come in three sizes: standard ,  miniature ,  and `` kaninchen ''  -lrb-  german for `` rabbit ''  -rrb-  . 
dachshunds have traditionally been viewed as a symbol of germany . 
according to the akc ,  the dachshund is ranked in 13th place in popularity amongst dog breeds in the united states . 
the flap-down ears and famous curved tail of the dachshund have deliberately been bred into the dog . 
dachshunds are one of the most popular dogs in the united states ,  ranking 13th in the 2016 akc registration statistics . 
the data structure implements the physical form of the data type . 
data structures serve as the basis for abstract data types  -lrb-  adt  -rrb-  . 
more precisely ,  a data structure is a collection of data values ,  the relationships among them ,  and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data . 
there are numerous types of data structures ,  generally built upon simpler primitive data types:
in computer science ,  a data structure is a data organization ,  management and storage format that enables efficient access and modification . 
it was also at this time that shostakovich composed the first of his string quartets . 
shostakovich married his first wife ,  nina varzar ,  in 1932.
the success put shostakovich in good standing once again . 
it is also uncertain to what extent shostakovich expressed his opposition to the state in his music . 
shostakovich died of lung cancer on 9 august 1975.
more than 25 years later ,  shostakovich quotes this theme in his eighth string quartet . 
when asked if he believed in god ,  shostakovich said `` no ,  and i am very sorry about it . `` 
throughout his compositions ,  shostakovich demonstrated a controlled use of musical quotation . 
among these were shostakovich's piano and vocal sketches for a prologue to an opera ,  `` orango ''  -lrb-  1932 -rrb- . 
dmitri dmitriyevich shostakovich  -lrb-   ,  ; 9 august 1975 -rrb- was a russian composer and pianist . 
in 1962 shostakovich got married for the third time ,  to irina supinskaya . 
in the late 1920s and early 1930s ,  shostakovich worked at tram ,  a proletarian youth theatre . 
in 1954, shostakovich wrote the festive overture ,  opus 96; it was used as the theme music for the 1980 summer olympics . 
shostakovich's musical response to these personal crises was the eighth string quartet ,  composed in only three days . 
in the years after 1936, shostakovich's symphonic works were outwardly musically conservative ,  regardless of any subversive political content . 
born at podolskaya street in saint petersburg ,  russia ,  shostakovich was the second of three children of dmitri boleslavovich shostakovich and sofiya vasilievna kokoulina . 
the publication of the `` pravda '' editorials coincided with the composition of shostakovich's fourth symphony . 
in the 1980s ,  the finnish conductor and composer esa-pekka salonen was critical of shostakovich and refused to conduct his music . 
in may 1958, during a visit to paris ,  shostakovich recorded his two piano concertos with andré cluytens ,  as well as some short piano works . 
shostakovich concentrated on composition thereafter and soon limited his performances primarily to those of his own works . 
shostakovich's works are broadly tonal and in the romantic tradition ,  but with elements of atonality and chromaticism . 
salonen has since performed and recorded several of shostakovich's works ,  including the piano concertos nos . 
the restrictions on shostakovich's music and living arrangements were eased in 1949, when stalin decided that the soviets needed to send artistic representatives to the cultural and scientific congress for world peace in new york city ,  and that shostakovich should be among them . 
their son ,  dmitri dmitriyevich shostakovich ,  displayed significant musical talent after he began piano lessons with his mother at the age of nine . 
in 1948, shostakovich ,  along with many other composers ,  was again denounced for formalism in the zhdanov decree . 
1927 also marked the beginning of shostakovich's relationship with ivan sollertinsky ,  who remained his closest friend until the latter's death in 1944.
while writing the second symphony ,  shostakovich also began work on his satirical opera `` the nose '' ,  based on the story by nikolai gogol . 
doom . ' ''
in 1994 `` computer gaming world '' named `` doom '' game of the year . 
doom  -lrb-  typeset as doom in official documents and stylized as doom in other media  -rrb-  is a 1993 first-person shooter  -lrb-  fps  -rrb-  video game by id software . 
because id planned to self-publish the game ,  as the game neared completion they had to set up the systems to sell the game . 
in 2009, gametrailers ranked `` doom '' as number one `` breakthrough pc game '' . 
the `` doom '' series remained dormant between 1997 and 2000, when `` doom 3 '' would finally be announced . 
in 1996 `` computer gaming world '' ranked it as the fifth best video game of all time ,  and the third most-innovative game . 
in 2001, `` doom '' was voted the number one game of all time in a poll among over 100 game developers and journalists conducted by gamespy . 
in 2004, readers of `` retro gamer '' voted `` doom '' as the ninth top retro game ,  with the editors commenting: `` only a handful of games can claim that they've changed the gaming world ,  and `` doom '' is perhaps the most qualified of them all . `` 
within hours of `` doom ''s release ,  university networks were banning `` doom '' multiplayer games ,  as a rush of players overwhelmed their systems . 
the `` doom '' franchise was later continued with the follow-up ``  ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- and numerous expansion packs ,  including `` master levels for doom ii ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  and `` final doom ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- . 
in 1994, `` pc gamer uk '' named `` doom '' the third best computer game of all time . 
on march 12, 2007, `` the new york times '' reported that `` doom '' was named to a list of the ten most important video games of all time ,  the so called game canon . 
 ''doom '' is a first-person shooter presented with early 3d graphics . 
the library of congress took up this video game preservation proposal and began with the games from this list . 
 ''doom '' was influential and dozens of new first-person shooter titles appeared following `` doom '' release ,  and they were often referred to as ``  ''doom '' clones '' rather than `` first-person shooters '' . 
in 2005, ign ranked it as the 39th top game . 
because of its widespread distribution ,  `` doom '' hence became the game that introduced deathmatching to a large audience and was also the first game to use the term `` deathmatch '' . 
 ''pc gamer '' proclaimed `` doom '' the most influential game of all time in its ten-year anniversary issue in april 2004.
the popularity of `` doom '' led to the development of an expanded version ,  `` the ultimate doom ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  which includes a fourth episode . 
the denver department of safety oversees three branches: the denver police department ,  denver fire department ,  and denver sheriff department . 
denver public schools  -lrb-  dps  -rrb-  is the public school system in denver . 
medianews group purchased the `` denver post '' in 1987; the company is based in denver . 
in 1900, whites represented 96.8% of denver's population . 
denver is home to a wide array of museums . 
during the 1960s and 1970s ,  denver was one of the epicenters of the chicano movement . 
denver  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the city and county of denver ,  is the capital and most populous municipality of the u . s .  state of colorado . 
denverites is a term used for residents of denver . 
denver has several additional professional teams . 
between the 1880s and 1930s ,  denver's floriculture industry developed and thrived . 
denver is also well known for other types of food such as rocky mountain oysters ,  rainbow trout ,  and the denver sandwich . 
the denver county court is an integrated colorado county court and municipal court and is managed by denver instead of the state . 
denver has a strong mayor/weak city council government . 
denver also has a number of neighborhoods not reflected in the administrative boundaries . 
on october 31, 2011 it was announced the university of denver in denver would host the first of three 2012 presidential debates to be held on october 3, 2012.
larimer street ,  named after william larimer ,  jr .  ,  the founder of denver ,  which is in the heart of lodo ,  is the oldest street in denver . 
denver has been home to two national hockey league teams . 
denver is also home to a large network of public community gardens ,  most of which are managed by denver urban gardens ,  a non-profit organization . 
geography also allows denver to have a considerable government presence ,  with many federal agencies based or having offices in the denver area . 
denver residents use the terms `` north '' ,  `` south '' ,  `` east '' ,  and `` west '' . 
denver is also famous for its dedication to new mexican cuisine and the chile . 
most of denver has a straightforward street grid oriented to the four cardinal directions . 
benjamin f .  stapleton was the mayor of denver ,  colorado ,  for two periods ,  the first from 1923 to 1931 and the second from 1935 to 1947.
denver has also enjoyed success as a pioneer in the fast-casual restaurant industry ,  with many popular national chain restaurants founded and based in denver . 
denver has numerous art districts around the city ,  including denver's art district on santa fe and the river north art district  -lrb-  rino  -rrb-  . 
despite challenges ,  on june 24, 1870, citizens cheered as the denver pacific completed the link to the transcontinental railroad ,  ushering in a new age of prosperity for denver . 
molson coors brewing company established its u . s .  headquarters in denver in 2005.
denver used to be a major trading center for beef and livestock when ranchers would drive  -lrb-  or later transport  -rrb-  cattle to the denver union stockyards for sale . 
the denver area has 2 chinese newspapers ,  the chinese american post and the colorado chinese news . 
according to the 2010 united states census ,  the racial composition of denver was as follows:
the denver area is home to the former nuclear weapons plant rocky flats ,  the denver federal center ,  byron g .  rogers federal building and united states courthouse ,  the denver mint ,  and the national renewable energy laboratory . 
this is the total spin of the deuterium nucleus . 
the nucleus of deuterium is called a deuteron . 
deuterium  -lrb-  or hydrogen-2, symbol ' or ' ,  also known as heavy hydrogen  -rrb-  is one of two stable isotopes of hydrogen  -lrb-  the other being protium ,  or hydrogen-1 -rrb- . 
this is about 17% of the terrestrial deuterium-to-hydrogen ratio of 156 deuterium atoms per million hydrogen atoms . 
since gives a stronger nuclear attraction ,  the deuterium ground state is in the  ,  state . 
soon after deuterium's discovery ,  urey and others produced samples of `` heavy water '' in which the deuterium content had been highly concentrated . 
deuterium can replace the normal hydrogen in water molecules to form heavy water  -lrb-  do  -rrb-  ,  which is about 10.6% denser than normal water  -lrb-  so that ice made from it sinks in ordinary water  -rrb-  . 
pharmaceutical firms are interested in the fact that deuterium is harder to remove from carbon than hydrogen . 
deuterium is destroyed in the interiors of stars faster than it is produced . 
deuterium is one of only five stable nuclides with an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons . 
deuterium is frequently represented by the chemical symbol d .  since it is an isotope of hydrogen with mass number 2, it is also represented by  . 
to summarize ,  the deuterium nucleus is antisymmetric in terms of isospin ,  and has spin 1 and even  -lrb-  +1 -rrb- parity . 
the proton and neutron making up deuterium can be dissociated through neutral current interactions with neutrinos . 
however ,  forming helium-4 requires the intermediate step of forming deuterium . 
the natural abundance of deuterium seems to be a very similar fraction of hydrogen ,  wherever hydrogen is found ,  unless there are obvious processes at work that concentrate it . 
in terms of the `` down '' state and `` up '' state ,  the singlet is
digital signal processing and analog signal processing are subfields of signal processing . 
in dsp ,  engineers usually study digital signals in one of the following domains: time domain  -lrb-  one-dimensional signals  -rrb-  ,  spatial domain  -lrb-  multidimensional signals  -rrb-  ,  frequency domain ,  and wavelet domains . 
the most common purpose for analysis of signals in the frequency domain is analysis of signal properties . 
signals are converted from time or space domain to the frequency domain usually through use of the fourier transform . 
the most common processing approach in the time or space domain is enhancement of the input signal through a method called filtering . 
digital signal processing  -lrb-  dsp  -rrb-  is the use of digital processing ,  such as by computers or more specialized digital signal processors ,  to perform a wide variety of signal processing operations . 
there are some commonly-used frequency domain transformations . 
dsp algorithms may be run on general-purpose computers and digital signal processors . 
nonlinear signal processing is closely related to nonlinear system identification and can be implemented in the time ,  frequency ,  and spatio-temporal domains . 
the `` principia discordia '' ,  if read literally ,  encourages the worship of eris ,  known in latin as discordia ,  the goddess of disorder ,  or archetypes and ideals associated with her . 
the foundational document of discordianism is the `` principia discordia '' ,  fourth edition ,  written by malaclypse the younger ,  an alias of greg hill . 
according to the `` principia discordia '' ,  `` every single man ,  woman ,  and child on this earth '' is deemed a pope . 
included in the `` principia discordia '' is an official pope card that may be reproduced and distributed freely to anyone and everyone . 
it is the inference that if `` p '' is true ,  then `` p or q '' must be true . 
the reasoning is simple: since at least one of the statements p and r is true ,  and since either of them would be sufficient to entail q ,  q is certainly true . 
the dead sea  -lrb-   lit . 
just northwest of the dead sea is jericho . 
the highlands east of the dead sea receive more rainfall than the dead sea itself . 
in hebrew ,  the dead sea is '  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning `` sea of salt ''  -lrb-  genesis 14:3 -rrb- . 
the palestinian dead sea coast is about long . 
the palestinian dead sea coast is about long . 
since 1930, when its surface was and its level was below sea level ,  the dead sea has been monitored continuously . 
the salt concentration of the dead sea fluctuates around 31.5% . 
there are several small communities near the dead sea . 
an unusual feature of the dead sea is its discharge of asphalt . 
they became known and famous as the dead sea scrolls . 
the designation `` dead sea '' never appears in the bible . 
the mineral content of the dead sea is very different from that of ocean water . 
the dead sea is an endorheic lake located in the jordan rift valley ,  a geographic feature formed by the dead sea transform  -lrb-  dst  -rrb-  . 
both jordan and israel have established nature reserves around the dead sea . 
most israeli hotels and resorts on the dead sea are on a stretch of the southern shore . 
a similar prophecy is stated in  ,  which says that `` living waters will go out from jerusalem ,  half of them to the eastern sea likely the dead sea and half to the western sea the mediterranean . `` 
the dead sea is receding at an alarming rate; its surface area today is  ,  having been in 1930.
there are two contending hypotheses about the origin of the low elevation of the dead sea . 
in times of flood ,  the salt content of the dead sea can drop from its usual 35% to 30% or lower . 
in december 2013, israel ,  jordan and the palestinian authority signed an agreement for laying a water pipeline to link the red sea with the dead sea . 
many animal species live in the mountains surrounding the dead sea . 
various sects of jews settled in caves overlooking the dead sea . 
the dead sea has attracted visitors from around the mediterranean basin for thousands of years . 
a more recent hypothesis is that the dead sea basin is a consequence of a `` step-over '' discontinuity along the dead sea transform ,  creating an extension of the crust with consequent subsidence . 
the korean dragon is in many ways similar in appearance to other east asian dragons such as the chinese and japanese dragons . 
although quite similar to other european dragons ,  slavic dragons have their peculiarities . 
dragons are prominent in medieval heraldry . 
in korean myths ,  some kings who founded kingdoms were described as descendants of dragons because dragon was a symbol of the monarch . 
the king wore five-taloned dragon insignia while the crown prince wore four-taloned dragon insignia . 
the earliest attested dragons resemble giant snakes . 
korean folk mythology states that most dragons were originally  -lrb-  이무기  -rrb-  ,  or lesser dragons ,  which were said to resemble gigantic serpents . 
japanese dragon myths amalgamate native legends with imported stories about dragons from china ,  korea and india . 
it was believed that dragons could be appeased or exorcised with metal . 
like the chinese dragon ,  the vietnamese dragon is the symbol of yang ,  representing the universe ,  life ,  existence ,  and growth . 
the popular role playing game system `` dungeons & dragons ''  -lrb-  d&d  -rrb-  makes heavy use of dragons . 
dragons and dragon motifs are featured in many works of modern literature ,  particularly within the fantasy genre . 
one of the most famous dragon stories is about the lord ye gao ,  who loved dragons obsessively ,  even though he had never seen one . 
the druk  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as 'thunder dragon' ,  is one of the national symbols of bhutan . 
dragons were also identified with the emperor of china ,  who ,  during later chinese imperial history ,  was the only one permitted to have dragons on his house ,  clothing ,  or personal articles . 
after lo chên-jen healed the man ,  a dragon appeared to him and carried him to heaven . 
the word `` dragon '' entered the english language in the early 13th century from old french `` dragon '' ,  which in turn comes from  -lrb-  nominative `` draco ''  -rrb-  meaning `` huge serpent ,  dragon '' ,  from  ,  `` drakon ''  -lrb-  genitive `` drakontos '' ,  δράκοντος  -rrb-  `` serpent ,  giant seafish '' . 
the band did not tour in support of the album ,  with fletcher quoted as saying
depeche mode have released a total of 14 studio albums ,  10 compilation albums ,  six live albums ,  eight box sets ,  13 video albums ,  71 music videos ,  and 54 singles . 
in october 2005, the band released their 11th studio album `` playing the angel '' . 
gore recalled that the first time the band played as depeche mode was a school gig in may 1980.
in addition ,  all of their studio albums have reached the uk top 10 and their albums have spent over 210 weeks on the uk charts . 
the band's second live album ,  `` songs of faith and devotion live '' ,  was released in december 1993.
a symptom of the slow fracturing of the band ,  interviews given by the band during this period tended to be conducted separately ,  unlike earlier albums ,  where the band was interviewed as a group . 
the band made their recording debut in 1980 on the `` some bizzare album '' with the song `` photographic '' ,  later re-recorded for their debut album `` speak & spell '' . 
depeche mode  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  are an english electronic band formed in basildon ,  essex ,  in 1980.
depeche mode released their debut album `` speak & spell '' in 1981, bringing the band onto the british new wave scene . 
 ''some great reward '' became the first depeche mode album to enter the us album charts ,  and made the top 10 in several european countries . 
in september 1983, to promote `` construction time again '' ,  the band launched a european concert tour . 
in 2003, gahan released his first solo album ,  `` paper monsters '' ,  and toured to promote the record . 
the album also made a breakthrough in the american market . 
 ''the world we live in and live in hamburg '' was the band's first video release ,  almost an entire concert from their 1984 some great reward tour . 
the music for the masses tour began 22 october 1987.
depeche mode has had 54 songs in the uk singles chart and 17 top 10 albums in the uk chart; they have sold more than 100 million records worldwide . 
1987's `` music for the masses '' saw further alterations in the band's sound and working methods . 
in may 2009, the band embarked on a concert tour in support of the album — called tour of the universe; it had been announced at a press conference in october 2008 at the olympiastadion in berlin . 
7 on the uk charts . 
on the american tour ,  the band was ,  according to gore ,  `` shocked by the way the fans were turning up in droves at the concerts '' . 
the members of depeche mode are vegetarian . 
in august 2007, during promotion for dave gahan's second solo album ,  `` hourglass '' ,  it was announced that depeche mode were heading back in studio in early 2008 to work on a new album . 
martin gore revealed that flood mixed the album ,  marking the producer's first studio collaboration with the band since 1993's `` songs of faith and devotion '' . 
the band's last albums of the 1980s ,  `` black celebration '' and `` music for the masses '' ,  established them as a dominant force within the electronic music scene . 
the band's next single was `` just can't get enough '' . 
 ''violator '' was the first depeche mode album to enter the top 10 of the `` billboard '' 200, reaching number 7 and staying 74 weeks in the chart . 
the following album ,  `` songs of faith and devotion '' in 1993 was also a success ,  though internal struggles within the band during recording and touring resulted in wilder's departure in 1995.
when one round key has been deemed a potential round key considerably more often than any other key ,  it is assumed to be the correct round key . 
when this happens ,  the differential attack requires as much work to determine the key as simply brute forcing the key . 
if the attacker sends in the values of {6, 7} and observes the correct output difference it means the key is either 6 ⊕ k = 2, or 6 ⊕ k = 4, meaning the key k is either 2 or 4.
this would have allowed room for a more efficient s-box ,  even if it is 16-uniform the probability of attack would have still been 2.
for any particular cipher ,  the input difference must be carefully selected for the attack to be successful . 
differential cryptanalysis is usually a chosen plaintext attack ,  meaning that the attacker must be able to obtain ciphertexts for some set of plaintexts of their choosing . 
a dtd defines the valid building blocks of an xml document . 
in manichaeism ,  god and the devil are two unrelated principles . 
in christianity ,  evil is incarnate in the devil or satan ,  a fallen angel who is the primary opponent of god . 
the teutonic gods demonized the giants . 
in the book of wisdom ,  the devil is represented as the one who brought death into the world . 
zoroastrianism probably introduced the first idea of the conceptual `` devil ''; a principle of evil independently existing apart from god . 
it is meaningful to consider the devil through the lens of each of the cultures and religions that have the devil as part of their mythos . 
some texts ,  such as the `` apocryphon of john '' and `` on the origin of the world '' not only demonized the creator god but also called him by the name of the devil in some jewish writings ,  `` samael '' . 
according to yazidism there is no entity that represents evil in opposition to god; such dualism is rejected by yazidis ,  and evil is regarded as non-existent . 
a devil is the personification of evil as it is conceived in many and various cultures and religious traditions . 
those who follow their lower nature are also described as followers of `` the evil one '' . 
even some fierce deities like kali are not thought of as devils but just as darker aspects of god and may even manifest benevolence . 
the idea of the devil has been taken seriously often ,  but not always ,  for example when devil figures are used in advertising and on candy wrappers . 
christians considered the roman and greek deities devils . 
in the bible ,  the devil is identified with `` the dragon '' and `` the old serpent '' in the book of revelation 12:9, 20:2 have also been identified with satan ,  as has `` the prince of this world '' in the gospel of john 12:31, 14:30; and `` the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience '' in the epistle to the ephesians 2:2; and `` the god of this world '' in 2 corinthians 4:4.
in his book `` the devil: perceptions of evil from antiquity to primitive christianity '' jeffrey burton russell discusses various meanings ,  and difficulties that are encountered when using the term `` devil '' . 
on the other hand ,  `` shaitan '' refers unilaterally to forces of evil ,  including the devil iblis ,  then he causes mischief . 
