lovelace also translated and wrote literature supporting the project . 
in the 1860s ,  babbage also took up the anti-hoop-rolling campaign . 
the book also contained ideas on rational design in factories ,  and profit sharing . 
babbage ,  john herschel ,  george peacock ,  and several other friends formed the analytical society in 1812; they were also close to edward ryan . 
in works of the 1820s and 1830s ,  babbage referred in detail to de prony's project . 
the other half of babbage's brain is on display in the science museum ,  london . 
it performed its first calculation at the science museum ,  london ,  returning results to 31 digits . 
with herschel ,  babbage worked on the electrodynamics of arago's rotations ,  publishing in 1825.
his eldest son ,  benjamin herschel babbage ,  worked as an engineer for brunel on the railways before emigrating to australia in the 1850s . 
the two models that have been constructed are not replicas; myhrvold's engine is the first design by babbage ,  and the science museum's is a later model . 
parts of babbage's incomplete mechanisms are on display in the science museum in london . 
his date of birth was given in his obituary in `` the times '' as 26 december 1792; but then a nephew wrote to say that babbage was born one year earlier ,  in 1791.
there is a black plaque commemorating the 40 years babbage spent at 1 dorset street ,  london . 
he also argued against hereditary peerages ,  favouring life peerages instead . 
the book is a work of natural theology ,  and incorporates extracts from related correspondence of herschel with charles lyell . 
in 1832, babbage ,  herschel and ivory were appointed knights of the royal guelphic order ,  however they were not subsequently made knights bachelor to entitle them to the prefix `` sir '' ,  which often came with appointments to that foreign order  -lrb-  though herschel was later created a baronet  -rrb-  . 
nine years later ,  in 2000, the science museum completed the printer babbage had designed for the difference engine . 
charles' wife georgiana died in worcester on 1 september 1827, the same year as his father ,  their second son  -lrb-  also named charles  -rrb-  and their newborn son alexander . 
exact measurement was also key to the development of machine tools . 
there was another period ,  seven years later ,  when his interest was aroused by the issues around computation of mathematical tables . 
other works in which babbage appears include:
charles and georgiana had eight children ,  but only four – benjamin herschel ,  georgiana whitmore ,  dugald bromhead and henry prevost – survived childhood . 
the book sold well ,  and quickly went to a fourth edition  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- . 
in april 1828 he was in rome ,  and relying on herschel to manage the difference engine project ,  when he heard that he had become professor at cambridge ,  a position he had three times failed to obtain  -lrb-  in 1820, 1823 and 1826 -rrb- . 
babbage lived and worked for over 40 years at 1 dorset street ,  marylebone ,  where he died ,  at the age of 79, on 18 october 1871; he was buried in london's kensal green cemetery . 
babbage's machines were among the first mechanical computers . 
in 1838, babbage invented the pilot  -lrb-  also called a cow-catcher  -rrb-  ,  the metal frame attached to the front of locomotives that clears the tracks of obstacles; he also constructed a dynamometer car . 
babbage was instrumental in founding the royal astronomical society in 1820, initially known as the astronomical society of london . 
here ,  for the first time ,  mass production was applied to arithmetic ,  and babbage was seized by the idea that the labours of the unskilled computers people could be taken over completely by machinery which would be quicker and more reliable . 
after the attempt at making the first difference engine fell through ,  babbage worked to design a more complex machine called the analytical engine . 
his view of human capital was restricted to minimising the time period for recovery of training costs . 
another aspect of the work was its detailed breakdown of the cost structure of book publishing . 
gender disguise has been used by women and girls to pass as male ,  and by men and boys to pass as female . 
the term `` underdressing '' is used by male cross-dressers to describe wearing female undergarments under their male clothes . 
in most parts of the world it remains socially disapproved for men to wear clothes traditionally associated with women . 
the modern activity of battle reenactments has raised the question of women passing as male soldiers . 
a woman dressing in men's clothing is considered to be a more acceptable activity . 
cross-dressing ,  particularly the depiction of males wearing dresses ,  is often used for comic effect onstage and on-screen . 
cross-dressers have complained that society permits women to wear pants or jeans and other masculine clothing ,  while condemning any man who wants to wear clothing sold for women . 
 ''female masking '' is a form of cross-dressing in which men wear masks that present them as female . 
in a broader context ,  cross-dressing may also refer to other actions undertaken to pass as a particular sex ,  such as packing  -lrb-  accentuating the male crotch bulge  -rrb-  or ,  the opposite ,  tucking  -lrb-  concealing the male crotch bulge  -rrb-  . 
advocacy for social change has done much to relax the constrictions of gender roles on men and women ,  but they are still subject to prejudice from some people . 
the historical associations of maleness with power and femaleness with submission and frivolity mean that in the present time a woman dressing in men's clothing and a man dressing in women's clothing evoke very different responses . 
there are videos ,  books ,  and magazines on how a man may look more like a woman . 
tunnelling commenced in 1988, and the tunnel began operating in 1994.
the speed limit for trains in the tunnel is  . 
working from both the english side and the french side of the channel ,  eleven tunnel boring machines or tbms cut through chalk marl to construct two rail tunnels and a service tunnel . 
the ventilation system maintains the air pressure in the service tunnel higher than in the rail tunnels ,  so that in the event of a fire ,  smoke does not enter the service tunnel from the rail tunnels . 
this led to the adoption of different tunnelling techniques on the two sides . 
tunnelling was a major engineering challenge ,  with the only precedent being the undersea seikan tunnel in japan ,  which opened in 1988.
on it are the words `` hommage aux bâtisseurs du tunnel '' ,  meaning `` tribute to the builders of the tunnel '' . 
a british film from gaumont studios ,  `` the tunnel ''  -lrb-  also called `` transatlantic tunnel ''  -rrb-  ,  was released in 1935 as a futuristic science fiction project concerning the creation of a transatlantic tunnel . 
between the portals at beussingue and castle hill the tunnel is long ,  with under land on the french side and on the uk side ,  and under sea . 
the objective was to construct two rail tunnels ,  apart ,  in length; a service tunnel between the two main ones; pairs of cross-passages linking the rail tunnels to the service one at spacing; piston relief ducts in diameter connecting the rail tunnels apart; two undersea crossover caverns to connect the rail tunnels ,  with the service tunnel always preceding the main ones by at least to ascertain the ground conditions . 
construction work of this government-funded project to create two tunnels designed to accommodate car shuttle wagons on either side of a service tunnel started on both sides of the channel in 1974.
in the 1920s winston churchill was an advocate for the channel tunnel ,  using that exact nomenclature in an essay entitled `` should strategists veto the tunnel ? `` 
since its construction ,  the tunnel has faced a few mechanical problems . 
the channel tunnel rail link  -lrb-  ctrl  -rrb-  ,  now called high speed 1, runs from st pancras railway station in london to the tunnel portal at folkestone in kent . 
mathieu-favier's design envisaged a bored two-level tunnel with the top tunnel used for transport and the bottom one for groundwater flows . 
pumping stations remove water in the tunnels from rain ,  seepage ,  and so on . 
a 1907 film ,  `` tunnelling the english channel '' by pioneer filmmaker georges méliès ,  depicts king edward vii and president armand fallières dreaming of building a tunnel under the english channel . 
the french one was based on the mount baker ridge freeway tunnel in seattle; the uk cavern was dug from the service tunnel ahead of the main ones ,  to avoid delay . 
churchill extolled his enthusiasm for the project again in an article for the `` daily mail '' on 12 february 1936, `` why not a channel tunnel ? `` 
the channel tunnel  -lrb-  ; also nicknamed the chunnel  -rrb-  is a rail tunnel linking folkestone ,  kent ,  in the united kingdom ,  with coquelles ,  pas-de-calais ,  near calais in northern france ,  beneath the english channel at the strait of dover . 
on the english side ,  the stratum dip is less than 5°; on the french side this increases to 20° . 
the tunnel is a build-own-operate-transfer  -lrb-  boot  -rrb-  project with a concession . <ref name= ''flyvbjerg p .  96/97 ''>flyvbjerg et al . 
there are cyberpunk video games . 
several subcultures have been inspired by cyberpunk fiction . 
several rpgs called `` cyberpunk '' exist: `` cyberpunk '' ,  `` cyberpunk 2020 '' and `` cyberpunk v3 '' ,  by r .  talsorian games ,  and `` gurps cyberpunk '' ,  published by steve jackson games as a module of the gurps family of rpgs . 
vaporwave and synthwave are also influenced by cyberpunk . 
in 1986 he edited a volume of cyberpunk stories called ``  '' ,  an attempt to establish what cyberpunk was ,  from sterling's perspective . 
cyberpunk themes are widely visible in anime and manga . 
cyberpunk further inspired many professional writers who were not among the `` original '' cyberpunks to incorporate cyberpunk ideas into their own works ,  such as george alec effinger's `` when gravity fails '' . 
 ''blade runner '' can be seen as a quintessential example of the cyberpunk style and theme . 
cyberpunk stories have also been seen as fictional forecasts of the evolution of the internet . 
cyberpunk can be intended to disquiet readers and call them to action . 
this emphasis on the misfits and the malcontents is the `` punk '' component of cyberpunk . 
the film's tone has since been the staple of many cyberpunk movies ,  such as `` the matrix trilogy ''  -lrb-  1999-2003 -rrb- ,  which uses a wide variety of cyberpunk elements . 
one of the cyberpunk genre's prototype characters is case ,  from gibson's `` neuromancer '' . 
the exposure to cyberpunk ideas and fiction in the 1980s has allowed it to seep into the japanese culture . 
william gibson with his novel `` neuromancer ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- is arguably the most famous writer connected with the term cyberpunk . 
it satirized the genre in this way: the impact of cyberpunk ,  though ,  has been long-lasting . 
cyberpunk works have been described as well-situated within postmodern literature . 
role playing game publisher r .  talsorian games ,  owner of the `` cyberpunk 2020 '' franchise ,  trademarked the word `` cyberpunk '' in the united states in 2012.
this had a profound influence on a new generation of writers ,  some of whom would come to call their movement `` cyberpunk '' . 
the former has been interpreted as a dystopian critique of capitalism in the vein of cyberpunk and the latter as a nostalgic retrofuturistic revival of aspects of cyberpunk's origins . 
the economic and technological state of japan is a regular theme in the cyberpunk literature of the '80s . 
strips are written and drawn by a comics artist or cartoonist . 
the first newspaper comic strips appeared in north america in the late 19th century . 
in the uk and the rest of europe ,  comic strips are also serialized in comic book magazines ,  with a strip's story sometimes continuing over three pages or more . 
in the united states ,  the great popularity of comics sprang from the  . 
the `` generalized continuum hypothesis ''  -lrb-  gch  -rrb-  states that if an infinite set's cardinality lies between that of an infinite set `` s '' and that of the power set of `` s '' ,  then it either has the same cardinality as the set `` s '' or the same cardinality as the power set of `` s '' . 
however ,  per könig's theorem ,  it is not consistent to assume formula_9 is formula_10 or formula_11 or any cardinal with cofinality formula_12.
using the fact that the real numbers are equinumerous with the powerset of the integers ,  the continuum hypothesis says that there is no set formula_1 for which formula_2
this is a generalization of the continuum hypothesis since the continuum has the same cardinality as the power set of the integers . 
gödel believed that ch is false ,  and that his proof that ch is consistent with zfc only shows that the zermelo–fraenkel axioms do not adequately characterize the universe of sets . 
that is ,  for any infinite cardinal formula_15 there is no cardinal formula_7 such that formula_17 gch is equivalent to: the beth numbers provide an alternate notation for this condition: formula_20 for every ordinal formula_19
there is also a generalization of the continuum hypothesis called the generalized continuum hypothesis  -lrb-  gch  -rrb-  which says that for every ordinal α ,  formula_6 that is ,  gch asserts that the cardinality of the power set of each infinite set is the smallest cardinality greater than that of the set . 
assuming the axiom of choice ,  there is a smallest cardinal number formula_3 greater than formula_4, and the continuum hypothesis is in turn equivalent to the equality formula_5
in mathematics ,  the continuum hypothesis  -lrb-  abbreviated ch  -rrb-  is a hypothesis about the possible sizes of infinite sets . 
the continuum hypothesis was not the first statement shown to be independent of zfc . 
çevik bir is of albanian origin . 
çevik bir  -lrb-  born 1939 -rrb- is a retired turkish army general . 
çevik bir ,  one of the generals who planned the process ,  said `` in turkey we have a marriage of islam and democracy . 
in one critical model of collectivism ,  markus and kitayama describe the interdependent  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  collectivistic  -rrb-  self as fundamentally connected to the social context . 
collectivism is a cultural value that is characterized by emphasis on cohesiveness among individuals and prioritization of the group over self . 
this effect has been replicated extensively by independent research groups ,  supporting its robustness . 
this division is thought to impact goal formation such that people from marginalized groups tend to emphasize collectivistic over individualistic values . 
in-group collectivism can be referred to as family collectivism . 
originated by w .  e .  b .  dubois ,  some researchers have adopted a historical perspective on the emergence of collectivism among some cultural groups . 
markus and kitayama also contributed to the literature by challenging hofstede's unidimensional model of collectivism-individualism . 
the calyx is tubular or campanulate ,  they are slightly curved or straight ,  and the limbs are often 2-lipped with five teeth . 
the fruits are nutlets ,  which are oblong-ovoid ,  ellipsoid ,  ovoid ,  or obovoid in shape . 
the genus is native to europe ,  asia ,  and africa ,  and has also naturalized in north america . 
whetter and the cnp still publish a quarterly journal ,  `` the cornish banner ''  -lrb-  `` an baner kernewek ''  -rrb-  ,  within the actions of the roseland institute . 
it also gave support to the cornish language and commemorated thomas flamank ,  a leader of the cornish rebellion in 1497, at an annual ceremony at bodmin on 27 june each year . 
the cornish nationalist party  -lrb-  cnp;   -rrb-  is a political party ,  founded by dr james whetter ,  who campaigned for independence for cornwall . 
with reciprocal machine ciphers such as the lorenz cipher and the enigma machine used by nazi germany during world war ii ,  each message had its own key . 
sending two or more messages with the same key is an insecure process . 
when a recovered plaintext is then combined with its ciphertext ,  the key is revealed: knowledge of a key of course allows the analyst to read other messages encrypted with the same key ,  and knowledge of a set of related keys may allow cryptanalysts to diagnose the system used for constructing them . 
in world war i ,  the breaking of the zimmermann telegram was instrumental in bringing the united states into the war . 
even though computation was used to great effect in cryptanalysis of the lorenz cipher and other systems during world war ii ,  it also made possible new methods of cryptography orders of magnitude more complex than ever before . 
asymmetric cryptography  -lrb-  or public key cryptography  -rrb-  is cryptography that relies on using two  -lrb-  mathematically related  -rrb-  keys; one private ,  and one public . 
frequency analysis is the basic tool for breaking most classical ciphers . 
poorly designed and implemented indicator systems allowed first polish cryptographers and then the british cryptographers at bletchley park to break the enigma cipher system . 
 -lrb-  and on occasion ,  ciphers have been broken through pure deduction; for example ,  the german lorenz cipher and the japanese purple code ,  and a variety of classical schemes  -rrb- :
similar poor indicator systems allowed the british to identify `` depths '' that led to the diagnosis of the lorenz sz40/42 cipher system ,  and the comprehensive breaking of its messages without the cryptanalysts seeing the cipher machine . 
during world war i ,  inventors in several countries developed rotor cipher machines such as arthur scherbius' enigma ,  in an attempt to minimise the repetition that had been exploited to break the vigenère system . 
bruce schneier notes that even computationally impractical attacks can be considered breaks: `` breaking a cipher simply means finding a weakness in the cipher that can be exploited with a complexity less than brute force . 
academic attacks are often against weakened versions of a cryptosystem ,  such as a block cipher or hash function with some rounds removed . 
the origin of the word `` chicano '' is disputed . 
therefore ,  most self-identifying chicanos do not agree that `` chicano '' was ever derived from the word `` chicamo '' . 
the term `` chicano '' had negative connotations before the chicano movement ,  and still is viewed negatively and archaic by more conservative members of this community . 
from a popular perspective ,  the term `` chicano '' became widely visible outside of chicano communities during the american civil rights movement . 
chicano or chicana is a chosen identity of some mexican americans in the united states . 
the term's meanings are highly debatable ,  but self-described chicanos view the term as a positive ,  self-identifying social construction . 
tenerife is the largest and most populous island of the archipelago . 
the island of fuerteventura is the second largest in the archipelago and located from the african coast . 
the seven main islands are  -lrb-  from largest to smallest in area  -rrb-  tenerife ,  fuerteventura ,  gran canaria ,  lanzarote ,  la palma ,  la gomera and el hierro . 
the name `` islas canarias '' is likely derived from the latin name `` canariae insulae '' ,  meaning `` islands of the dogs '' ,  a name that was applied only to gran canaria . 
what is certain is that the name of the islands does not derive from the canary bird; rather ,  the birds are named after the islands . 
for this reason ,  two professional observatories ,  teide observatory on the island of tenerife and roque de los muchachos observatory on the island of la palma ,  have been built on the islands . 
the seven major islands ,  one minor island ,  and several small islets were originally volcanic islands ,  formed by the canary hotspot . 
in 2010, chuck d released a track entitled `` tear down that wall '' . 
chuck d is known for his powerful rapping voice - `` how to rap '' says ,  `` chuck d of public enemy has a powerful ,  resonant voice that is often acclaimed as one of the most distinct and impressive in hip-hop '' . 
he also appeared on brother ali's album ,  `` us '' . 
their major label albums were `` yo ! 
chuck d stated that it is public enemy's belief that all human beings are equal . 
carlton douglas ridenhour  -lrb-  born august 1, 1960 -rrb- ,  known professionally as chuck d ,  is an american rapper ,  author ,  and producer . 
the most common use of cutaway shots in dramatic films is to adjust the pace of the main action ,  to conceal the deletion of some unwanted part of the main shot ,  or to allow the joining of parts of two versions of that shot . 
for example ,  if the main shot is of a man walking down an alley ,  possible cutaways may include a shot of a cat on a nearby dumpster or a shot of a person watching from a window overhead . 
a failure in aras functioning may thus lead to a coma . 
injury to either or both of these components is sufficient to cause a patient to experience a coma . 
he took over the writing of `` call of cthulhu '' ,  and the game was released in 1981.
 ''call of cthulhu: the card game '' is a second collectible card game ,  produced by fantasy flight games . 
the game does not use levels . 
the first book of `` call of cthulhu '' adventures was `` shadows of yog-sothoth '' . 
the game was released on january 30, 2012.
call of cthulhu is a horror fiction role-playing game based on h .  p .  lovecraft's story of the same name and the associated cthulhu mythos . 
 ''lovecraft country '' was a line of supplements for `` call of cthulhu '' released in 1990.
william a .  barton reviewed `` call of cthulhu '' in `` the space gamer '' no . 
it is inspired by h .  p .  lovecraft's short story `` the call of cthulhu '' . 
the original conception of `` call of cthulhu '' was `` dark worlds '' ,  a game commissioned by the publisher chaosium but never published . 
in 2001, a stand-alone version of `` call of cthulhu '' was released by wizards of the coast ,  for the d20 system . 
in 2018, metarcade produced `` cthulhu chronicles '' ,  a game for ios with a campaign of nine mobile interactive fiction stories set in 1920s england based on `` call of cthulhu '' . 
david cook reviewed `` call of cthulhu '' for `` dragon '' magazine #61  -lrb-  may 1982 -rrb- . 
for those grounded in the rpg tradition ,  the very first release of `` call of cthulhu '' created a brand new framework for table-top gaming . 
the 1920s were some of the most violent times in cape breton . 
cape breton island is divided into four counties: cape breton ,  inverness ,  richmond ,  and victoria . 
in 1820, the colony of cape breton island was merged for the second time with nova scotia . 
cape breton island  -lrb-  —formerly '; or '; ; or simply `` cape breton ''  -rrb-  is an island on the atlantic coast of north america and part of the province of nova scotia ,  canada . 
the island is divided into four of nova scotia's eighteen counties: cape breton ,  inverness ,  richmond ,  and victoria . 
acadians who had been expelled from nova scotia and île royale were permitted to settle in cape breton beginning in 1764, and established communities in north-western cape breton ,  near cheticamp ,  and southern cape breton ,  on and near isle madame . 
cape breton island's northern portion is dominated by the cape breton highlands ,  commonly shortened to simply the `` highlands '' ,  which are an extension of the appalachian mountain chain . 
cape breton island's first residents were likely archaic maritime natives ,  ancestors of the mi'kmaq . 
the island accounts for 18.7% of nova scotia's total area . 
at present several schools in cape breton offer gaelic studies and gaelic language programs ,  and the language is taught at university college of cape breton . 
according to the census of canada ,  the population of cape breton economic region in 2016 / 2011 / 2006 / 1996 was 132,010 / 135,974 / 142,298 / 158,260.
approximately 75% of the island's population is in the cape breton regional municipality  -lrb-  cbrm  -rrb-  which includes all of cape breton county and is often referred to as industrial cape breton ,  given the history of coal mining and steel manufacturing in this area ,  which was nova scotia's industrial heartland throughout the 20th century . 
an order forbidding the granting of land in cape breton ,  issued in 1763, was removed in 1784.
the island measures in area ,  making it the 77th largest island in the world and canada's 18th largest island . 
the island has five reserves of the mi'kmaq nation:  ,   ,   ,   ,  and /chapel island . 
the first permanently settled scottish community on cape breton island was judique ,  settled in 1775 by michael mor macdonald . 
price believes that the basis for derleth's system is found in lovecraft: `` was derleth's use of the rubric 'elder gods' so alien to lovecraft's in `` at the mountains of madness '' ? 
in his essay `` h .  p .  lovecraft and the cthulhu mythos '' ,  robert m .  price described two stages in the development of the cthulhu mythos . 
the name `` cthulhu '' derives from the central creature in lovecraft's seminal short story ,  `` the call of cthulhu '' ,  first published in the pulp magazine `` weird tales '' in 1928.
price denotes the second stage's commencement with august derleth . 
the cthulhu mythos is a shared fictional universe ,  originating in the works of american horror writer h .  p .  lovecraft . 
derleth himself believed that lovecraft wished for other authors to actively write about the mythos as opposed to it being a discrete plot device within lovecraft's own stories . 
the second stage was guided by august derleth who ,  in addition to publishing lovecraft's stories after his death ,  attempted to categorize and expand the mythos . 
in filmmaking and video production ,  a crane shot is a shot taken by a camera on a moving crane or jib . 
large camera cranes are almost indistinguishable from the usual boom-type cranes ,  with the exception of special equipment for smoothly moving the boom and controlling noise . 
some pieces of vangelis's music in the film did not end up on the film's soundtrack album . 
the film's theme tune was also played during each medal ceremony of the 2012 olympics . 
chariots of fire is a 1981 british historical drama film . 
at the 1981 cannes film festival the film won two awards and competed for the palme d'or . 
the film reverses the order of abrahams' 100m and 200m races at the olympics . 
in 1977, hudson had also been second-unit director on the puttnam-produced film `` midnight express '' . 
the film was slightly altered for the u . s .  audience . 
the title theme of the film has become iconic ,  and has been used in subsequent films and television shows during slow-motion segments . 
the film's title was inspired by the line ,  `` bring me my chariot of fire ! 
the beach scenes associated with the theme tune were filmed at west sands ,  st andrews . 
the film was conceived and produced by david puttnam ,  written by colin welland ,  and directed by hugh hudson . 
the film ,  however ,  suggests that abrahams himself sought mussabini's assistance . 
liddell's sister was several years younger than she was portrayed in the film . 
hudson originally wanted vangelis's 1977 tune `` l'enfant '' ,  from his `` opera sauvage '' album ,  to be the title theme of the film ,  and the beach running sequence was actually filmed with `` l'enfant '' playing on loudspeakers for the runners to pace to . 
all of the cambridge scenes were actually filmed at hugh hudson's alma mater eton college ,  because cambridge refused filming rights ,  fearing depictions of anti-semitism . 
cross was thrilled to be cast ,  and said he was moved to tears by the film's script . 
since the film's release ,  the great court run has also been successfully run by trinity undergraduate sam dobin ,  in october 2007.
the film also incorporates a major traditional work: `` jerusalem '' ,  sung by a british choir at the 1978 funeral of harold abrahams . 
the film is also notable for its memorable electronic theme tune by vangelis ,  who won the academy award for best original score . 
the film depicts lindsay ,  having already won a medal in the 400-metre hurdles ,  giving up his place in the 400-metre race for liddell . 
the beach-running sequence was also recreated at st .  andrews and filmed as part of the olympic torch relay . 
various versions are also included on vangelis's compilation albums `` themes '' ,  `` portraits '' ,  and ``  '' ,  though none of these include the version used in the film . 
harold abrahams' love of and heavy involvement with gilbert and sullivan ,  as depicted in the film ,  is factual . 
consequentialist theories differ in how they define moral goods . 
thus ,  from a consequentialist standpoint ,  a morally right act  -lrb-  or omission from acting  -rrb-  is one that will produce a good outcome ,  or consequence . 
moral action always has consequences for certain people or things . 
in general ,  consequentialist theories focus on actions . 
this position can be described as a reconciliation between act consequentialism – in which the morality of an action is determined by that action's effects – and rule consequentialism – in which moral behavior is derived from following rules that lead to positive outcomes . 
consequentialist theories that adopt this paradigm hold that right action is the action that will bring about the best consequences from this ideal observer's perspective . 
one important characteristic of many normative moral theories such as consequentialism is the ability to produce practical moral judgements . 
unlike utilitarianism ,  which views utility as the sole moral good ,  `` the basic goods in mohist consequentialist thinking are .  .  .  order ,  material wealth ,  and increase in population '' . 
various theorists are split as to whether the rules are the only determinant of moral behavior or not . 
that is ,  one might ask `` consequences for whom ? `` 
most consequentialist theories focus on `` promoting '' some sort of good consequences . 
since pure consequentialism holds that an action is to be judged solely by its result ,  most consequentialist theories hold that a deliberate action is no different from a deliberate decision not to act . 
for example ,  it may be meaningful to speak of an action as being good for someone as an individual ,  but bad for them as a citizen of their town . 
one major difference between these two approaches is the agent's responsibility . 
one common tactic among consequentialists ,  particularly those committed to an altruistic  -lrb-  selfless  -rrb-  account of consequentialism ,  is to employ an ideal ,  neutral observer from which moral judgements can be made . 
consequentialism can also be contrasted with aretaic moral theories such as virtue ethics . 
one of the most common objections to rule-consequentialism is that it is incoherent ,  because it is based on the consequentialist principle that what we should be concerned with is maximizing the good ,  but then it tells us not to act to maximize the good ,  but to follow rules  -lrb-  even in cases where we know that breaking the rule could produce better results  -rrb-  . 
around the reign of hammurabi  -lrb-  1791–1750 bc  -rrb-  ,  the babylonian empire used a system of conscription called `` ilkum '' . 
it is possible that this right was not to hold land `` per se '' but specific land supplied by the state . 
former british colonies are less likely to have conscription ,  as they are influenced by british anticonscription norms that can be traced back to the english civil war . 
coleman was selected by nasa in 1992 to join the nasa astronaut corps . 
she is a veteran of two space shuttle missions ,  and departed the international space station on may 23, 2011, as a crew member of expedition 27 after logging 159 days in space . 
sts-93 on `` columbia ''  -lrb-  july 22 to 27, 1999 -rrb- was a five-day mission during which coleman was the lead mission specialist for the deployment of the chandra x-ray observatory . 
coleman served as chief of robotics for the astronaut office ,  to include robotic arm operations and training for all space shuttle and international space station missions . 
coleman launched on december 15, 2010  -lrb-  december 16 baikonur time  -rrb-  ,  aboard soyuz tma-20 to join the expedition 26 mission aboard the international space station . 
inflammation of the cervix is referred to as cervicitis . 
the cervix is part of the female reproductive system . 
the cervix or cervix uteri  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  is the lower part of the uterus in the human female reproductive system . 
the cervix plays a major role in childbirth . 
in-utero exposure  -rrb-  develop a cockscomb cervix . 
several methods of contraception involve the cervix . 
the ectocervix  -lrb-  also known as the vaginal portion of the cervix  -rrb-  has a convex ,  elliptical shape and projects into the cervix between the anterior and posterior vaginal fornices . 
the first attested use of the word to refer to the cervix of the uterus was in 1702.
three channels facilitate lymphatic drainage from the cervix . 
in front of the upper part of the cervix lies the bladder ,  separated from it by cellular connective tissue known as parametrium ,  which also extends over the sides of the cervix . 
in becoming wider ,  the cervix also becomes shorter ,  a phenomenon known as effacement . 
the cervix is more tightly connected to surrounding structures than the rest of the uterus . 
the cervix may be duplicated in situations such as bicornuate uterus and uterine didelphys . 
midwives and doctors use the extent of the dilation of the cervix to assist decision-making during childbirth . 
the cervix has been documented anatomically since at least the time of hippocrates ,  over 2,000 years ago . 
optimization between the front end and back end could produce more efficient target code . 
the name `` compiler '' is primarily used for programs that translate source code from a high-level programming language to a lower level language  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  assembly language ,  object code ,  or machine code  -rrb-  to create an executable program . 
a compiler is a computer program that transforms computer code written in one programming language  -lrb-  the source language  -rrb-  into another programming language  -lrb-  the target language  -rrb-  . 
compiler technology evolved from the need for a strictly defined transformation of the high-level source program into a low-level target program for the digital computer . 
although the castrato  -lrb-  or musico  -rrb-  predates opera ,  there is some evidence that castrati had parts in the earliest operas . 
a castrato  -lrb-  italian ,  plural: `` castrati ''  -rrb-  is a type of classical male singing voice equivalent to that of a soprano ,  mezzo-soprano ,  or contralto . 
the last sistine castrato to survive was alessandro moreschi ,  the only castrato to have made solo recordings . 
castrati first appeared in italy in the mid-16th century ,  though at first the terms describing them were not always clear . 
but as evidence shows ,  many castratos ,  such as senesino and caffarelli ,  were actually altos  -lrb-  mezzosoprano  -rrb-  – not sopranos . 
the castrati came in for a great amount of scurrilous and unkind abuse ,  and as their fame increased ,  so did the hatred of them . 
by the late 18th century ,  changes in operatic taste and social attitudes spelled the end for castrati . 
actor chris colfer has soprano voice . 
a counting-out game is a simple game intended to select a person to be `` it '' ,  often for the purpose of playing another game . 
many such games involve one person pointing at each participant in a circle of players while reciting a rhyme . 
bizz buzz is a spoken word game where if a player slips up and speaks a word out of sequence ,  they are eliminated . 
at 2005, 80-bit keys were allowed only until 2010.
with a key of length `` n '' bits ,  there are 2 possible keys . 
thus ,  a 3072-bit diffie-hellman key has about the same strength as a 3072-bit rsa key . 
in cryptography ,  key size or key length is the number of bits in a key used by a cryptographic algorithm  -lrb-  such as a cipher  -rrb-  . 
the finite field diffie-hellman algorithm has roughly the same key strength as rsa for the same key sizes . 
a message encrypted with an elliptic key algorithm using a 109-bit long key has been broken by brute force . 
the advanced encryption standard published in 2001 uses key sizes of 128 bits ,  192 or 256 bits . 
for example ,  the security available with a 1024-bit key using asymmetric rsa is considered approximately equal in security to an 80-bit key in a symmetric algorithm . 
since 2015, nist guidance says that `` the use of keys that provide less than 112 bits of security strength for key agreement is now disallowed . `` 
along with interpersonal psychotherapy  -lrb-  ipt  -rrb-  ,  cbt is recommended in treatment guidelines as a psychosocial treatment of choice ,  and cbt and ipt are the only psychosocial interventions that psychiatry residents are mandated to be trained in . 
cognitive behavioral therapy  -lrb-  cbt  -rrb-  is a psycho-social intervention that aims to improve mental health . 
the cbt model is based on the combination of the basic principles from behavioral and cognitive psychology . 
standard chinese ``  -lrb-  pǔtōnghuà/guóyǔ/huáyǔ  -rrb- ``  is a standardized form of spoken chinese based on the beijing dialect of mandarin . 
the relationship between spoken and written chinese is rather complex . 
in mainland china and taiwan ,  diglossia has been a common feature . 
some varieties remain unclassified ,  including danzhou dialect  -lrb-  spoken in danzhou ,  on hainan island  -rrb-  ,  waxianghua  -lrb-  spoken in western hunan  -rrb-  and shaozhou tuhua  -lrb-  spoken in northern guangdong  -rrb-  . 
after the fall of the northern song dynasty ,  and during the reign of the jin  -lrb-  jurchen  -rrb-  and yuan  -lrb-  mongol  -rrb-  dynasties in northern china ,  a common speech  -lrb-  now called old mandarin  -rrb-  developed based on the dialects of the north china plain around the capital . 
standard chinese ,  often called mandarin ,  is the official standard language of china and taiwan ,  and one of the four official languages of singapore  -lrb-  where it is called `` huáyŭ '' or simply chinese  -rrb-  . 
all varieties of spoken chinese use tones to distinguish words . 
until the late 20th century ,  chinese emigrants to southeast asia and north america came from southeast coastal areas ,  where min ,  hakka ,  and yue dialects are spoken . 
up to the early 20th century ,  most of the people in china spoke only their local variety . 
 ''stone oil ''  -rrb-  . 
standard chinese was adopted in the 1930s ,  and is now the official language of both the people's republic of china and taiwan . 
the number of sounds in the different spoken dialects varies ,  but in general there has been a tendency to a reduction in sounds from middle chinese . 
most chinese people consider the spoken varieties as one single language because speakers share a common culture and history ,  as well as a shared national identity and a common written form . 
together with the slightly later `` menggu ziyun '' ,  this dictionary describes a language with many of the features characteristic of modern mandarin dialects . 
the written form of the standard language  -lrb-  ; `` zhōngwén ''  -rrb-  ,  based on the logograms known as chinese characters  -lrb-  /; `` hànzì ''  -rrb-  ,  is shared by literate speakers of otherwise unintelligible dialects . 
a complex function is a function from complex numbers to complex numbers . 
complex analysis ,  traditionally known as the theory of functions of a complex variable ,  is the branch of mathematical analysis that investigates functions of complex numbers . 
what is now china was inhabited by `` homo erectus '' more than a million years ago . 
the earliest known written records of the history of china date from as early as 1250 bc ,  from the shang dynasty  -lrb-  c .  1600–1046 bc  -rrb-  ,  during the king wu ding's reign ,  who was recorded as the twenty-first shang king by the written records of shang dynasty unearthed . 
its charter defined civil engineering as:
 ''civil engineers '' typically possess an academic degree in civil engineering . 
there are a number of sub-disciplines within the broad field of civil engineering . 
 ''materials science '' is closely related to civil engineering . 
 ''geotechnical engineering '' studies rock and soil supporting civil engineering systems . 
in the 18th century ,  the term civil engineering was coined to incorporate all things civilian as opposed to military engineering . 
its purpose is to help integrate the entire civil engineering project life cycle from conception ,  through planning ,  designing ,  making ,  operating to decommissioning . 
the first private college to teach civil engineering in the united states was norwich university ,  founded in 1819 by captain alden partridge . 
although the actual design of the facility may be left to other engineers . 
civil engineering takes place in the public sector from municipal through to national governments ,  and in the private sector from individual homeowners through to international companies . 
until modern times there was no clear distinction between civil engineering and architecture ,  and the term engineer and architect were mainly geographical variations referring to the same occupation ,  and often used interchangeably . 
the romans developed civil structures throughout their empire ,  including especially aqueducts ,  insulae ,  harbors ,  bridges ,  dams and roads . 
in the uk during the early 19th century ,  the division between civil engineering and military engineering  -lrb-  served by the royal military academy ,  woolwich  -rrb-  ,  coupled with the demands of the industrial revolution ,  spawned new engineering education initiatives: the class of civil engineering and mining was founded at king's college london in 1838, mainly as a response to the growth of the railway system and the need for more qualified engineers ,  the private college for civil engineers in putney was established in 1839, and the uk's first chair of engineering was established at the university of glasgow in 1840.
 ''water resources engineering '' is concerned with the collection and management of water  -lrb-  as a natural resource  -rrb-  . 
the site was first excavated by james mellaart in 1958.
vivid murals and figurines are found throughout the settlement ,  on interior and exterior walls . 
a striking feature of çatalhöyük are its female figurines . 
çatalhöyük  -lrb-  ; also `` çatal höyük '' and `` çatal hüyük ''; from turkish `` çatal '' `` fork '' + `` höyük '' `` tumulus ''  -rrb-  was a very large neolithic and chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern anatolia ,  which existed from approximately 7500 bc to 5700 bc ,  and flourished around 7000 bc . 
instead of a mother goddess culture ,  hodder points out that the site gives little indication of a matriarchy or patriarchy . 
a channel of the çarşamba river once flowed between the two mounds ,  and the settlement was built on alluvial clay which may have been favorable for early agriculture . 
as many as eighteen levels of settlement have been uncovered . 
in july 2012, it was inscribed as a unesco world heritage site . 
he was the leader of the labour party from 1935 to 1955.
i am convinced it would be fatal for the labour party .  .  . '
he would write:
attlee remains the longest-ever serving leader of the labour party . 
he went on to come first in both the first and second ballots ,  formally being elected leader of the labour party on 3 december 1935.
after ramsay macdonald formed the national government ,  labour was deeply divided . 
his first taste of ministerial office came in 1924, when he served as under-secretary of state for war in the short-lived first labour government ,  led by macdonald . 
the 1931 general election held later that year was a disaster for the labour party ,  which lost over 200 seats ,  returning only 52 mps to parliament . 
in 1921, george lansbury ,  the labour mayor of the neighbouring borough of poplar ,  and future labour party leader ,  launched the poplar rates rebellion; a campaign of disobedience seeking to equalise the poor relief burden across all the london boroughs . 
in the old days i had looked up to macdonald as a great leader . 
'i find that the proposition often reduces itself to this – that if the labour party would drop its socialism and adopt a liberal platform ,  many liberals would be pleased to support it . 
most of the remaining labour mps after 1931 were elderly trade union officials who could not contribute much to debates ,  lansbury was in his 70s ,  and stafford cripps another main figure of the labour front bench who had entered parliament in 1931, was inexperienced . 
attlee therefore led labour through the 1935 election ,  which saw the party stage a partial comeback from its disastrous 1931 performance ,  winning 38 per cent of the vote ,  the highest share labour had won up to that point ,  and gaining over one hundred seats . 
in 1937, attlee wrote a book entitled `` the labour party in perspective '' ,  which sold fairly well ,  in which he set out some of his views . 
at the end of 1937, attlee and a party of three labour mps visited spain and visited the british battalion of the international brigades fighting in the spanish civil war . 
catullus's poems about the relationship display striking depth and psychological insight . 
catullus's poems have been preserved in an anthology of 116 `` carmina ''  -lrb-  the actual number of poems may slightly vary in various editions  -rrb-  ,  which can be divided into three parts according to their form: sixty short poems in varying meters ,  called `` polymetra '' ,  eight longer poems ,  and forty-eight epigrams . 
the longer poems differ from the `` polymetra '' and the epigrams not only in length but also in their subjects: there are seven hymns and one mini-epic ,  or epyllion ,  the most highly prized form for the `` new poets '' . 
catullus was also an admirer of sappho ,  a female poet of the seventh century bc ,  and is the source for much of what we know or infer about her . 
he spent the provincial command year summer 57 to summer 56 bc in bithynia on the staff of the commander gaius memmius . 
catullus's poems were widely appreciated by other poets ,  significantly influencing ovid ,  horace ,  and virgil ,  among others . 
forester wrote many novels . 
he wrote several volumes of short stories set during the second world war . 
his other works include `` the african queen ''  -lrb-  1935; filmed in 1951 by john huston  -rrb-  . 
a hornblower is listed on the 1914–1918 war memorial at the school . 
country calling codes are prefix codes and can be organized as a tree . 
a warrant was issued for marlowe's arrest on 18 may 1593.
so too did the publisher edward blount ,  in the dedication of `` hero and leander '' to sir thomas walsingham . 
various accounts of marlowe's death were current over the next few years . 
on wednesday ,  30 may ,  marlowe was killed . 
christopher marlowe ,  also known as kit marlowe  -lrb-  ; baptised 26 february 156430 may 1593 -rrb- ,  was an english playwright ,  poet and translator of the elizabethan era . 
the official account came to light only in 1925 when the scholar leslie hotson discovered the coroner's report of the inquest on marlowe's death ,  held two days later on friday 1 june 1593, by the coroner of the queen's household ,  william danby . 
marlowe wrote the only play about the life of edward ii up to his time ,  taking the humanist literary discussion of male sexuality much further than his contemporaries . 
an argument has arisen centred on the notion that marlowe may have faked his death and then continued to write under the assumed name of william shakespeare . 
in fact ,  the quarrel and his arrest was on 18 september ,  he was released on bail on 1 october ,  and he had to attend court – where he was cleared of any wrongdoing – on 3 december ,  but there is no record of where he was for the intervening two months . 
marlowe also wrote the poem `` hero and leander ''  -lrb-  published in 1598, and with a continuation by george chapman the same year  -rrb-  ,  the popular lyric `` the passionate shepherd to his love '' ,  and translations of ovid's `` amores '' and the first book of lucan's `` pharsalia '' . 
since there are only written documents on which to base any conclusions ,  and since it is probable that the most crucial information about his death was never committed to writing at all ,  it is unlikely that the full circumstances of marlowe's death will ever be known . 
the play was first published in 1594; the title page attributes the play to marlowe and thomas nashe . 
one of the main reasons for doubting the truth of the inquest concerns the reliability of marlowe's companions as witnesses . 
in contrast ,  speleology is the scientific study of caves and the cave environment . 
many cave environments are very fragile . 
in well-explored regions  -lrb-  such as most developed nations  -rrb-  ,  the most accessible caves have already been explored ,  and gaining access to new caves often requires cave digging or cave diving . 
though cave wildlife may not always be immediately visible ,  it is typically nonetheless present in most caves . 
the base term `` caving '' comes from the latin `` cavea '' or `` caverna '' ,  meaning simply ,  a cave . 
cave-dwelling species are also very fragile ,  and often ,  a particular species found in a cave may live within that cave alone ,  and be found nowhere else in the world ,  such as alabama cave shrimp . 
safety risks while caving can be minimized by using a number of techniques:
the scaling-pole  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- ,  nylon ropes  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- ,  use of explosives in caves  -lrb-  1947 -rrb- and mechanical rope-ascenders  -lrb-  henri brenot's `` monkeys '' ,  first used by chevalier and brenot in a cave in 1934 -rrb- can be directly associated to the exploration of the dent de crolles cave system . 
caving ,  in certain areas ,  has also been utilized as a form of eco and adventure tourism . 
caving – also traditionally known as spelunking in the united states and canada and potholing in the united kingdom and ireland – is the recreational pastime of exploring wild  -lrb-  generally non-commercial  -rrb-  cave systems . 
in 2008, researchers found evidence that respiration from cave visitors may generate elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in caves ,  leading to increased temperatures of up to 3 °c and a dissolution of existing features . 
solutional caves or karst caves are the most frequently occurring caves . 
caves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called primary caves . 
lava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes . 
most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution . 
sea caves are generally around in length ,  but may exceed  . 
types of active caves include inflow caves  -lrb-  `` into which a stream sinks ''  -rrb-  ,  outflow caves  -lrb-  `` from which a stream emerges ''  -rrb-  ,  and through caves  -lrb-  `` traversed by a stream ''  -rrb-  . 
sea caves are found along coasts around the world . 
anchialine caves are caves ,  usually coastal ,  containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water  -lrb-  usually sea water  -rrb-  . 
today ,  speakers of chinese use three written numeral systems: the system of hindu-arabic numerals used worldwide ,  and two indigenous systems . 
today ,  the governments of both china and taiwan use phonetic transliterations for the si prefixes . 
in modern chinese only the second system is used ,  in which the same ancient names are used ,  but each represents a number 10,000  -lrb-  myriad ,  萬 wàn  -rrb-  times the previous:
in the people's republic of china ,  the translations for the si prefixes in 1981 were different from those used today . 
for numbers larger than 10,000, similarly to the long and short scales in the west ,  there have been four systems in ancient and modern usage . 
since it reflects spoken language ,  it does not use the positional system as in arabic numerals ,  in the same way that spelling out numbers in english does not . 
32 switches were available for programming . 
compilers are used to translate source code from a programming language into either object code or machine code . 
computer programming is the process of writing or editing source code . 
a computer requires programs to function . 
a computer program in the form of a human-readable ,  computer programming language is called source code . 
a computer program is usually written by a computer programmer in a programming language . 
computer programs may be categorized along functional lines . 
computer programs can be categorized by the programming language paradigm used to produce them . 
self-modifying code is possible for programs written in machine code ,  assembly language ,  lisp ,  c ,  cobol ,  pl/1, and prolog . 
interpreters are used to execute source code from a programming language line-by-line . 
a computer program in execution is normally treated as being different from the data the program operates on . 
computers manufactured until the 1970s had front-panel switches for programming . 
while every crime violates the law ,  not every violation of the law counts as a crime . 
usually ,  a natural person perpetrates a crime ,  but legal persons may also commit crimes . 
such acts are forbidden and punishable by law . 
 ''crime wave '' is first attested in 1893 in american english . 
conversely ,  at least under u . s .  law ,  nonpersons such as animals cannot commit crimes . 
 ,  1891 patents were granted to caltech researchers since 1969.
in december 2009, some caltech students declared that mit had been sold and had become the caltech east campus . 
life in the caltech community is governed by the honor code ,  which simply states: `` no member of the caltech community shall take unfair advantage of any other member of the caltech community . `` 
since 2000, the einstein papers project has been located at caltech . 
during lee a .  dubridge's tenure as caltech's president  -lrb-  1946–1969 -rrb- ,  caltech's faculty doubled and the campus tripled in size . 
that same year `` money magazine '' ranked caltech 10th nationally . 
caltech students have been known for the many pranks  -lrb-  also known as `` rfs ''  -rrb-  . 
nearly half of the funds went into the support of caltech programs and projects . 
in 2005, caltech had dedicated to research: to physical sciences ,  to engineering ,  and to biological sciences . 
caltech enrolled 961 undergraduate students and 1,277 graduate students for the 2017–2018 school year . 
caltech students then moved the tardis to uc berkeley and stanford . 
identical mugs continue to be sold at the caltech campus store . 
over the next few years ,  as caltech's president emeritus david baltimore describes it ,  arnold beckman and his wife mabel `` shaped the destiny of caltech '' . 
caltech has appeared in many works of popular culture ,  both as itself and in disguised form . 
albert einstein arrived on the caltech campus for the first time in 1931 to polish up his theory of general relativity ,  and he returned to caltech subsequently as a visiting professor in 1932 and 1933.
the md degree would be from usc or ucla and the phd would be awarded from caltech . 
caltech pranks have been documented in three legends of caltech books ,  the most recent of which was edited by alumni autumn looijen '99 and mason porter '98 and published in may 2007.
founded in 1930s ,  the jet propulsion laboratory  -lrb-  jpl  -rrb-  is a federally funded research and development center  -lrb-  ffrdc  -rrb-  owned by nasa and operated as a division of caltech through a contract between nasa and caltech . 
caltech is a small four-year ,  highly residential research university with a slight majority in graduate programs . 
on film ,  the pacific tech of `` the war of the worlds '' and `` real genius '' is based on caltech . 
the average salary for assistant professors at caltech is $111,300, associate professors $121,300, and full professors $172,800.
the `` academic ranking of world universities ''  -lrb-  arwu  -rrb-  ,  ranked caltech 8th in the world and 6th in the u . s .  in 2016.
caltech students also passed out t-shirts to mit's incoming freshman class that had mit written on the front and ``  .  .  . because not everyone can go to caltech '' along with an image of a palm tree on the back . 
in 1971 a magnitude-6.6 earthquake in san fernando caused some damage to the caltech campus . 
goodhue's designs for caltech were also influenced by the traditional spanish mission architecture of southern california . 
over the years caltech has actively promoted the commercialization of technologies developed within its walls . 
caltech offers army and air force rotc in cooperation with the university of southern california . 
admission to caltech is extremely rigorous and requires the highest test scores in the nation . 
for the class of 2022  -lrb-  enrolled fall 2018 -rrb- ,  caltech received 8208 applications and accepted 6.6% of applicants; 231 enrolled . 
caltech has six academic divisions with strong emphasis on science and engineering ,  managing $332 million in 2011 in sponsored research . 
the california institute of technology  -lrb-  abbreviated caltech  -rrb-  is a private doctorate-granting research university located in pasadena ,  california ,  united states . 
in 2014 the ''the daily beast '' ranked caltech 12th nationally its guide to best colleges . 
caltech offers co-operative programs with other schools ,  such as the pasadena art center college of design and occidental college . 
on february 2, 2013, the caltech baseball team ended a 228-game losing streak ,  the team's first win in nearly 10 years . 
in nonfiction ,  two 2007 documentaries examine aspects of caltech: `` curious '' ,  its researchers ,  and `` quantum hoops '' ,  its men's basketball team . 
goldoni was born in venice in 1707, the son of margherita and giulio goldoni . 
goldoni returned with her to venice ,  where he stayed until 1743.
goldoni's plays are gentler and more optimistic in tone than molière's . 
goldoni entered the italian theatre scene with a tragedy ,  `` amalasunta '' ,  produced in milan . 
goldoni was inspired by his love of humanity and the admiration he had for his fellow men . 
goldoni had a dislike for arrogance ,  intolerance and the abuse of power . 
carlo osvaldo goldoni  -lrb-  ; 25 february 1707 – 6 february 1793 -rrb- was an italian playwright and librettist from the republic of venice . 
there is an abundance of autobiographical information on goldoni ,  most of which comes from the introductions to his plays and from his `` memoirs '' . 
goldoni's plays that were written while he was still in italy ignore religious and ecclesiastical subjects . 
for all real numbers formula_39 and formula_20.
for formula_98 random variables formula_99, the joint cdf formula_100 is given by
then the cdf of formula_1 is given by
then the cdf of formula_1 is given by
if formula_22 is continuous at formula_20, this equals zero and there is no discrete component at formula_20.
the probability that formula_1 lies in the semi-closed interval formula_11, where formula_12, is therefore
if formula_1 is a purely discrete random variable ,  then it attains values formula_28 with probability formula_29, and the cdf of formula_1 will be discontinuous at the points formula_31 and constant in between:
if the cdf formula_22 of a real valued random variable formula_1 is continuous ,  then formula_1 is a continuous random variable; if furthermore formula_22 is absolutely continuous ,  then there exists a lebesgue-integrable function formula_37 such that
the function formula_17 is equal to the derivative of formula_22 almost everywhere ,  and it is called the probability density function of the distribution of formula_1.
the 0- ''norm '' is not convex  -lrb-  hence not a norm  -rrb-  . 
note that for formula_4 and formula_5 these functions are defined by taking limits ,  respectively as formula_6 and formula_7.
the mean  -lrb-  `` l '' center  -rrb-  and midrange  -lrb-  `` l '' center  -rrb-  are unique  -lrb-  when they exist  -rrb-  ,  while the median  -lrb-  `` l '' center  -rrb-  and mode  -lrb-  `` l '' center  -rrb-  are not in general unique . 
in statistics ,  a central tendency  -lrb-  or measure of central tendency  -rrb-  is a central or typical value for a probability distribution . 
the term `` central tendency '' dates from the late 1920s . 
