selig was previously the team owner and team president of the milwaukee brewers . 
selig remains a resident of milwaukee . 
selig turned his attention to other franchises . 
selig's interest in baseball came from his mother . 
selig's defenders point to the poor management of the team after selig-prieb took control as proof that selig was not working behind the scenes . 
american bison tend to be slightly heavier than european bison ,  while european bison tend to be taller than american bison . 
the pleistocene woodland bison  -lrb-  `` b '' . 
had posed threats to bison . 
the modern european bison is likely to have arisen from the steppe bison . 
the first census of the bison occurred in 1996, which recorded 45,235 bison on 745 farms ,  and grew to 195,728 bison on 1,898 farms for the 2006 census . 
wallowing is a common behavior of bison . 
of the two surviving species ,  the american bison ,  `` b .  bison '' ,  found only in north america ,  is the more numerous . 
bison temperament is often unpredictable . 
due to their size ,  bison have few predators . 
bison are large ,  even-toed ungulates in the genus `` bison '' within the subfamily bovinae . 
 ''bison latifrons ''  -lrb-  the `` giant '' or `` longhorn '' bison  -rrb-  is thought to have evolved in midcontinent north america from `` b .  priscus '' ,  after the steppe bison crossed into north america . 
the american bison and the european bison  -lrb-  wisent  -rrb-  are the largest surviving terrestrial animals in north america and europe . 
bison are nomadic grazers and travel in herds . 
going extinct in 6,000 bce ,  outlasted only by `` b .  occidentalis '' ,  `` b .  bonasus '' and `` b .  bison '' ,  the steppe bison was the predominant bison pictured in the ancient cave paintings of spain and southern france . 
humans were almost exclusively accountable for the near-extinction of the american bison in the 1800s . 
the american bison is ,  therefore ,  no longer considered an endangered species . 
the mathematics of isospin was modeled after that of spin . 
since baryons are made of three quarks ,  their spin vectors can add to make a vector of length `` s '' =  ,  which has four spin projections  -lrb-  `` s '' = + ,  `` s '' = + ,  `` s '' = − ,  and `` s '' = −  -rrb-  ,  or a vector of length `` s '' =  with two spin projections  -lrb-  `` s '' = + ,  and `` s '' = −  -rrb-  . 
quarks are fermionic particles of spin  -lrb-  `` s '' =   -rrb-  . 
spin  -lrb-  quantum number `` s ''  -rrb-  is a vector quantity that represents the `` intrinsic '' angular momentum of a particle . 
for example ,  a proton is made of two up quarks and one down quark; and its corresponding antiparticle ,  the antiproton ,  is made of two up antiquarks and one down antiquark . 
the c quark has a charge of  -lrb-  `` q '' = +  -rrb-  ,  therefore the other two must be a u quark  -lrb-  `` q '' = +  -rrb-  ,  and a d quark  -lrb-  `` q '' = −  -rrb-  to have the correct total charge  -lrb-  `` q '' = +1 -rrb- . 
baryons are classified into groups according to their isospin  -lrb-  `` i ''  -rrb-  values and quark  -lrb-  `` q ''  -rrb-  content . 
the strangeness flavour quantum number `` s ''  -lrb-  not to be confused with spin  -rrb-  was noticed to go up and down along with particle mass . 
it was noted that charge  -lrb-  `` q ''  -rrb-  was related to the isospin projection  -lrb-  `` i ''  -rrb-  ,  the baryon number  -lrb-  `` b ''  -rrb-  and flavour quantum numbers  -lrb-  `` s '' ,  `` c '' ,  `` b ''′ ,  `` t ''  -rrb-  by the gell-mann–nishijima formula:<br>
as a consequence ,  baryons with no orbital angular momentum  -lrb-  `` l '' = 0 -rrb- all have even parity  -lrb-  `` p '' = +  -rrb-  . 
the term `` baryon '' usually refers to `` triquarks ''—baryons made of three quarks  -lrb-  `` b '' =  +  +  = 1 -rrb- . 
as of 2008 there are more than 60 in use across the world . 
this is often the case regardless of the type of printer being discussed  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  thermal printers being called `` ink printers '' even though they use no ink  -rrb-  . 
blind users tend to call other printers `` ink printers , ``  to distinguish them from their braille counterparts . 
other ,  non-chaosium games have used `` brp '' for its core rules . 
basic role-playing  -lrb-  brp  -rrb-  is a role-playing game system which originated in the `` runequest '' fantasy role-playing game . 
the `` brp '' itself has been the recipient ,  via its games ,  of many awards . 
 ''brp '' was conceived of as a generic system for playing any sort of rpg . 
the `` brp '' was notable for being the first role-playing game system to introduce a full skill system to characters regardless of their profession . 
a percentile skill-based system ,  `` brp '' was used as the basis for most of the games published by chaosium ,  including `` call of cthulhu '' ,  `` stormbringer '' ,  and `` elfquest '' . 
for example ,  a block cipher encryption algorithm might take a 128-bit block of plaintext as input ,  and output a corresponding 128-bit block of ciphertext . 
even a secure block cipher is suitable only for the encryption of a single block under a fixed key . 
the modern design of block ciphers is based on the concept of an iterated product cipher . 
a `` substitution box  -lrb-  s-box  -rrb- ``  substitutes a small block of input bits with another block of output bits . 
most block cipher algorithms are classified as `` iterated block ciphers '' which means that they transform fixed-size blocks of plaintext into identical size blocks of ciphertext ,  via the repeated application of an invertible transformation known as the `` round function '' ,  with each iteration referred to as a `` round '' . 
for each key `` k '' ,  `` e '' is a permutation  -lrb-  a bijective mapping  -rrb-  over the set of input blocks . 
in cryptography ,  a block cipher is a deterministic algorithm operating on fixed-length groups of bits ,  called a `` block '' ,  with an unvarying transformation that is specified by a symmetric key . 
wireless broadband is telecommunications technology that provides high-speed wireless internet access or computer networking access over a wide area . 
to cope with increased demand for wireless broadband ,  increased spectrum would be needed . 
because of this ,  most wireless isp's use unlicensed spectrum which is publicly shared . 
a wireless connection can be either licensed or unlicensed . 
few wireless internet service providers  -lrb-  wisps  -rrb-  provide download speeds of over 100 mbit/s; most broadband wireless access  -lrb-  bwa  -rrb-  services are estimated to have a range of from a tower . 
called mobile broadband ,  wireless broadband technologies include services from mobile phone service providers such as verizon wireless ,  sprint corporation ,  and at&t mobility , and t-mobile which allow a more mobile version of internet access . 
borg went on to lose to mcenroe at the 1981 us open . 
borg later bounced back as the owner of the björn borg fashion label . 
barely 18, borg was the youngest-ever male french open champion up to that point . 
björn borg was born in stockholm ,  sweden ,  on 6 june 1956, as the only child of rune  -lrb-  1932-2008 -rrb- and margaretha borg  -lrb-  b . 
borg won his last grand slam title at the french open in 1981, defeating lendl in a five-set final . 
in reaching the wimbledon final in 1981, borg stretched his winning streak at the all england club to a record 41 matches . 
borg's six french open grand slam titles was a record bettered only by rafael nadal in 2012.
björn rune borg  -lrb-  ; born 6 june 1956 -rrb- is a swedish former world no . 
borg was at the height of his career from 1978 through 1980, completing the french open-wimbledon double all three years . 
borg then defeated ivan lendl for his second masters title . 
the booch method is a method for object-oriented software development . 
methodological aspects of the booch method have been incorporated into several methodologies and processes ,  the primary such methodology being the rational unified process  -lrb-  rup  -rrb-  . 
with the french army ashore ,  the french fleet anchored in aboukir bay ,  northeast of alexandria . 
at 21:00, the british observed a fire on the lower decks of the `` orient '' ,  the french flagship . 
nelson had missed the french by less than a day—the scouts of the french fleet arrived off alexandria in the evening of 29 june . 
one cut across the head of the line and passed between the anchored french and the shore ,  while the other engaged the seaward side of the french fleet . 
at 19:00 the identifying lights in the mizzenmasts of the british fleet were lit . 
the british fleet was led in the battle by rear-admiral sir horatio nelson; they decisively defeated the french under vice-admiral françois-paul brueys d'aigalliers . 
although initially disappointed that the main french fleet was not at alexandria ,  nelson knew from the presence of the transports that they must be nearby . 
the next three british ships ,  `` vanguard '' in the lead followed by hms `` minotaur '' and hms `` defence '' ,  remained in line of battle formation and anchored on the starboard side of the french line at 18:40.
french casualties are harder to calculate but were significantly higher . 
as a result ,  the french selected an alternative anchorage at aboukir bay ,  northeast of alexandria . 
two other french ships still flew the tricolour ,  but neither was in a position to either retreat or fight . 
the rear division of the french fleet attempted to break out of the bay ,  with brueys dead and his vanguard and centre defeated ,  but only two ships of the line and two frigates escaped from a total of 17 ships engaged . 
 ''zealous '' was struck by a number of french shot and lost one man killed . 
 ''timoléon '' exploded shortly after midday ,  the eleventh and final french ship of the line destroyed or captured during the battle . 
the third british ship into action was hms `` orion '' under captain sir james saumarez ,  which rounded the engagement at the head of the battle line and passed between the french main line and the frigates that lay closer inshore . 
 ''defence '' and `` orion `` attacked the fifth french ship ,  `` peuple souverain '' ,  from either side and the ship rapidly lost the fore and main masts . 
 ''orion '' then rejoined the action further south than intended ,  firing on the fifth french ship ,  `` peuple souverain , ``  and admiral blanquet's flagship ,  `` franklin '' . 
his scouts ,  hms `` alexander '' and hms `` swiftsure '' ,  sighted the french transport fleet at alexandria on the afternoon of 1 august . 
on the evening of 22 june ,  nelson's fleet passed the french in the darkness ,  overtaking the slow invasion convoy without realising how close they were to their target . 
on 7 june ,  following hasty repairs to his flagship ,  a fleet consisting of ten ships of the line and a fourth-rate joined nelson off toulon . 
rumours of a battle first appeared in the french press as early as 7 august ,  although credible reports did not arrive until 26 august ,  and even these claimed that nelson was dead and bonaparte a british prisoner . 
bonaparte sought to invade egypt as the first step in a campaign against british india ,  part of a greater effort to drive britain out of the french revolutionary wars . 
this squadron ,  consisting of three ships of the line and three frigates ,  was entrusted to rear-admiral sir horatio nelson . 
after they had returned to antioch from the jerusalem council ,  they spent some time there  -lrb-  15:35 -rrb- . 
a considerable minority of the antioch church of barnabas's time belonged to the merchant class ,  and they provided support to the poorer jerusalem church . 
returning from this first missionary journey to antioch ,  they were again sent up to jerusalem to consult with the church there regarding the relation of gentiles to the church  -lrb-  acts 15:2; galatians 2:1 -rrb- . 
at the end of this period ,  the two were sent up to jerusalem  -lrb-  44 ad  -rrb-  with contributions from the church at antioch for the relief of the poorer christians in judea . 
he also appears in several of paul's epistles . 
paul considered that they `` walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel '' and upbraided them before the whole church  -lrb-  galatians 2:11-15 -rrb- . 
the successful preaching of christianity at antioch to non-jews led the church at jerusalem to send barnabas there to oversee the movement  -lrb-  acts 11:20–22 -rrb- . 
paul then asked barnabas to accompany him on another journey  -lrb-  15:36 -rrb- . 
sources of birka are mainly archaeological remains . 
birka was also important as the site of the first known christian in sweden ,  founded in 831 by saint ansgar . 
birka was abandoned during the later half of the 10th century . 
it has been estimated that the population in viking age birka was between 500 and 1000 people . 
birka was founded around ad 750 by either a king in order to control and expand trade or it emerged from a seasonal trading place around . 
beta-lactam antibiotics are typically used to treat a broad spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria . 
rabbani was also the leader of jamiat-e islami afghanistan  -lrb-  islamic society of afghanistan  -rrb-  . 
his son salahuddin rabbani was chosen in april 2012 to lead efforts to forge peace in afghanistan with the taliban . 
rabbani returned to afghanistan in 1968, where the high council of jamiat-e islami gave him the duty of organizing the university students . 
rabbani's son salahuddin then took over chairmanship of the high peace council from his father . 
rabbani was head of afghanistan's high peace council ,  which had been formed in 2010 to initiate peace talks with the taliban and other groups in the insurgency ,  until his death . 
the 747-300 features a upper deck than the -200.
freighter versions of the 747x and 747x stretch were also studied . 
a total of 81 747-300 series aircraft were delivered ,  56 for passenger use ,  21 -300m and 4 -300sr versions . 
as a result of the boeing 767 development overlapping with the 747-400's development ,  both aircraft can use the same three powerplants and are even interchangeable between the two aircraft models . 
boeing was not able to attract enough interest to launch the aircraft . 
union de transports aériens  -lrb-  uta  -rrb-  also had two aircraft converted . 
the aircraft is certified to carry only essential crew and not passengers . 
 ''b741 '' for all -100 models  -rrb-  . 
in 1986, two -100bsr sud models ,  featuring the stretched upper deck  -lrb-  sud  -rrb-  of the -300, were produced for jal . 
the first 747-100s were built with six upper deck windows  -lrb-  three per side  -rrb-  to accommodate upstairs lounge areas . 
swissair placed the first order for the 747-300 on june 11, 1980.
the hughes h-4 hercules is the largest aircraft by wingspan ,  but completed a single flight . 
during this time ,  airport congestion ,  worsened by increasing numbers of passengers carried on relatively small aircraft ,  became a problem that trippe thought could be addressed by a larger new aircraft . 
ana operated this variant on domestic japanese routes with 455 or 456 seats until retiring its last aircraft in march 2006.
the -8f was first delivered to cargolux on october 12, 2011.
after several variants were proposed but later abandoned ,  some industry observers became skeptical of new aircraft proposals from boeing . 
boeing announced the 747-500x and -600x at the 1996 farnborough airshow . 
the first 747-400bcf was redelivered in december 2005.
no production freighter version of the 747-300 was built ,  but boeing began modifications of used passenger -300 models into freighters in 2000.
the 747-100 was the original variant launched in 1966.
the nose door and raised cockpit concepts would be carried over to the design of the 747.
some of the ideas developed for the 747x were used on the 747-400er ,  a longer range variant of the 747-400.
boeing agreed to deliver the first 747 to pan am by the end of 1969.
in 1963, the united states air force started a series of study projects on a very large strategic transport aircraft . 
a total of 393 of the 747-200 versions had been built when production ended in 1991.
boeing announced a new 747 variant ,  the 747-8, on november 14, 2005.
the english sources vary between about 1,500 and 11,000 for the french dead ,  with english dead put at no more than 100.
the french suffered heavily . 
the french were arrayed in three lines or `` battles '' . 
the plate armour of the french men-at-arms allowed them to close the 1,000 yards or so to the english lines while being under what the french monk of saint denis described as `` a terrifying hail of arrow shot '' . 
the french men-at-arms were taken prisoner or killed in the thousands . 
instead ,  the french were commanded by constable charles d'albret and various prominent french noblemen of the armagnac party . 
using the lowest french estimate of their own dead of 4,000 would imply a ratio of nearly 9 to 1 in favour of the english ,  or over 10 to 1 if the prisoners are included . 
there had even been a suggestion that the english would run away rather than give battle when they saw that they would be fighting so many french princes . 
the english made their confessions before the battle ,  as was customary . 
the french force was not only larger than that of the english ,  but their noble men-at-arms would have considered themselves superior to the large number of archers in the english army ,  whom the french  -lrb-  based on their experience in recent memory of using and facing archers  -rrb-  considered relatively insignificant . 
accounts of the battle describe the french engaging the english men-at-arms before being rushed from the sides by the longbowmen as the mêlée developed . 
after several decades of relative peace ,  the english had renewed their war effort in 1415 amid the failure of negotiations with the french . 
several french accounts emphasise that the french leaders were so eager to defeat the english  -lrb-  and win the ransoms of the english men-at-arms  -rrb-  that they insisted on being in the first line; as one of the contemporary accounts put it: `` all the lords wanted to be in the vanguard ,  against the opinion of the constable and the experienced knights . `` 
the french had raised an army during the siege which assembled around rouen . 
although the iron age generally followed the bronze age ,  in some areas  -lrb-  such as sub-saharan africa  -rrb-  ,  the iron age intruded directly on the neolithic . 
western asia and the near east was the first region to enter the bronze age ,  which began with the rise of the mesopotamian civilization of sumer in the mid 4th millennium bc . 
on 21 april 2008, bbc news 24 was renamed `` bbc news '' on the channel itself – but is referred to as the `` bbc news channel '' on other bbc services . 
bbc news  -lrb-  also known as the bbc news channel  -rrb-  is a british free-to-air television news channel . 
the bbc had run the international news channel bbc world for two and a half years prior to the launch of bbc news 24 on 9 november 1997.
in 2017, it was named the rts `` news channel of the year ''
the bbc news channel moved from the studio n8 set ,  which became home to bbc world news ,  to what was the home of the national news in studio n6, allowing the channel to share its set with the `` bbc news at one '' and the `` bbc news at ten '' – with other bulletins moving to studio tc7.
 ''bbc breakfast '' has been simulcast since launch  -lrb-  in 2000 -rrb- on bbc one and bbc news ,  replacing the individual breakfast shows that had run on both channels . 
during the summer ,  the hour-long programme `` news 24 sunday '' was broadcast both on bbc one and the bbc news channel at 09:00, to replace `` the andrew marr show '' ,  which is off air . 
coverage of major events has also been simulcast on bbc world news . 
sky news had had a free hand with domestic news for over eight years  -lrb-  since 5 february 1989 -rrb- and being owned by news corporation their papers were used to criticise the bbc for extending its news output . 
the bbc maintains guidelines for procedures to be taken for breaking news . 
in the amnesty international show `` a poke in the eye  -lrb-  with a sharp stick  -rrb- ``  ,  oddie ,  brooke-taylor and garden sang their hit song `` funky gibbon '' . 
his wildlife programmes for the bbc include: `` springwatch/autumnwatch '' ,  `` how to watch wildlife '' ,  `` wild in your garden '' ,  `` birding with bill oddie '' ,  `` britain goes wild with bill oddie '' and `` bill oddie goes wild '' . 
he discussed bird song recordings with derek jones in an august 1973 bbc radio 4 programme called `` sounds natural '' . 
oddie ,  brooke-taylor and garden voiced characters on the 1983 animated children's programme `` bananaman '' . 
oddie's first published work was an article about the birdlife of birmingham's bartley reservoir in the west midland bird club's 1962 annual report  -lrb-  he is first credited in the 1956 report ,  in which reports of his bird observations are tagged with his initials `` weo ''  -rrb-  . 
at 178th street ,  u . s .  9 becomes concurrent with broadway . 
broadway once was a two-way street for its entire length . 
between west 70th and 73rd streets ,  broadway intersects with amsterdam avenue  -lrb-  known as 10th avenue south of west 59th street  -rrb-  . 
early street railways on broadway included the broadway and seventh avenue railroad's broadway and university place line  -lrb-  1864?  -rrb- 
newyork–presbyterian hospital lies on broadway near 166th ,  167th ,  and 168th streets in washington heights . 
in 2001, a one-block section of broadway between 72nd street and 73rd street at verdi square was reconfigured . 
at 99th street ,  broadway passes between the controversial skyscrapers of the ariel east and west . 
broadway crosses the harlem river on the broadway bridge to marble hill . 
broadway is a road in the u . s .  state of new york . 
 ,  broadway is served by the m4  -lrb-  ex-facco 4 -rrb- ,  m7  -lrb-  ex-nyco 7 -rrb- ,  m55, m100, and m104.
on june 3, 1962, broadway became one-way south of canal street ,  with trinity place and church street carrying northbound traffic . 
additionally ,  bike lanes were added on broadway from 42nd street down to union square . 
the broadway surface railroad's broadway line ,  a cable car line ,  opened on lower broadway  -lrb-  below times square  -rrb-  in 1893, and soon became the core of the metropolitan street railway ,  with two cable branches: the broadway and lexington avenue line and broadway and columbus avenue line . 
northbound traffic on broadway is now channeled onto amsterdam avenue to 73rd street ,  makes a left turn on the three-lane 73rd street ,  and then a right turn on broadway shortly afterward . 
the northwestern corner of the park marks the city limit and broadway enters yonkers ,  where it is now known as south broadway . 
macy's herald square department store ,  one block north of the vehicular discontinuity ,  is located on the northwest corner of broadway and west 34th street and southwest corner of broadway and west 35th street; it is one of the largest department stores in the world . 
u . s .  9 continues to be known as broadway until its junction with ny 117.
in spring 2017, as part of a capital reconstruction of worth square ,  broadway between 24th and 25th street was converted to a `` shared street '' where through vehicles are banned and delivery vehicles are restricted to  . 
at its intersection with west 78th street ,  broadway shifts direction and continues directly uptown and aligned approximately with the commissioners' grid . 
the above bilinear approximation can be solved for formula_11 or a similar approximation for formula_12 can be performed . 
the bilinear transform is a special case of a conformal mapping  -lrb-  namely ,  a möbius transformation  -rrb-  ,  often used to convert a transfer function formula_1 of a linear ,  time-invariant  -lrb-  lti  -rrb-  filter in the continuous-time domain  -lrb-  often called an analog filter  -rrb-  to a transfer function formula_2 of a linear ,  shift-invariant filter in the discrete-time domain  -lrb-  often called a digital filter although there are analog filters constructed with switched capacitors that are discrete-time filters  -rrb-  . 
boitano's was to the music of napoleon . 
following the olympics ,  both orser and boitano went to the world championships ,  which boitano won . 
boitano turned professional soon after . 
boitano returned to the professional ranks afterwards . 
in 1982 boitano became the first american to land a triple axel . 
the battle of the brians at the 1988 winter olympics was the highlight of boitano's amateur career . 
going into the olympics ,  boitano and brian orser each had won a world title and each had an excellent ,  balanced repertoire ,  with boitano being known as the slightly better technician and orser as the better artist . 
at worlds ,  boitano fell on his quadruple toe loop attempt and placed second . 
after losing the world title to orser at home ,  boitano and his coach linda leaver decided that some changes needed to be made if boitano was to become the olympic champion . 
still ,  boitano won the competition ,  and went into the olympics as the national champion  -lrb-  u . s .   -rrb-  ,  as did orser  -lrb-  canadian  -rrb-  . 
bombardier inc .   -lrb-    -rrb-  is a multinational aerospace and transportation company based in montreal ,  quebec ,  canada . 
on october 16, 2017, the airbus group bought a 50.01% majority stake in the cseries aircraft . 
after some delay in its development of the bombardier c series ,  the cs100 and cs300 now compete with the smaller aircraft in the airbus a320 family and the boeing 737 family . 
armand and germain developed several prototypes of the lightweight snowmobile and finally ,  the first bombardier snowmobile went on sale in 1959.
in late september 2017, the u . s .  department of commerce proposed a 219% tariff on bombardier cseries aircraft to be imported into the country . 
the bombardier museum is a large modern museum in valcourt ,  quebec dedicated to the life of joseph-armand bombardier ,  the snowmobile ,  and the industry he helped create . 
the governments of canada and the uk also promised their support ,  threatening to stop ordering boeing aircraft since the company was putting aerospace jobs at risk . 
during the 1970s ,  bombardier began to enter the railway passenger car business with domestic orders for commuter and subway systems ,  winning its first order for mass transit rolling stock in 1974 for the société de transport de montréal  -lrb-  stm  -rrb-   -lrb-  montreal transport authority  -rrb-  to build mr-73 metro trains for the montreal metro . 
the total sale for 50 would be valued at us$1.7 billion ,  minus discounts . 
with the acquisition of adtranz from daimlerchrysler ,  bombardier transportation emerged as one of the largest manufacturers of railway rolling stock in the world . 
because the break function is usually combined with the pause function on one key since the introduction of the ibm model m 101-key keyboard in 1985, the break key is also called the pause key . 
the key is different from all other keys in that it sends no scancodes at all on release; therefore it is not possible for any software to determine whether this key is being held down . 
the sinclair ql computer ,  without a key ,  maps the function to  . 
the break key of a computer keyboard refers to breaking a telegraph circuit and originated with 19th century practice . 
the first standard gauge british railway to build coaches with bogies ,  instead of rigidly mounted axles ,  was the midland railway in 1874.
a `` bogie '' in the uk ,  or a `` railroad truck '' ,  `` wheel truck '' ,  or simply `` truck '' in north america ,  is a structure underneath a railway vehicle  -lrb-  wagon ,  coach or locomotive  -rrb-  to which axles  -lrb-  and ,  hence ,  wheels  -rrb-  are attached through bearings . 
british steel plc was a major british steel producer . 
corus itself was taken over in march 2007 by the indian steel operator tata steel . 
british steel was privatised in 1988 by the conservative government of margaret thatcher . 
but the sponsorship deal was terminated before it commenced after it was revealed that british steel only made up a tiny fraction of steel used in construction of the stadium ,  and that the bulk of the steel had been imported from germany . 
during the strike the `` battle of orgreave '' took place at british steel's coking plant . 
the industry was again nationalised in 1967 under another labour government ,  becoming british steel corporation  -lrb-  bsc  -rrb-  . 
bt acquired 100% of this venture in 1999.
bt's remaining concert assets were merged into its bt ignite ,  later bt global services group . 
in 2005 bt made a number of acquisitions . 
in january 2016, bt acquired ee for £12.5 billion . 
bt controls a number of large subsidiaries . 
deutsche telekom will own 12% of bt ,  while orange s . a .  will own 4% . 
then in april 2005, it bought radianz from reuters  -lrb-  now rebranded as bt radianz  -rrb-  ,  which expanded bt's coverage and provided bt with more buying power in certain countries . 
on 18 april 2018, bt announced further organisational changes following unification of its bt consumer and ee divisions ,  and involves bringing together its bt business and public sector and bt wholesale and ventures divisions into a new unified division known as `` bt enterprise '' . 
on 1 april 2009, bt engage it was created from the merger of two previous bt acquisitions ,  lynx technology and basilica . 
in 2004, bt launched consult 21, a consultation organisation that was to aid bt 21cn in the eventual conversion to digital telephony . 
on 1 august 2013, bt launched its first television channels ,  bt sport ,  to compete with rival broadcaster sky sports . 
as part of the deal ,  bt also bought out from mci its 24.9% interest in concert communications ,  thereby making concert a wholly owned part of bt . 
bt group plc  -lrb-  trading as bt and formerly british telecom  -rrb-  is a british multinational telecommunications holding company headquartered in london ,  united kingdom . 
bt sold its stake in mci to worldcom in 1998 for £4,159 million ,  on which it made a pre-tax profit of £1,133 million . 
in march 2015, launched a 4g service as bt mobile bt group ceo gavin patterson announced that bt plans to migrate all of its customers onto the ip network by 2025, switching off the company's isdn network . 
the bt home hub manufactured by inventel was also launched in june 2006.
in january 2015, bt stopped taking orders for the on-demand product . 
in august 2006, bt acquired online electrical retailer dabs . com for £30.6 million . 
on 6 april 2011, bt launched the first online not-for-profit fundraising service for uk charities called bt mydonate as part of its investment to the community . 
in 2000, bt acquired esat telecom group plc ,  and all its subsidiary companies ,  and ireland on line . 
victoria eugenie would become the queen of spain . 
in 1887, balmoral castle was the birthplace of victoria eugenie ,  a granddaughter of queen victoria . 
after victoria's death ,  the royal family continued to use balmoral during annual autumn visits . 
queen victoria and prince albert first visited scotland in 1842, five years after her accession to the throne and two years after their marriage . 
the royal couple arrived for their first visit on 8 september 1848.
the architect was william smith of aberdeen ,  although his designs were amended by prince albert . 
queen elizabeth ii was in residence at balmoral at the time of the death of diana ,  princess of wales in 1997.
balmoral has been one of the residences of the british royal family since 1852, when the estate and its original castle were purchased privately by prince albert ,  the husband of queen victoria . 
following albert's death ,  victoria spent increasing periods at balmoral ,  staying for as long as four months a year during early summer and autumn . 
during the 1980s new staff buildings were built close to the castle . 
during the second world war ,  royal visits to balmoral ceased . 
four years later victoria made her last visit to the estate ,  three months before her death on 22 january 1901.
the lodge has been in the news periodically since 2005, because queen elizabeth ii often spends the first few days of her summer holiday there . 
a tower house was built on the estate by the gordons . 
the estate extends to loch muick in the southeast where an old boat house and the royal bothy  -lrb-  hunting lodge  -rrb-  now named `` glas-allt-shiel '' ,  built by victoria ,  are located . 
william smith's designs were amended by prince albert ,  who took a close interest in details such as turrets and windows . 
queen elizabeth ii's visits to balmoral castle were also featured in several episodes of the netflix series `` the crown '' . 
few 15- to 19-year-olds spoke breton . 
breton is written in the latin script . 
the recognized stages of the breton language are: old breton - c . 800 to c . 1100, middle breton - c . 1100 to c . 1650, modern breton - c . 1650 to present . 
some original media are created in breton . 
the english words and have been borrowed from french ,  which took them from breton . 
vowels in breton may be short or long . 
the first breton dictionary ,  the `` catholicon '' ,  was also the first french dictionary . 
the `` asterix '' comic series has been translated into breton . 
 ,  the breton language agency ,  was set up in 1999 by the brittany region to promote and develop the daily use of breton . 
the family transmission of breton in 1999 is estimated to be 3 percent . 
breton is spoken mainly in lower brittany ,  but also in a more dispersed way in upper brittany  -lrb-  where gallo is spoken alongside breton and french  -rrb-  ,  and in areas around the world that have breton emigrants . 
one station of the rennes metro system has signs in both french and breton . 
in 1977, diwan schools were founded to teach breton by immersion . 
under the french law known as toubon ,  it is illegal for commercial signage to be in breton alone . 
the french word  -lrb-  `` to jabber in a foreign language ''  -rrb-  is derived from breton '  -lrb-  `` bread ''  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  `` wine ''  -rrb-  . 
the diwan schools were founded in brittany in 1977 to teach breton by immersion . 
breton  -lrb-  ; or in morbihan  -rrb-  is a southwestern brittonic celtic language spoken in brittany . 
in the early 21st century ,  the  -lrb-  `` office of the breton language ''  -rrb-  began a campaign to encourage daily use of breton in the region by both businesses and local communes . 
additionally ,  the university of rennes 2 has a breton language department offering courses in the language along with a master's degree in breton and celtic studies . 
regional and departmental authorities use breton to a very limited extent ,  for example in signage . 
most brochs are unexcavated . 
clickimin in shetland  -rrb-  . 
the distribution of brochs is centred on northern scotland . 
the origin of brochs is a subject of continuing research . 
a broch  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an iron age drystone hollow-walled structure found in scotland . 
antiquarians began to use the spelling `` broch '' in the 1870s . 
some brochs such as dun dornaigil and culswick in shetland have unusual triangular lintels above the entrance door . 
his mother ,  helen crystal ,  died in 2001.
crystal returned to new york city . 
in 1982, billy crystal hosted his own variety show ,  `` the billy crystal comedy hour '' on nbc . 
crystal hosted the academy awards broadcast in 1990–1993, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2004 and 2012.
crystal's first film role was in joan rivers' 1978 film `` rabbit test '' ,  the story of the `` world's first pregnant man . `` 
in `` city slickers '' ,  crystal wears a new york mets baseball cap . 
crystal's boyhood idol was yankee hall of fame legend mickey mantle who had signed a program for him when crystal attended a game where mantle had hit a home run . 
reiner directed crystal for a third time in the romantic comedy `` when harry met sally .  .  . ``   -lrb-  1989 -rrb- ,  in which crystal starred alongside meg ryan and for which he was nominated for a golden globe . 
in 1986, crystal started hosting `` comic relief '' on hbo with robin williams and whoopi goldberg . 
instead ,  crystal joined the broadcasters in the booth and pretended to be rizzuto for a few minutes during the august 31 game . 
for a black hole of mass `` m '' . 
in this period more general black hole solutions were found . 
these properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole . 
the most general stationary black hole solution known is the kerr–newman metric ,  which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum . 
solutions describing more general black holes also exist . 
while the mass of a black hole can take any positive value ,  the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass . 
the analogy was completed when hawking ,  in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole . 
the simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum . 
this behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox . 
there is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies . 
the two types of beta decay are known as `` beta minus '' and `` beta plus '' . 
another example is when the free neutron  -lrb-    -rrb-  decays by  decay into a proton  -lrb-    -rrb- :
decay times for many nuclides that are subject to beta decay can be thousands of years . 
electron capture is a competing  -lrb-  simultaneous  -rrb-  decay process for all nuclei that can undergo β decay . 
beta decay is a consequence of the weak force ,  which is characterized by relatively lengthy decay times . 
an example of electron emission  -lrb-  β decay  -rrb-  is the decay of carbon-14 into nitrogen-14 with a half-life of about 5,730 years:
in nuclear physics ,  beta decay  -lrb-  `` β ''-decay  -rrb-  is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta ray  -lrb-  fast energetic electron or positron  -rrb-  is emitted from an atomic nucleus . 
β decay is also known as positron emission . 
this particular nuclide  -lrb-  though not all nuclides in this situation  -rrb-  is almost equally likely to decay through proton decay by positron emission  -lrb-  18%  -rrb-  or electron capture  -lrb-  43%  -rrb-  to  ,  as it is through neutron decay by electron emission  -lrb-  39%  -rrb-  to  . 
since a proton or neutron has lepton number zero ,  β decay  -lrb-  a positron ,  or antielectron  -rrb-  must be accompanied with an electron neutrino ,  while β decay  -lrb-  an electron  -rrb-  must be accompanied by an electron antineutrino . 
beta decay does not change the number  -lrb-    -rrb-  of nucleons in the nucleus ,  but changes only its charge  . 
he found that for a beta particle is the same as for thomson's electron ,  and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron . 
however ,  the electron spin is 1/2, hence angular momentum would not be conserved if beta decay were simply electron emission . 
at the outbreak of war ,  the german army had no radically new theory of war . 
german operational theories were revised after the first world war . 
it has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new; the germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s . 
frieser wrote that the  -lrb-    -rrb-  was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war . 
adam tooze wrote that the german economy was being prepared for a long war . 
the origins of blitzkrieg are in some doubt: if it existed ,  who contributed to it ,  whether it was part of german war strategy from 1933–1939.
german volunteers first used armour in live field conditions during the spanish civil war of 1936.
allied air superiority became a significant hindrance to german operations during the later years of the war . 
in `` doctrine and training in the german army 1919–1939 '' ,  o'neill wrote
during the first world war the german army used 1.4 million horses for transport and in the second world war used 2.7 million horses; only ten percent of the army was motorised in 1940.
half of the german divisions available in 1940 were combat ready but less well-equipped than the british and french or the imperial german army of 1914.
the traditional meaning of blitzkrieg is that of german tactical and operational methodology in the first half of the second world war ,  that is often hailed as a new method of warfare . 
in 2003, john mosier wrote that while the french soldiers in 1940 were better trained than german soldiers ,  as were the americans later and that the german army was the least mechanised of the major armies ,  its leadership cadres were larger and better and that the high standard of leadership was the main reason for the successes of the german army in world war ii ,  as it had been in world war i . 
german thinking reverted to the possibility of a quick and decisive war for the balkan campaign and operation barbarossa . 
under these conditions it was difficult for german commanders to employ the `` armoured idea '' ,  if at all . 
the origin of the term `` blitzkrieg '' is obscure . 
on the eastern front ,  the war did not bog down into trench warfare; german and russian armies fought a war of manoeuvre over thousands of miles ,  which gave the german leadership unique experience not available to the trench-bound western allies . 
guderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war . 
the purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the german people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities and avoid the economic hardships of the first world war . 
by guderian's account he single-handedly created the german tactical and operational methodology . 
during world war i ,  fuller had been a staff officer attached to the new tank corps . 
hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced germany into war before rearmament was complete . 
the notion of a german blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survives in popular history and many historians still support the thesis . 
despite being common in german and english-language journalism during world war ii ,  the word was never used by the wehrmacht as an official military term ,  except for propaganda . 
during the battle of moscow ,  the red army defeated the german army group center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative . 
historian james corum criticised the german leadership for failing to understand the technical advances of the first world war ,  having given tank production the lowest priority and having conducted no studies of the machine gun prior to that war . 
the germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations their enemies were capable of by 1944.
his book offers scant clues as to how german lightning victories might be won . 
another german theorist ,  ernst volckheim ,  wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics and was influential to german thinking on the use of armoured formations but his work was not acknowledged in guderian's writings . 
the soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of german plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations ,  and the german commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced . 
the influence of air forces over forces on the ground changed significantly over the course of the second world war . 
a `` beano poster comic '' series was also printed in the early 1990s . 
as of late 2010, `` the beano '' is printed by bgp and the comic is now in an a4 format . 
in late 2012, craig graham took over as beano editor and revamped the comic . 
the first edition of `` the beano '' was dated 30 july 1938.
the comic also ran a4-sized `` beano specials '' in 1987 with full coloured pages ,  which later were replaced by `` beano superstars '' which ran for 121 issues from 1992-2002.
 ''the beano '' will strike 4000 issues in the summer of 2019.
the beano specials returned in 2003, and were now published seasonally . 
since 1982 the comic ,  along with `` the dandy '' ,  has also run `` comic library '' titles . 
during the 1980s ,  `` the beano '' ran a 'readers' request' feature where readers could request for a particular comic strip to feature in the beano . 
on a number of occasions ,  the beano has allowed its readers to vote for which new strips they want to appear in the comic . 
 ''the beano '' is now the longest-running weekly comic ,  since `` the dandy '' became a fortnightly comic in 2007, and later stopped publlishing in 2013.
a number of strips in the comic have run for a very long time . 
at the start of 2011, the beano vip pages were dropped from the comic ,  but the online features remain . 
the 3,000th issue of `` the beano '' was published in january 2000.
the following editor of `` the beano '' was craig graham ,  who joined `` the beano '' once `` the dandy '' announced its closure . 
the beano is the longest running british children's comic magazine ,  published by dc thomson . 
fun size comics were discontinued in late 2010.
in the issue dated 28 january 2012, `` the beano '''s cover changed . 
honey bees are used commercially to produce honey . 
most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences ,  namely: carpenter bees ,  sweat bees ,  mason bees ,  plasterer bees ,  squash bees ,  dwarf carpenter bees ,  leafcutter bees ,  alkali bees and digger bees . 
some species including honey bees ,  bumblebees ,  and stingless bees live socially in colonies . 
stingless bees are also highly eusocial . 
bees were associated ,  too ,  with the delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee . 
solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax . 
bees are generally easy to recognize . 
bees are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants ,  known for their role in pollination and ,  in the case of the best-known bee species ,  the western honey bee ,  for producing honey and beeswax . 
bee pollination is important both ecologically and commercially; the decline in wild bees has increased the value of pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees . 
humans have kept honey bee colonies ,  commonly in hives ,  for millennia . 
most other bees ,  including familiar insects such as carpenter bees ,  leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile ,  and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself . 
however ,  unlike many other bee brood parasites ,  they have pollen baskets and often collect pollen . 
bees are also mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate  -lrb-  pseudocopulation  -rrb-  with the furry lip of the flower ,  thus pollinating it . 
solitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood . 
the ethologist karl von frisch studied navigation in the honey bee . 
bees are partly considered edible insects . 
apitherapy is a branch of alternative medicine that uses honey bee products ,  including raw honey ,  royal jelly ,  pollen ,  propolis ,  beeswax and apitoxin  -lrb-  bee venom  -rrb-  . 
the nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood ,  in solitary bees ,  to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees . 
beekeepers collect honey ,  beeswax ,  propolis ,  pollen ,  and royal jelly from hives; bees are also kept to pollinate crops and to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers . 
in english folklore ,  bees would be told of important events in the household ,  in a custom known as `` telling the bees '' . 
bees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities . 
bees range in size from tiny stingless bee species whose workers are less than long ,  to `` megachile pluto '' ,  the largest species of leafcutter bee ,  whose females can attain a length of  . 
both the spanish and french governments have ,  at times ,  suppressed basque linguistic and cultural identity . 
the corresponding basque names of these territories are `` araba '' ,  `` bizkaia '' and `` gipuzkoa '' ,  and their spanish names are `` álava '' ,  `` vizcaya '' and `` guipúzcoa '' . 
the autonomous community  -lrb-  a concept established in the spanish constitution of 1978 -rrb- known as `` euskal autonomia erkidegoa '' or eae in basque and as `` comunidad autónoma vasca '' or cav in spanish  -lrb-  in english: `` basque autonomous community '' or bac  -rrb-  ,  is made up of the three spanish provinces of álava ,  biscay and gipuzkoa . 
the english word `` basque '' may be pronounced or and derives from the french `` basque ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which is derived from gascon `` basco ''  -lrb-  pronounced   -rrb-  ,  cognate with spanish `` vasco ``  -lrb-  pronounced   -rrb-  . 
about a quarter of a million people live in the french basque country . 
some of north america's largest ranches ,  which were founded under these colonial land grants ,  can be found in this region . 
under spain's present constitution ,  navarre  -lrb-  `` nafarroa '' in present-day basque ,  `` navarra '' historically in spanish  -rrb-  constitutes a separate entity ,  called in present-day basque `` nafarroako foru erkidegoa '' ,  in spanish `` comunidad foral de navarra ''  -lrb-  the autonomous community of navarre  -rrb-  . 
elko ,  nevada sponsors an annual basque festival that celebrates the dance ,  cuisine and cultures of the basque peoples of spanish ,  french and mexican nationalities who have arrived in nevada since the late 19th century . 
rugby union is a popular sport among french basques ,  with major clubs biarritz olympique and aviron bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of french rugby  -lrb-  the top 14 -rrb- . 
the french basque country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the french department of pyrénées atlantiques ,  centered in béarn . 
only spanish is an official language of navarre ,  and the basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region ,  where most basque-speaking navarrese are concentrated . 
as a result of state language promotion ,  school policies ,  the effects of mass media and migration ,  today virtually all basques  -lrb-  except for some children below school age  -rrb-  speak the official language of their state  -lrb-  spanish or french  -rrb-  . 
note that in historical contexts navarre may refer to a wider area ,  and that the present-day northern basque province of lower navarre may also be referred to as  -lrb-  part of  -rrb-  `` nafarroa '' ,  while the term `` high navarre ''  -lrb-  `` nafarroa garaia '' in basque ,  `` alta navarra '' in spanish  -rrb-  is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community . 
the great family of ball games has its unique offspring among basque ball games ,  known generically as pilota  -lrb-  spanish: `` pelota ''  -rrb-  . 
it consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of chihuahua and durango . 
basque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of spain and france ,  in australia ,  in many parts of latin america ,  and in the united states ,  especially in nevada ,  idaho ,  and california . 
combined with the issue of lingering pagan beliefs ,  this enraged the leaders of the spanish inquisition ,  perhaps leading to one of the largest witch hunts in the basque town of logroño in 1610 '' . 
these basques in california are grouped in the group known as `` californios '' . 
spain has ,  at most points in its history ,  granted some degree of linguistic ,  cultural ,  and even political autonomy to its basques ,  but under the regime of francisco franco ,  the spanish government reversed the advances of basque nationalism ,  as it had fought in the opposite side of the spanish civil war: cultural activity in basque was limited to folkloric issues and the roman catholic church . 
in 1920, h .  g .  wells referred to the mediterranean race as the `` iberian race '' . 
attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from french officials . 
in 2012, the proportion of basques that identify themselves as roman catholic was 58.6% ,  while it is one of the most secularized communities of spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of basques were atheist . 
the kingdom of pamplona ,  a central basque realm ,  later known as navarre ,  underwent a process of feudalization and was subject to the influence of its much larger aragonese ,  castilian and french neighbours . 
arana's neologism `` euzkadi ''  -lrb-  in the regularized spelling euskadi  -rrb-  is still widely used in both basque and spanish ,  since it is now the official name of the autonomous community of the basque country . 
bayonne held a jewish community composed mainly of sephardi jews fleeing from the spanish and portuguese inquisitions . 
by the turn of the first millennium ,  the territory of vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions ,  such as soule and labourd ,  while south of the pyrenees the castile ,  pamplona and the pyrenean counties of aragon ,  sobrarbe ,  ribagorza  -lrb-  later kingdom of aragon  -rrb-  ,  and pallars emerged as the main regional entities with basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries . 
basque is also a modern language ,  and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication ,  as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts ,  styles ,  and registers . 
however ,  studies of the y-chromosome found that on their direct male lineages ,  the vast majority of modern basques have a common ancestry with other western europeans ,  namely a marked predominance of haplogroup r1b . 
 ''journals '' are recorded in the general journal daybook . 
once the accounts balance ,  the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts . 
a chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric ,  alphabetical ,  or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger . 
for every debit journal entry recorded ,  there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation . 
daily records were then transferred to a daybook or account ledger to balance the accounts and to create a permanent journal; then the waste book could be discarded ,  hence the name . 
the primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the `` cash book '' ,  which is similar to a checking account register  -lrb-  in uk: cheque account ,  current account  -rrb-  ,  except all entries are allocated among several categories of income and expense accounts . 
a `` petty cash '' book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts; it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier . 
once the posting process is complete ,  accounts kept using the `` t '' format undergo `` balancing '' ,  which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account . 
quadratic and cubic bézier curves are most common . 
truetype fonts use composite bézier curves composed of quadratic bézier curves . 
the bézier triangle is a special case of the latter . 
given distinct points p and p ,  a linear bézier curve is simply a straight line between those two points . 
in vector graphics ,  bézier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely . 
bézier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves . 
in mathematics ,  especially functional analysis ,  a banach algebra ,  named after stefan banach ,  is an associative algebra `` a '' over the real or complex numbers  -lrb-  or over a non-archimedean complete normed field  -rrb-  that at the same time is also a banach space ,  i . e . 
pasternak stayed in russia . 
as a novelist ,  pasternak is also known as the author of `` doctor zhivago ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  a novel which takes place between the russian revolution of 1905 and the second world war . 
commonly ,  a binomial coefficient is indexed by a pair of integers and is written formula_1 it is the coefficient of the term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power  ,  and it is given by the formula
in october 1989, holbrook began his second strip ,  `` safe havens '' ,  and his third strip ,  `` kevin and kell '' was launched in september 1995.
in 2010, characters from `` on the fastrack '' and `` safe havens '' began appearing in both strips . 
evil dead ''  -lrb-  2015–18 -rrb- . 
 '' ,  elaborating that the only future for `` evil dead '' is unrestricted distribution via a premium cable network ,  as `` ash vs evil dead '' is on starz . 
campbell produced the remake of `` the evil dead '' ,  along with raimi and rob tapert . 
he has appeared in many of raimi's films outside of the `` evil dead '' series ,  notably having cameos in the director's `` spider-man '' film series . 
he can also be seen as the role of the father in `` the escort ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- . 
a few years later ,  campbell and raimi got together with family and friends and began work on `` the evil dead '' . 
 ''ash vs evil dead '' began airing on starz on october 31, 2015, and was renewed by the cable channel for second and third seasons . 
in january 2010, he stated in an interview that his new film project is called `` bruce vs . 
campbell and raimi collaborated on a 30-minute super 8 version of the first `` evil dead '' film ,  titled `` within the woods '' ,  which was initially used to attract investors . 
campbell also joined the cast in raimi's `` darkman '' and `` the quick and the dead '' ,  though having no actual screen time in the latter film's theatrical cut . 
it then received distribution in the united states ,  spawning two sequels: `` evil dead ii '' and `` army of darkness '' . 
campbell often takes on quirky roles ,  such as elvis presley in the film `` bubba ho-tep '' . 
the heir apparent is the present holder's son the hon hector morys napier bruce  -lrb-  b . 
in south korea ,  boy bands have been commercially successful . 
some such bands form on their own . 
backstreet boys and nsync became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s until the early 2000s ,  and backstreet boys went on to tie the jackson 5 as the best-selling boy bands in history with over 100 million records sold . 
since the 2000s ,  groups such as backstreet boys and lfo have disliked the term `` boy band '' and have preferred to be known as a `` male vocal group '' . 
other big boy bands in britain during the late 1980s were big fun and brother beyond . 
although the term `` boy band '' was not commonly used yet ,  the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the jackson 5 and the osmonds which helped form the template for boy bands . 
american christian boy band plus one also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time . 
although most boy bands consist of r&b or pop influences ,  other music genres ,  most notably country music and folk music ,  are also represented . 
arguably the most successful boy band manager from the u . s .  was lou pearlman ,  who founded commercially successful acts such as the backstreet boys in 1993, nsync and lfo in 1995, o-town in 2000, and us5 in 2005.
the term boy band was not established until the late 1980s as before that they were called male vocal groups or `` hep harmony singing groups '' . 
the earliest forerunner of boy band music began in the late 19th century as a cappella barbershop quartets . 
this late 1990s marked the height of boy band popularity in north america ,  which hasn't been seen since . 
at the height of boy band popularity in north america ,  mtv created their own parody boyband ,  2gether . 
in the early 2010s ,  there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained ,  with the emergence of new boy bands like big time rush ,  the wanted ,  and one direction and the formation of supergroup nkotbsb which comprised members of new kids on the block and backstreet boys . 
in computer science ,  a b-tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that maintains sorted data and allows searches ,  sequential access ,  insertions ,  and deletions in logarithmic time . 
