arkansas  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a state in the southern region of the united states ,  home to over 3 million people as of 2017.
americans of english stock are found throughout the state . 
in 2007, the state legislature passed a non-binding resolution declaring that the possessive form of the state's name is `` arkansas's '' ,  which has been followed increasingly by the state government . 
as of 2014, arkansas was the most affordable u . s .  state to live in . 
citizens of the state of kansas often pronounce the arkansas river as  ,  in a manner similar to the common pronunciation of the name of their state . 
the largest city in the state's southeastern part is pine bluff . 
on may 6, a state convention voted to terminate arkansas's membership in the union and join the confederate states of america . 
european americans have a strong presence in the northwestern ozarks and the central part of the state . 
the territory of arkansas was admitted to the union as the 25th state on june 15, 1836.
after reconstruction ,  the state began to receive more immigrants and migrants . 
arkansas is the 29th largest by area and the 33rd most populous of the 50 united states . 
the state has eight cities with populations above 50,000  -lrb-  based on 2010 census  -rrb-  . 
in 1881, the arkansas state legislature enacted a bill that adopted an official pronunciation of the state's name ,  to combat a controversy then simmering . 
about 0.8% of the state's population spoke an asian language ,  and 0.2% spoke other languages . 
arkansas held a very important position for the rebels ,  maintaining control of the mississippi river and surrounding southern states . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of arkansas was 2,978,204 on july 1, 2015, a 2.14% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
arkansas ,  like most other southern states ,  is part of the bible belt and is predominantly protestant . 
bill clinton ,  the 42nd president of the united states ,  was born in hope . 
the state was a democratic one-party state for decades ,  until after passage of the federal civil rights act of 1964 and voting rights act of 1965 to enforce constitutional rights . 
arkansas struggled with taxation to support its new state government ,  a problem made worse by a state banking scandal and worse yet by the panic of 1837.
today ,  the little rock–north little rock–conway metropolitan area is the largest in the state ,  with a population of 724,385 in 2013.
two star systems have been found to have planets . 
lacaille gave twelve stars bayer designations ,  labelling them alpha through to kappa ,  including two stars next to each other as delta and another two stars near each other as kappa . 
the five brightest stars are all reddish in hue . 
the fifth-brightest star is zeta apodis at magnitude 4.8, a star that has swollen and cooled to become an orange giant of spectral type k1iii ,  with a surface temperature of 4649 k and a luminosity 133 times that of the sun . 
eta apodis is a white main sequence star located 140.8 ± 0.9 light-years distant . 
the abadan institute of technology was established in abadan in 1939.
there is an international airport in abadan . 
abadan  -lrb-   `` ābādān '' ,    -rrb-  is a city and capital of abadan county ,  khuzestan province which is located in the southwest of iran . 
to honour the 100th anniversary of the refining of oil in abadan ,  city officials are planning an oil museum . 
after total nationalization ,  iran focused on supplying oil domestically and built a pipeline from abadan to tehran . 
after the war ,  the biggest concern was the rebuilding of abadan's oil refinery ,  as it was operating at 10% of capacity due to damage . 
abadan is thought to have been further developed into a major port city under the abbasids' rule . 
but sir henry harris said in 1998: `` without fleming ,  no chain; without chain ,  no florey; without florey ,  no heatley; without heatley ,  no penicillin . `` 
by d-day in 1944, enough penicillin had been produced to treat all the wounded in the allied forces . 
fleming's discovery of penicillin changed the world of modern medicine by introducing the age of useful antibiotics; penicillin has saved ,  and is still saving ,  millions of people around the world . 
the laboratory at st mary's hospital where fleming discovered penicillin is home to the fleming museum ,  a popular london attraction . 
fleming was the first to push these studies further by isolating the penicillin ,  and by being motivated enough to promote his discovery at a larger scale . 
fleming also discovered very early that bacteria developed antibiotic resistance whenever too little penicillin was used or when it was used for too short a period . 
fleming's accidental discovery and isolation of penicillin in september 1928 marks the start of modern antibiotics . 
norman heatley suggested transferring the active ingredient of penicillin back into water by changing its acidity . 
the laboratory in which fleming discovered and tested penicillin is preserved as the alexander fleming laboratory museum in st .  mary's hospital ,  paddington . 
his steel enterprises were bought out for $303,450,000.
this project was an important proof-of-concept for steel technology ,  which marked the opening of a new steel market . 
scott also helped him with his first investments . 
carnegie made his fortune in the steel industry ,  controlling the most extensive integrated iron and steel operations ever owned by an individual in the united states . 
after selling carnegie steel ,  he surpassed john d .  rockefeller as the richest american for the next couple of years . 
by 1889, the u . s .  output of steel exceeded that of the uk ,  and carnegie owned a large part of it . 
steel prices dropped as a result ,  and bessemer steel was rapidly adopted for rails; however ,  it was not suitable for buildings and bridges . 
carnegie led the expansion of the american steel industry in the late 19th century and is often identified as one of the richest people  -lrb-  and richest americans  -rrb-  in history . 
carnegie combined his assets and those of his associates in 1892 with the launching of the carnegie steel company . 
throughout his later career ,  he made use of his close connections to thomson and scott ,  as he established businesses that supplied rails and bridges to the railroad ,  offering the two men a stake in his enterprises . 
carnegie had some investments in the iron industry before the war . 
the war demonstrated how integral the industries were to american success . 
non-high semivowels also occur . 
the correlation between semivowels and vowels is strong enough that cross-language differences between semivowels correspond with the differences between their related vowels . 
in articulation and often diachronically ,  palatal approximants correspond to front vowels ,  velar approximants to back vowels ,  and labialized approximants to rounded vowels . 
dutch for many speakers has a similar process that extends to mid vowels:
in addition to alternations ,  glides can be inserted to the left or the right of their corresponding vowels when they occur next to a hiatus . 
it is not often clear ,  however ,  whether such sequences involve a semivowel  -lrb-  a consonant  -rrb-  or a diphthong  -lrb-  a vowel  -rrb-  ,  and in many cases ,  it may not be a meaningful distinction . 
the astronomer royal was director of the royal observatory greenwich from the establishment of the post in 1675 until 1972.
astronomer royal is a senior post in the royal households of the united kingdom . 
christianity's idea of `` eternal life '' comes from the word for life ,  `` zoe '' ,  and a form of `` aeon '' ,  which could mean life in the next aeon ,  the kingdom of god ,  or heaven ,  just as much as immortality ,  as in  . 
the bible translation is a treatment of the hebrew word `` olam '' and the greek word `` aion '' . 
according to the christian doctrine of universal reconciliation ,  the greek new testament scriptures use the word `` aeon '' to mean a long period  -lrb-  perhaps 1000 years  -rrb-  and the word `` aeonian '' to mean `` during a long period ''; thus there was a time before the aeons ,  and the aeonian period is finite . 
for `` age '' is present in words such as `` longevity '' and `` mediaeval '' . 
 ''an aeon is a manifestation ,  in the causal ,  of a particular type of acausal energy . 
aeon can also refer to the four aeons on the geologic time scale that make up the earth's history ,  the hadean ,  archean ,  proterozoic ,  and the current aeon phanerozoic . 
in 1920, they were returned to the royal air force . 
the air travel market has evolved rapidly over recent years in latin america . 
the demand for air transport will be less elastic for longer flights than for shorter flights ,  and more elastic for leisure travel than for business travel . 
domestic air transport grew in china at 15.5 percent annually from 2001 to 2006.
two french airlines also merged to form air union on 1 january 1923.
air service was seen as a supplement to rail service in the american transportation network . 
an airline is a company that provides air transport services for traveling passengers and freight . 
in the soviet union ,  the chief administration of the civil air fleet was established in 1921.
korean air was one of the first airlines to be launched among the other asian countries in 1946 along with asiana airlines ,  which later joined in 1988.
congress passed the air transportation safety and system stabilization act  -lrb-  p . l . 
india was also one of the first countries to embrace civil aviation . 
tata airlines was also one of the world's first major airlines which began its operations without any support from the government . 
this was the first time an airline flew across an ocean . 
in 1933, aéropostale went bankrupt ,  was nationalized and merged into air france . 
delag ,  `` deutsche luftschiffahrts-aktiengesellschaft i '' was the world's first airline . 
carriers often accomplish this by dividing each cabin of the aircraft  -lrb-  first ,  business and economy  -rrb-  into a number of travel classes for pricing purposes . 
both airlines later entered the skyteam alliance after the fusion of klm and air france in 2004.
each operator of a scheduled or charter flight uses an airline call sign when communicating with airports or air traffic control centres . 
during the era of decolonization ,  newly born asian countries started to embrace air transport . 
world war ii ,  like world war i ,  brought new life to the airline industry . 
despite continuing efficiency improvements from the major aircraft manufacturers ,  the expanding demand for global air travel has resulted in growing greenhouse gas  -lrb-  ghg  -rrb-  emissions . 
the three largest major carriers and southwest airlines control 70% of the u . s .  passenger market . 
the dutch airline klm made its first flight in 1920, and is the oldest continuously operating airline in the world . 
in many ways ,  the biggest winner in the deregulated environment was the air passenger . 
historically ,  air travel has survived largely through state support ,  whether in the form of equity or subsidies . 
there are projects on electric aircraft ,  and some of them are fully operational as of 2013.
the first flight was between helsinki and tallinn ,  capital of estonia ,  and it took place on march 20, 1924, one week later . 
this later merged with four other french airlines to become air france ,  the country's flagship carrier to this day ,  on 7 october 1933.
operating costs for us major airlines are primarily aircraft operating expense including jet fuel ,  aircraft maintenance ,  depreciation and aircrew for 44% ,  servicing expense for 29%  -lrb-  traffic 11% ,  passenger 11% and aircraft 7%  -rrb-  ,  14% for reservations and sales and 13% for overheads  -lrb-  administration 6% and advertising 2%  -rrb-  . 
some of the carriers that won these routes would ,  through time and mergers ,  evolve into pan am ,  delta air lines ,  braniff airways ,  american airlines ,  united airlines  -lrb-  originally a division of boeing  -rrb-  ,  trans world airlines ,  northwest airlines ,  and eastern air lines . 
in 2016, air transport generated $704.4 billion of revenue in 2016, employed 10.2 million workers ,  supported 65.5 million jobs and $2.7 trillion of economic activity: 3.6% of the global gdp . 
for the iata ,  the global airline industry revenue was $754 billion in 2017 for a $38.4 billion collective profit ,  and should rise by 10.7% to $834 billion in 2018 for a $33.8 billion profit forecast ,  down by 12% due to rising jet fuel and labor costs . 
pan am and northwest airways  -lrb-  which began flights to canada in the 1920s  -rrb-  were the only u . s .  airlines to go international before the 1940s . 
often the companies combine it operations ,  or purchase fuel and aircraft as a bloc to achieve higher bargaining power . 
some industry estimates indicate that over 2,000 new aircraft will begin service over the next five years in this region . 
the solution would be blending algae fuels with existing jet fuel:
this trend continued until the beginning of world war ii . 
in return ,  the airline was granted status to operate international services from india as the designated flag carrier under the name air india international . 
between 2000 and 2005 us airlines lost $30 billion with wage cuts of over $15 billion and 100,000 employees laid off . 
ultimately ,  the federal government provided $4.6 billion in one-time ,  subject-to-income-tax cash payments to 427 u . s .  air carriers ,  with no provision for repayment ,  essentially a gift from the taxpayers . 
the airline was a pioneer in surveying and opening up air routes across the world to serve far-flung parts of the british empire and to enhance trade and integration . 
the 2002 south australian state election was the last time an australian democrat would be elected to an australian parliament . 
in later years ,  she campaigned for the australian greens . 
on 18 march 2006, at the 2006 south australian state election ,  the australian democrats were reduced to 1.7 per cent of the legislative council  -lrb-  upper house  -rrb-  vote . 
on 28 august 2006, the founder of the australian democrats ,  don chipp ,  died . 
the australian democrats was a centrist political party which held many seats in the australian senate and several state and territory legislatures between 1977 and 2008.
the democrats did not nominate a single candidate in the 2014 south australian election ,  in the party's state of origin . 
support for the australian democrats fell significantly at the 2004 federal election in which they achieved only 2.4 per cent of the national vote . 
the australian democrats were formed in may 1977 from an amalgamation of the australia party and the new liberal movement . 
the australian democrats were the first representatives of green politics at the federal level in australia . 
over three decades ,  the australian democrats achieved representation in the legislatures of the act ,  south australia ,  new south wales ,  western australia and tasmania as well as senate seats in all six states . 
in october 1997, party leader cheryl kernot resigned ,  announcing that she would be joining the australian labor party . 
in 1977 the australian democrats secured two seats in the senate with the election of colin mason  -lrb-  nsw  -rrb-  and don chipp  -lrb-  vic  -rrb-  . 
the australian democrats said they would appeal the aec decision ,  which under the legislation is reviewable . 
in early july ,  richard pascoe ,  national and south australian party president ,  resigned ,  citing slumping opinion polls and the poor result in the 2006 south australian election as well as south australian parliamentary leader sandra kanck's comments regarding the drug mdma which he saw as damaging to the party . 
after the election ,  south australian senator natasha stott despoja denied rumours that she was considering quitting the party . 
later ,  in 2009, jaensch suggested it was possible the democrats could make a political comeback at the 2010 south australian state election ,  but this did not occur . 
in the new south wales state election of march 2007, the australian democrats lost their last remaining nsw upper house representative ,  arthur chesterfield-evans . 
on 16 april 2015, the australian electoral commission deregistered the australian democrats as a political party for failure to demonstrate the requisite 500 members to maintain registration . 
in south australia ,  the new liberal movement dissolved and merged with the democrats ,  making its sole parliamentary representative ,  robin millhouse ,  the democrats' first member of the south australian parliament . 
on 29 january 2004, after seeking medical treatment ,  bartlett returned to the australian democrats leadership ,  vowing to abstain from alcohol . 
it is likely that such a merger ,  if successful ,  would produce a new party with separate objectives and characteristics from those of the former australian democrats . 
the australian government provides a current seven-day weather forecast for act . 
it contains canberra ,  the capital city of australia . 
the highest maximum temperature recorded in the act was at acton on 11 january 1939.
the oldest rocks in the act date from the ordovician around 480 million years ago . 
the act is bounded by the goulburn-cooma railway line in the east ,  the watershed of naas creek in the south ,  the watershed of the cotter river in the west ,  and the watershed of the molonglo river in the north-east . 
the act has internal self-government ,  but australia's constitution does not afford the territory government the full legislative independence provided to australian states . 
one unit of alcohol  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  is defined as 10 millilitres  -lrb-  8 grams  -rrb-  of pure alcohol . 
units of alcohol are used in the united kingdom  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  as a measure to quantify the actual alcoholic content within a given volume of an alcoholic beverage ,  in order to provide guidance on total alcohol consumption . 
 ''ally mcbeal '' was a heavily music-oriented show . 
fox cancelled ally mcbeal after five seasons . 
the triangle among the three forms the basis for the main plot for the show's first three seasons . 
due to the popularity of the show and shepard's music ,  a soundtrack titled `` songs from ally mcbeal '' was released in 1998, as well as a successor soundtrack titled `` heart and soul: new songs from ally mcbeal '' in 1999.
seasons 3, 4, and 5 were all released on october 5, 2010.
in australia ,  `` ally mcbeal '' was aired by the seven network from 1997 to 2002.
in episode 2, season 3 of the british comedy `` the adam and joe show '' ,  the show was parodied as `` ally mcsqeal '' using soft toys . 
the background score for the show was composed by danny lux . 
in 2007, `` ally mcbeal '' placed #48 on `` entertainment weekly '' 2007 `` new tv classics '' list . 
 ''de amore '' is made up of three books . 
book three is made of stories from actual courts of love presided over by noble women . 
 ''de amore '' was written at the request of marie de champagne ,  daughter of king louis vii of france and of eleanor of aquitaine . 
over the period from 2011 to 2014 the aclu foundation ,  on the average ,  has accounted for roughly 70% of the combined budget ,  and the aclu roughly 30% . 
the aclu solicits donations to its charitable foundation . 
aclu affiliates are the basic unit of the aclu's organization and engage in litigation ,  lobbying ,  and public education . 
fundraising and membership spiked after the 2016 election; the aclu's current membership is more than 1.2 million . 
by 1964, membership had risen to 80,000, and the aclu participated in efforts to expand civil liberties . 
the leadership of the aclu does not always agree on policy decisions; differences of opinion within the aclu leadership have sometimes grown into major debates . 
adobe's first products after postscript were digital fonts ,  which they released in a proprietary format called type 1.
it has also major development operations in noida and bangalore in india
the company was started in john warnock's garage . 
pdf is now an international standard: iso 32000-1:2008.
adobe's corporate logo features a stylized `` a '' and was designed by marva warnock ,  graphic designer and john warnock's wife . 
 ,  adobe has about 19,000 employees worldwide ,  about 40% of whom work in san jose . 
in 1989, adobe introduced what was to become its flagship product ,  a graphics editing program for the macintosh called photoshop . 
in 2002, adobe acquired canadian company accelio  -lrb-  also known as jetform  -rrb-  . 
by 1987, postscript had become the industry-standard printer language with more than 400 third-party software programs and licensing agreements with 19 printer companies . 
it is best known for its photoshop image editing software; acrobat reader; the portable document format  -lrb-  pdf  -rrb- ; and adobe creative suite ,  as well as its successor ,  adobe creative cloud . 
for example ,  the 2007 fiscal year ended on november 30, 2007.
this specialized hands-on skill also allows alexander teachers to bring about a balanced working of the student's supportive musculature as it relates to gravity's downward pull from moment to moment . 
huxley's work `` the art of seeing '' also discusses his views on the technique . 
the hands-on skill requires alexander teachers to maintain in themselves from moment-to-moment their own improved psycho-physical co-ordination that the teacher is communicating to the student . 
actions such as sitting ,  squatting ,  lunging or walking are often selected by the teacher . 
he saw the technique as a mental training technique as well . 
since alexander's work in the field came at the start of the 20th century ,  his ideas influenced many originators in the field of mind-body improvement . 
andrea alciato  -lrb-  8 may 149212 january 1550 -rrb- ,  commonly known as alciati  -lrb-  andreas alciatus  -rrb-  ,  was an italian jurist and writer . 
alciati was born in alzate brianza ,  near milan ,  and settled in france in the early 16th century . 
in 1856, norman robert pogson formalized the system by defining a first magnitude star as a star that is 100 times as bright as a sixth-magnitude star ,  thereby establishing the logarithmic scale still in use today . 
astronomers have developed other photometric zeropoint systems as alternatives to the vega system . 
this rather crude scale for the brightness of stars was popularized by ptolemy in his `` almagest '' and is generally believed to have originated with hipparchus . 
astronomers later discovered that polaris is slightly variable ,  so they switched to vega as the standard reference star ,  assigning the brightness of vega as the definition of zero magnitude at any specified wavelength . 
as bright as about 60,000 stars of magnitude −10 -rrb- . 
to compare the magnitudes of very distant objects with those of local objects ,  a k correction might have to be applied to the magnitudes of the distant objects . 
an object's absolute bolometric magnitude represents its total luminosity over all wavelengths ,  rather than in a single filter band ,  as expressed on a logarithmic magnitude scale . 
absolute magnitudes are denoted by a capital m ,  with a subscript representing the filter band used for measurement ,  such as m for absolute magnitude in the v band . 
the greek astronomer hipparchus established a numerical scale to describe the brightness of each star appearing in the sky . 
the first successful manned apollo mission was flown by apollo 1's backup crew on apollo 7 in october 1968.
after the fire ,  the apollo program was grounded for review and redesign . 
several fires in high-oxygen test environments had occurred before the apollo fire . 
dr .  mueller considered as-201 and as-202, the first and second flights of the apollo block i csm ,  as apollo 2 and 3 respectively . 
apollo 1, initially designated as-204, was the first crewed mission of the united states apollo program ,  the program to land the first men on the moon . 
the apollo 1 command module has never been on public display . 
as-204 was to be the first manned test flight of the apollo command and service module  -lrb-  csm  -rrb-  to earth orbit ,  launched on a saturn ib rocket . 
after the apollo 1 fire ,  launch complex 34 was subsequently used only for the launch of apollo 7 and later dismantled down to the concrete launch pedestal ,  which remains at the site  -lrb-    -rrb-  along with a few other concrete and steel-reinforced structures . 
grissom's crew received approval in june 1966 to design a mission patch with the name `` apollo 1 '' . 
the name `` apollo 1 '' ,  chosen by the crew ,  was officially retired by nasa in commemoration of them on april 24, 1967.
television cameras were carried aboard all manned apollo missions . 
a second unmanned saturn v as-502 flew as apollo 6 in april 1968, and grissom's backup crew of wally schirra ,  don eisele ,  and walter cunningham ,  finally flew the orbital test mission as apollo 7  -lrb-  as-205 -rrb- ,  in a block ii csm in october 1968.
manned apollo flights were suspended for 20 months while the command module's hazards were addressed . 
nasa planned to follow this with an unmanned test flight of the lm  -lrb-  as-206 -rrb- ,  then the third manned mission would be a dual flight designated as-278  -lrb-  or as-207/208 -rrb- ,  in which as-207 would launch the first manned block ii csm ,  which would then rendezvous and dock with the lm launched unmanned on as-208.
on january 27, 2017, the 50th anniversary of the fire ,  nasa put the hatch from apollo 1 on display alongside the remains of `` challenger '' and `` columbia '' . 
the astronauts' widows asked that `` apollo 1 '' be reserved for the flight their husbands never made ,  and on april 24, 1967, associate administrator for manned space flight ,  dr .  george e .  mueller ,  announced this change officially: as-204 would be recorded as apollo 1, `` first manned apollo saturn flight – failed on ground test '' . 
in march ,  nasa was studying the possibility of flying the first apollo mission as a joint space rendezvous with the final project gemini mission ,  gemini 12 in november 1966.
it was decided that remaining block i spacecraft would be used only for unmanned saturn v test flights . 
director of flight crew operations deke slayton selected the first apollo crew in january 1966, with grissom as command pilot ,  white as senior pilot ,  and rookie donn f .  eisele as pilot . 
the apollo command and service module was much bigger and far more complex than any previously implemented spacecraft design . 
on may 11, webb issued a statement defending nasa's november 1961 selection of north american as the prime contractor for apollo . 
immediately after the fire ,  nasa convened the `` apollo 204 accident review board '' to determine the cause of the fire ,  and both houses of the united states congress conducted their own committee inquiries to oversee nasa's investigation . 
incidents had also occurred in the soviet space program ,  but due to the government's policy of secrecy ,  these were not disclosed until well after the apollo 1 fire . 
the widows of the apollo 1 crew sent condolence letters to bartley and harmon's families . 
the next day ,  north american's chief engineer for apollo ,  george jeffs ,  also left . 
cm-012 arrived at the kennedy space center on august 26, labeled `` apollo one '' by naa on its packaging . 
apollo 10 was the fourth manned mission in the united states apollo space program ,  and the second  -lrb-  after apollo 8 -rrb- to orbit the moon . 
apollo 12 was the sixth manned flight in the united states apollo program and the second to land on the moon . 
shepard was the oldest u . s .  astronaut when he made his trip aboard apollo 14.
apollo 14 was the eighth manned mission in the united states apollo program ,  and the third to land on the moon . 
shepard and mitchell made their lunar landing on february 5 in the fra mauro formation – originally the target of the aborted apollo 13 mission . 
the 398.36-second burn took place at 078:31:46.7 into the mission at an altitude of above the moon ,  and placed apollo 15 in an elliptical lunar orbit of  . 
apollo 15 saw the first use of the lunar roving vehicle . 
both worden and irwin were selected in the fifth group of astronauts  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  and apollo 15 would be their only spaceflight . 
apollo 15 became the first of three extended missions ,  known as j missions ,  and the landing site was moved to hadley rille ,  originally planned for apollo 19.
apollo 15 was the ninth manned mission in the united states' apollo program ,  the eighth to be successful ,  and the fourth to land on the moon . 
schmitt would be the first member of group 4 to fly in space; he was the only astronaut from that group to make it to the moon ,  with apollo 17.
the apollo 15 particles and fields subsatellite  -lrb-  pfs-1 -rrb- was a small satellite released into lunar orbit from the sim bay just before the mission left orbit to return to earth . 
the apollo 15 astronauts wore redesigned space suits . 
the booster's impact was detected by the seismometers left on the moon by apollo 12 and apollo 14, providing useful scientific data . 
at 000:11:36 into the mission ,  the s-ivb engine shut down ,  leaving apollo 15 in its planned parking orbit in low earth orbit . 
the apollo 15 mission patch carries air force motifs ,  a nod to the crew's service there ,  just as the apollo 12 all-navy crew's patch had featured a sailing ship . 
by the time scott and irwin were ready to take off from the lunar surface and return to `` endeavor '' ,  the csm's orbit had drifted due to the rotation of the moon ,  and a plane change burn was required to ensure that the csm's orbit would be in the same plane as that of the lm once it took off from the moon . 
 ''falcon '' lifted off the moon at 17:11:22 gmt on august 2 after 66 hours and 55 minutes on the lunar surface . 
none of the support crew would fly during the apollo program ,  waiting until the space shuttle program to go into space . 
the lunar roving vehicle could be folded into a space 5 ft by 20 in  -lrb-  1.5 m by 0.5 m  -rrb-  . 
on apollo 11 and 12, the lunar module decoupled from the csm and descended to a much lower orbit from which the lunar landing attempt commenced; to save fuel in an increasingly heavy lander ,  beginning with apollo 14, the sps in the service module made that burn ,  known as descent orbit insertion  -lrb-  doi  -rrb-  ,  with the lunar module still attached to the csm . 
later on in the day ,  the crew set a record for the longest apollo flight to that point . 
in 1962, nasa contracted for fifteen saturn v rockets to achieve the apollo program's goal of a manned landing on the moon by 1970; at the time no one knew how many missions this would require . 
after the problem was solved ,  the crew began preparation for the first moon walk . 
after pressurizing the lm cabin ,  the crew began preparing to return to lunar orbit . 
at the end of day two ,  apollo 16 was about away from earth . 
apollo 16 was the second of the apollo type j missions ,  featuring the use of the lunar roving vehicle ,  increased scientific capability ,  and lunar surface stays of three days . 
he served on the support crew of apollo 10 and was a capsule communicator  -lrb-  capcom  -rrb-  for apollo 11.
it was decided to target the apollo 16 mission for the descartes site . 
apollo 16 was the tenth manned mission in the united states apollo space program ,  the fifth and penultimate to land on the moon and the first to land in the lunar highlands . 
after waking up on flight day four ,  the crew began preparations for the maneuver that would brake the spacecraft into orbit around the moon ,  or lunar orbit insertion . 
and on may 29, 1972—only 35 days and 425 orbits after its release ''—pfs-2 crashed into the lunar surface . 
after transfers were completed ,  the crew would sleep before jettisoning the empty lunar module ascent stage the next day ,  when it was to be crashed intentionally into the lunar surface . 
mattingly had originally been assigned to the prime crew of apollo 13, but was exposed to rubella through duke ,  at that time on the back-up crew for apollo 13, who had caught it from one of his children . 
there also remained the distinct possibility that this objective had already been satisfied by the apollo 14 and apollo 15 missions ,  as the apollo 14 samples had not yet been completely analyzed and samples from apollo 15 had not yet been obtained . 
although previous apollo expeditions ,  including apollo 14 and apollo 15, obtained samples of pre-mare lunar material ,  before lava began to upwell from the moon's interior and flood the low areas and basins ,  none had actually visited the lunar highlands . 
the apollo 16 mission launched from the kennedy space center in florida at 12:54 pm est on april 16, 1972.
flight day seven was their third and final day on the lunar surface ,  returning to orbit to rejoin mattingly in the csm following the day's moonwalk . 
at the beginning of day three ,  the spacecraft was about away from the earth . 
apollo 17 was the third mission  -lrb-  the others being apollo 15 and apollo 16 -rrb- to make use of a lunar roving vehicle . 
apollo 17 was the only apollo lunar landing mission to carry the traverse gravimeter experiment  -lrb-  tge  -rrb-  . 
like apollo 15 and apollo 16, apollo 17 was slated to be a `` j-mission , ``  an apollo mission type that featured lunar surface stays of three days ,  higher scientific capability ,  and the usage of the lunar roving vehicle . 
apollo 17 was the final mission of nasa's apollo program and the last mission in which humans traveled to and walked on the moon . 
subsequent to the decision to assign schmitt to apollo 17, there remained the question of which crew  -lrb-  the full backup crew of apollo 15, dick gordon ,  vance brand ,  and schmitt ,  or the backup crew of apollo 14 -rrb- would become prime crew of the mission . 
the apollo 15 prime crew received the backup assignment since this was to be the last lunar mission and the backup crew would not rotate to another mission . 
director of flight crew operations deke slayton removed them from flight status and replaced them with young and duke from the apollo 16 prime crew and roosa from the apollo 14 prime and apollo 16 backup crews . 
nasa director of flight crew operations deke slayton ultimately assigned the backup crew of apollo 14  -lrb-  cernan and evans  -rrb-  ,  along with schmitt ,  to the prime crew of apollo 17.
throughout the apollo lunar missions ,  the crew members observed light flashes that penetrated closed eyelids . 
the apollo 17 crew conducted an experiment ,  also conducted on apollo 16, with the objective of linking these light flashes with cosmic rays . 
apollo 17 was the last manned saturn v launch and the only night launch . 
on december 12, at 6:28 pm est ,  cernan and schmitt began their second lunar excursion . 
the ascent stage was then deliberately crashed into the moon in a collision recorded by seismometers deployed on apollo 17 and previous apollo expeditions . 
the third moonwalk ,  the last of the apollo program ,  began at 5:26 pm est on december 13.
apollo 17 was the only lunar surface expedition to include the surface electrical properties  -lrb-  sep  -rrb-  experiment . 
although the valley is similar to the landing site of apollo 15 in that it is on the border of a lunar mare ,  the advantages of taurus-littrow were believed to outweigh the drawbacks ,  thus leading to its selection as the apollo 17 landing site . 
launched at 12:33 a . m .  eastern standard time  -lrb-  est  -rrb-  on december 7, 1972, with a crew made up of commander eugene cernan ,  command module pilot ronald evans ,  and lunar module pilot harrison schmitt ,  it was the last use of apollo hardware for its original purpose; after apollo 17, extra apollo spacecraft were used in the skylab and apollo–soyuz programs . 
unofficially ,  according to cernan ,  the apollo 17 crew dubbed them `` fe '' ,  `` fi '' ,  `` fo '' ,  `` fum '' and `` phooey '' . 
eugene cernan ,  ronald evans ,  and former x-15 pilot joe engle were assigned to the backup crew of apollo 14.
in 1777, the british sent burgoyne's invasion force from canada south to new york to seal off new england . 
they defeated the british in the american revolutionary war  -lrb-  1775–1783 -rrb- in alliance with france and others . 
washington forced the british out of boston in the spring of 1776, and neither the british nor the loyalists controlled any significant areas . 
the british army under cornwallis marched to yorktown ,  virginia where they expected to be rescued by a british fleet . 
the british also took new jersey ,  pushing the continental army into pennsylvania . 
the british largely abandoned the indian allies living in the new nation . 
the revolution also resulted in the migration of around 60,000 loyalists to other british territories ,  especially british north america  -lrb-  canada  -rrb-  . 
during the war ,  slaves escaped from new england and the mid-atlantic area to british-occupied cities such as new york . 
britain's war against the americans ,  french ,  and spanish cost about £100 million . 
the seneca ,  onondaga ,  and cayuga of the iroquois confederacy also allied with the british against the americans . 
the british provided arms to indians who were led by loyalists in war parties to raid frontier settlements from the carolinas to new york . 
they often were linked to british families in england by marriage as well . 
most american indians rejected pleas that they remain neutral and instead supported the british crown . 
washington could not know that the british would not reopen hostilities after yorktown . 
congress called for a boycott beginning on 1 december 1774 of all british goods; it was enforced by new committees authorized by the congress . 
the capture of a british army at saratoga encouraged the french to formally enter the war in support of congress . 
british commander sir henry clinton evacuated philadelphia and returned to new york city . 
in pennsylvania ,  new jersey ,  and new hampshire ,  the resulting constitutions embodied:
the american enlightenment was a critical precursor of the american revolution . 
the war became a personal issue for the king ,  fueled by his growing belief that british leniency would be taken as weakness by the americans . 
in march 1776, the continental army forced the british to evacuate boston ,  with george washington as the commander of the new army . 
the british government responded by passing several acts which came to be known as the intolerable acts ,  which further darkened colonial opinion towards the british . 
the british were forced to withdraw troops from continental america to reinforce the valuable sugar-producing caribbean colonies ,  which were more lucrative to british investors . 
most indians did not participate directly in the war ,  except for warriors and bands associated with four of the iroquois nations in new york and pennsylvania which allied with the british . 
the colonists ,  however ,  accused the british of encouraging slave revolts . 
the continental army forced the redcoats out of boston in march 1776, but that summer the british captured and held new york city and its strategic harbor for the duration of the war . 
loyalists who left the south in 1783 took thousands of their slaves with them to be slaves in the british west indies . 
this contributed to the development of a unique identity ,  separate from that of the british people . 
colonists emphasized their determination by boycotting imports of british merchandise . 
that goal was one of the causes of the war of 1812.
the consensus of scholars is that about 15–20% of the white population remained loyal to the british crown . 
on march 5, 1770, a large crowd gathered around a group of british soldiers . 
at the peace conference following the war ,  the british ceded lands which they did not really control ,  and did not consult their indian allies . 
the declaration also referred to the `` laws of nature and of nature's god '' as justification for the americans' separation from the british monarchy . 
support for the conflict had never been strong in britain ,  where many sympathized with the americans ,  but now it reached a new low . 
those who fought for independence were called `` patriots '' ,  `` whigs '' ,  `` congress-men '' ,  or `` americans '' during and after the war . 
the british resettled them in ontario ,  providing land grants as compensation for some of their losses . 
the oneida and tuscarora among the iroquois of central and western new york supported the american cause . 
american women were integral to the success of the boycott of british goods ,  as the boycotted items were largely household items such as tea and cloth . 
the british set up a network of forts inland ,  hoping that the loyalists would rally to the flag . 
beginning in late december 1778, the british captured savannah and controlled the georgia coastline . 
americans such as james otis maintained that the americans were not in fact virtually represented . 
states such as new jersey and new york adopted gradual emancipation ,  which kept some people as slaves for more than two decades longer . 
following that victory ,  the british requested a meeting with representatives from congress to negotiate an end to hostilities . 
losing the war and the thirteen colonies was a shock to britain . 
the american revolution has a central place in the american memory as the story of the nation's founding . 
in october 1781, the british surrendered their second invading army of the war ,  under a siege by the combined french and continental armies commanded by washington . 
the american revolution was the first wave of the atlantic revolutions: the french revolution ,  the haitian revolution ,  and the latin american wars of independence . 
on january 5, 1776, new hampshire ratified the first state constitution . 
according to british historian jeremy black ,  the british had significant advantages ,  including a highly trained army ,  the world's largest navy ,  and a highly efficient system of public finance that could easily fund the war . 
ellis concludes that ,  once the howe brothers failed ,  the opportunity for a british victory `` would never come again . `` 
it would be three decades until war resumed again with the war of 1812, which firmly established the permanence of the united states . 
the signers of the declaration of independence were mostly well-educated ,  of british stock ,  and of the protestant faith . 
in this play ,  ayckbourn himself played the character jerry watiss . 
ayckbourn was born in hampstead ,  london . 
although ayckbourn is best known as a writer ,  it is said that he only spends 10% of his time writing plays . 
in 1957, ayckbourn was employed by the director stephen joseph at the library theatre ,  scarborough ,  the predecessor to the modern stephen joseph theatre . 
one side-effect of the timing is that ,  as ayckbourn was awarded a knighthood a few months before the divorce ,  both his first and second wife were entitled to take the title of lady ayckbourn . 
ayckbourn ,  however ,  continues to write and direct his own work at the theatre . 
it could be that ayckbourn had written plays with himself and his own issues in mind ,  but as ayckbourn is portrayed as a guarded and private man ,  it is hard to imagine him exposing his own life in his plays to any great degree . 
it has been suggested that ,  after ayckbourn himself ,  the person who is used the most in his plays is his mother ,  particularly as susan in `` woman in mind ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
ayckbourn wrote his first play at wisborough lodge  -lrb-  a preparatory school in the village of wisborough green  -rrb-  when he was about 10.
in 1957, ayckbourn married christine roland ,  another member of the library theatre company ,  and indeed ayckbourn's first two plays were written jointly with her under the pseudonym of `` roland allen '' . 
ayckbourn received the cbe in 1987 and was knighted in the 1997 new year honours . 
sir alan ayckbourn ,   -lrb-  born 12 april 1939 -rrb- is a prolific british playwright and director . 
with a résumé of over seventy plays ,  of which more than forty have played at the national theatre or in the west end ,  alan ayckbourn is one of england’s most successful living playwrights . 
ayckbourn's career was briefly interrupted when he was called for national service . 
alpha centauri is a triple star system ,  with its two main stars ,  alpha centauri a and alpha centauri b ,  being a binary component . 
only one planet has been confirmed for the alpha centauri system: proxima centauri b . 
additional planets may exist in the alpha centauri system ,  either orbiting alpha centauri a or alpha centauri b individually ,  or in large orbits around alpha centauri ab . 
 ''α centauri ''  -lrb-  latinized to `` alpha centauri ''  -rrb-  is the system's bayer designation . 
alpha centauri c is about 13,000 astronomical units  -lrb-  au  -rrb-  away from alpha centauri ab . 
alpha centauri a and b have absolute magnitudes of +4.38 and +5.71, respectively . 
alpha centauri was only the second binary star to be discovered ,  preceded by alpha crucis . 
the existence of a planet ,  alpha centauri bc ,  was announced in 2013.
alpha centauri c ,  or proxima centauri ,  is a small and faint red dwarf  -lrb-  class m  -rrb-  . 
alpha centauri a and b are sun-like stars  -lrb-  class g and k  -rrb-  ,  and together they form the binary star alpha centauri ab . 
the a and b components of alpha centauri have an orbital period of 79.91 years . 
alpha centauri  -lrb-  latinized from α centauri ,  abbreviated alpha cen or α cen  -rrb-  is the closest star system to the solar system at from the sun . 
alpha centauri is listed in the 2nd-century star catalog of ptolemy . 
the observational thresholds for planet detection in the habitable zones by the radial velocity method are currently  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- estimated to be about for alpha centauri a ,  for alpha centauri b ,  and for proxima centauri . 
alpha centauri b ,  also known as toliman ,  is the `` secondary '' star of the binary system . 
in 10 august 2018, iau approved the name `` toliman '' for `` alpha centauri b '' . 
proxima centauri b is an earth-sized exoplanet in the habitable zone of proxima centauri; it was discovered in 2016.
alpha centauri a has 1.1 times the mass and 1.519 times the luminosity of the sun ,  while alpha centauri b is smaller and cooler ,  at 0.907 times the sun's mass and 0.445 times its luminosity . 
it is a triple star system ,  consisting of three stars: α centauri a  -lrb-  officially rigil kentaurus  -rrb-  ,  α centauri b  -lrb-  officially toliman  -rrb-  ,  and α centauri c  -lrb-  officially proxima centauri  -rrb-  . 
lying away ,  proxima centauri is the nearest star to the sun . 
the apparent distance between alpha centauri a and b is rapidly decreasing ,  at least until 2019.
similar high-end/low-end models would make up the amiga line for the rest of its history; follow-on designs included the amiga 3000/amiga 500 plus/amiga 600, and the amiga 4000/amiga 1200.
as a result of this and the amiga's audio and video capabilities ,  the amiga became a popular system for editing and producing both music and video . 
the first model was announced in 1985 as simply `` the amiga from commodore '' ,  later to be retroactively dubbed the amiga 1000.
later amiga clones featured powerpc processors only . 
see amiga software for more information on these applications . 
the newtek video toaster was made possible by the genlock ability of the amiga . 
these new designs were released in 1987 as the amiga 2000 and amiga 500, the latter of which went on to widespread success and became their best selling model . 
the motorola 68000 series of microprocessors was used in all amiga models from commodore . 
the amiga is a family of personal computers introduced by commodore in 1985.
the amiga was one of the first computers for which inexpensive sound sampling and video digitization accessories were available . 
ultimately the amiga line would sell an estimated 4,850,000 machines over its lifetime . 
most models  -lrb-  excluding the amiga 1000 -rrb- come equipped with kickstart on an embedded rom-chip . 
this architecture freed up the amiga's processor for other tasks and gave the amiga a performance edge over its competitors ,  particularly in terms of video-intensive applications and games . 
the quality of the amiga's sound output ,  and the fact that the hardware is ubiquitous and easily addressed by software ,  were standout features of amiga hardware unavailable on pc platforms for years . 
another of the changes was to split the amiga into two products ,  a new high-end version of the amiga aimed at the creative market ,  and a cost-reduced version that would take over for the commodore 64 in the low-end market . 
later amiga models featured higher-speed ,  full 32-bit cpus with a larger address space and instruction pipeline facilities . 
in the north american market ,  the `` newtek video toaster '' was a video effects board which turned the amiga into an affordable video processing computer which found its way into many professional video environments . 
all amiga systems can display full-screen animated graphics with 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64  -lrb-  ehb mode  -rrb-  ,  or 4096 colors  -lrb-  ham mode  -rrb-  . 
these axopods adhere to passing prey and assist with cell movement ,  as well as playing a part in cell division and cell fusion . 
these axopodia are used for prey capture ,  mobility ,  and cell fusion and division . 
reproduction in actinophryids generally takes place via fission ,  where one parent cell divides into two or more daughter cells . 
the actinophryids are an order of heliozoa . 
this process is not caused merely by contact between two individuals but can be caused by damage to the cell body . 
abel janszoon tasman  -lrb-  ; 1603 – 10 october 1659 -rrb- was a dutch seafarer ,  explorer ,  and merchant ,  best known for his voyages of 1642 and 1644 in the service of the dutch east india company  -lrb-  voc  -rrb-  . 
employed by the dutch east india company  -lrb-  voc  -rrb-  ,  tasman sailed from texel to batavia in 1633, taking the southern brouwer route . 
in august 1637, tasman was back in amsterdam ,  and the following year he signed on for another ten years and took his wife with him to batavia . 
given a subset `` u '' of a ,  can one recover the set of polynomials which generate it ? 
therefore ,  the set of the regular functions on a is a ring ,  which is denoted `` k ''a . 
a subset of a which is `` v '' -lrb-  `` s ''  -rrb-  ,  for some `` s '' ,  is called an `` algebraic set '' . 
first we start with a field `` k '' . 
in classical algebraic geometry ,  the main objects of interest are the vanishing sets of collections of polynomials ,  meaning the set of all points that simultaneously satisfy one or more polynomial equations . 
residents of austin are known as austinites . 
in 1870, blacks made up 36.5% of austin's population . 
austin also hosted the mtv series ,  ``  '' in 2005.
austin has hosted a number of other professional teams ,  including the austin spurs of the nba g league ,  the austin aztex of the united soccer league ,  the austin outlaws in wfa football ,  and the austin aces in wtt tennis . 
austin is home to more than 50 public pools and swimming holes . 
austin also hosts the out of bounds comedy festival ,  which draws comedic artists in all disciplines to austin . 
lady bird lake ,  lake austin ,  and lake travis are each on the colorado river . 
to strengthen the region's parks system ,  which spans more than  ,  the austin parks foundation  -lrb-  apf  -rrb-  was established in 1992 to develop and improve parks in and around austin . 
the university of texas at austin emerged as a major university . 
the austin metropolitan area had the third highest rate in the nation . 
all proceeds are donated to caritas of austin ,  a local charity . 
the elevation of austin varies from to approximately above sea level . 
according to sperling's bestplaces ,  52.4% of austin's population are religious . 
in september 1881, austin public schools held their first classes . 
in the 1830s ,  pioneers began to settle the area in central austin along the colorado river . 
the austin baroque orchestra and la follia austin baroque ensembles both give historically-informed performances of baroque music . 
austin has been the location for a number of motion pictures ,  partly due to the influence of the university of texas at austin department of radio-television-film . 
the fbi ranked austin as the #2 safest major city in the u . s .  for 2012.
ballet austin is the fourth largest ballet academy in the country . 
austin has a large craft beer scene ,  with over 50 microbreweries in the metro area . 
austin hosts several film festivals including sxsw film festival and austin film festival ,  which hosts international films . 
 ''u . s .  news & world report '' named austin the #1 place to live in the u . s .  for 2017 and 2018.
austin is northwest of houston ,  south of dallas and northeast of san antonio . 
austin ,  the southernmost state capital of the contiguous 48 states ,  is located in central texas . 
austin is perhaps best known for its texas barbecue and tex-mex cuisine . 
the austin public library is a public library system operated by the city of austin and consists of the central library on cesar chavez boulevard ,  the austin history center ,  20 branches and the recycled reads bookstore and upcycling facility . 
austin's largest employers include the austin independent school district ,  the city of austin ,  dell ,  the u . s .  federal government ,  nxp semiconductors ,  ibm ,  st .  david's healthcare partnership ,  seton family of hospitals ,  the state of texas ,  the texas state university ,  and the university of texas at austin . 
austin is also emerging as a hub for pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies; the city is home to about 85 of them . 
locally produced art is featured at the south austin museum of popular culture . 
austin is also home to a large number of food trucks ,  with 1,256 food trucks operating in 2016.
 ''old austin '' is an adage often used by the native citizens in austin ,  texas when being nostalgic to refer to the olden days of the capital city of texas . 
other annual events include eeyore's birthday party ,  spamarama ,  austin gay pride in august ,  the austin reggae festival in april ,  kite festival ,  texas craft brewers festival in september ,  art city austin in april ,  east austin studio tour in november ,  and carnaval brasileiro in february . 
the grid plan waller designed and surveyed now forms the basis of downtown austin . 
typical of central texas ,  severe weather in austin is a threat that can strike during any season . 
after the mid-20th century ,  austin became established as one of texas' major metropolitan centers . 
austin has been part of the unesco creative cities network under media arts the category . 
austin hosts the fuse box festival each april featuring theater artists . 
the argument from morality is an argument for the existence of god . 
some arguments from moral order suggest that morality is based on rationality and that this can only be the case if there is a moral order in the universe . 
a natural moral order requires the existence of god as orthodoxly conceived ,  so god must exist . 
all variations of the argument from morality begin with an observation about moral thought or experiences and conclude with the existence of god . 
many arguments from morality are based on moral normativity ,  which suggests that objective moral truths exist and require god's existence to give them authority . 
in its most general form ,  the argument from moral normativity is:
auschwitz i ,  a former polish army barracks ,  was the main camp  -lrb-  `` stammlager ''  -rrb-  and administrative headquarters of the camp complex . 
in june 1945 the soviet authorities took over auschwitz i and converted it to a pow camp for german prisoners . 
at least 802 prisoners attempted to escape from the auschwitz camps ,  mostly polish or soviet prisoners fleeing from work sites outside the camp . 
the auschwitz concentration camp  -lrb-  `` konzentrationslager auschwitz ''  -rrb-  was a complex of over 40 concentration and extermination camps built and operated by nazi germany in occupied poland during world war ii and the holocaust . 
a separate camp for the roma ,  the `` zigeunerfamilienlager ''  -lrb-  `` gypsy family camp ''  -rrb-  ,  was set up in the biie sector of auschwitz ii-birkenau in february 1943.
around 1 in 6 jews killed in the holocaust died in auschwitz . 
the bayer research was led at auschwitz by helmuth vetter of bayer/ig farben ,  who was also an auschwitz physician and ss captain ,  and by auschwitz physicians friedrich entress and eduard wirths . 
on 27 january 2015, some 300 auschwitz survivors gathered with world leaders under a giant tent at the entrance to auschwitz ii to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the camp's liberation . 
höss worked again at auschwitz between 8 may and 29 july 1944, as commander of the ss garrison ,  to oversee the arrival of hungary's jews ,  who were deported to auschwitz ii between 15 may and 9 july . 
primo levi described a 1944 auschwitz iii washroom:
born in baden-baden ,  `` ss obersturmbannführer '' rudolf höss became the first commandant of auschwitz . 
in addition to the auschwitz inmates ,  who comprised a third of the work force ,  ig auschwitz employed slave laborers from all over europe . 
many of the ss at the camp enriched themselves by pilfering the confiscated property . 
the women's concentration camp  -lrb-  `` frauenkonzentrationslager '' or fkl  -rrb-  was established in august 1942, in 15 brick and 15 wooden barracks in sector bia  -lrb-  `` bauabschnitt '' ia  -rrb-  in auschwitz ii ,  when 13,000 women were transferred from auschwitz i . 
german doctors performed a wide variety of experiments on prisoners at auschwitz . 
on 25 november 1947, the auschwitz trial began in kraków ,  when poland's supreme national tribunal brought to court 40 former auschwitz staff . 
the last inmates to be gassed in auschwitz i ,  in december 1942, were 300–400 members of the auschwitz ii `` sonderkommando '' ,  who had been forced to dig up that camp's mass graves ,  thought to hold 100,000 corpses ,  and burn the remains . 
it consisted of  ,  the main camp  -lrb-  `` stammlager ''  -rrb-  and administrative headquarters ,  in oświęcim; auschwitz ii–birkenau ,  a combined concentration/extermination camp three kilometers away in brzezinka;  ,  a labor camp seven kilometers from auschwitz i ,  set up to staff an ig farben synthetic-rubber factory; and dozens of other subcamps . 
also published in 1942 were the books `` auschwitz: obóz śmierci ''  -lrb-  `` auschwitz: camp of death ''  -rrb-  by natalia zarembina ,  and `` w piekle ''  -lrb-  `` in hell ''  -rrb-  by zofia kossak-szczucka ,  the polish writer and founder of żegota . 
construction of crematorium i began at auschwitz i at the end of june or beginning of july 1940.
overall 268,657 male and 131,560 female prisoners were registered in auschwitz ,  400,207 in total . 
the most infamous doctor at auschwitz was josef mengele ,  known as the `` angel of death '' . 
approximately 20,000 auschwitz prisoners made it to bergen-belsen ,  where they were liberated by the british in april 1945.
an estimated 5,000 to 15,000 gay men prosecuted under german penal code section 175  -lrb-  proscribing sexual acts between men  -rrb-  were detained in concentration camps of which an unknown number were sent to auschwitz; of those sent to auschwitz 80 percent died . 
fewer than one percent of soviet jews murdered in the holocaust were killed in auschwitz; german forces had already been driven from russia when the killing at auschwitz reached its peak in 1944.
auschwitz inmates began building the plant ,  known as buna werke and ig auschwitz ,  in april 1941, and demolishing houses in monowitz to make way for it . 
in the course of the war ,  the camp was staffed by 7,000 members of the german `` schutzstaffel ''  -lrb-  ss  -rrb-  ,  approximately 12 percent of whom were later convicted of war crimes . 
as soviet troops approached auschwitz in january 1945, most of its population was sent west on a death march . 
the group also smuggled out photographs; the `` sonderkommando '' photographs ,  of events around the gas chambers in auschwitz ii ,  were smuggled out of the camp in september 1944 in a toothpaste tube . 
a polish report about auschwitz titled `` oswiecim ,  camp of death  -lrb-  underground report  -rrb- ``  with a foreword by florence jaffray harriman was published in english by the polish labor group in new york in march 1944.
auschwitz plans originating with the polish government were provided to the uk foreign ministry in august 1944.
that month ,  himmler ordered the evacuation of all camps ,  charging camp commanders with `` making sure that not a single prisoner from the concentration camps falls alive into the hands of the enemy '' . 
according to polish historian andrzej strzelecki ,  the evacuation of the prisoners by the ss in january 1945 was one of the camp's `` most tragic chapters '' . 
in the decades since its liberation ,  auschwitz has become a primary symbol of the holocaust . 
the hand that holds the bow is referred to as the `` bow hand '' and its arm the `` bow arm '' . 
using a bow and arrow to take fish is known as `` bow fishing '' . 
left hand draw = arrow on left side of bow . 
it consists of a small bow attached by cables on the back of a larger main bow . 
in different cultures ,  the arrows are released from either the left or right side of the bow ,  and this affects the hand grip and position of the bow . 
archery is the art ,  sport ,  practice or skill of using a bow to shoot arrows . 
in western archery ,  the arrow is usually released from the left hand side of the bow for a right-handed archer . 
directly drawn bows may be further divided based upon differences in the method of limb construction ,  notable examples being self bows ,  laminated bows and composite bows . 
the archer then raises the bow and draws the string ,  with varying alignments for vertical versus slightly canted bow positions . 
the innovative aspect of the invention of the bow and arrow was the amount of power delivered to an extremely small area by the arrow . 
stabilizers are mounted at various points on the bow . 
terms such as `` bow shoulder '' or `` string elbow '' follow the same convention . 
the bowstring and arrow are held with three fingers ,  or with a mechanical arrow release . 
mechanical sights can be affixed to the bow to aid in aiming . 
typical arrows with three vanes should be oriented such that a single vane ,  the `` cock feather '' ,  is pointing away from the bow ,  to improve the clearance of the arrow as it passes the arrow rest . 
the bow and arrow seems to have been invented in the later paleolithic or early mesolithic periods . 
using archery to take game animals is known as `` bow hunting '' . 
the arrow is typically released by relaxing the fingers of the drawing hand  -lrb-  see bow draw  -rrb-  ,  or triggering the mechanical release aid . 
when using short bows or shooting from horseback ,  it is difficult to use the sight picture . 
modern game archery owes much of its success to fred bear ,  an american bow hunter and bow manufacturer . 
stabilizers aid in aiming by improving the balance of the bow . 
dacron and other modern materials offer high strength for their weight and are used on most modern bows . 
to load ,  the bow is pointed toward the ground ,  tipped slightly clockwise of vertical  -lrb-  for a right handed shooter  -rrb-  and the shaft of the arrow is placed on the arrow rest or shelf . 
