he re-organized the war staff as following: chief of war staff ,  operations ,  intelligence ,  signal section ,  mobilisation ,  trade . 
the deputy chief of naval staff would direct all operations and movements of the fleet ,  while the assistant chief of naval staff would be responsible for mercantile movements and anti-submarine operations . 
the maintenance committee consisted of the deputy first sea lord  -lrb-  representing the operations committee  -rrb-  ,  second sea lord  -lrb-  personnel  -rrb-  ,  third sea lord  -lrb-  materiel  -rrb-  ,  fourth sea lord  -lrb-  transport and stores  -rrb-  ,  civil lord ,  controller and financial secretary . 
the title of lord high admiral of the united kingdom was vested in the monarch from 1964 to 2011.
following this ,  a new advisory body called the admiralty war staff was then instituted in 1912, headed by the chief of the war staff who was responsible for administering three new sub-divisions responsible for operations ,  intelligence and mobilisation . 
in some cases ,  that individual may take drastic measures to remove the offending appendages ,  either by causing irreparable damage to the limb so that medical intervention cannot save the limb ,  or by causing the limb to be severed . 
when done by a person ,  the person executing the amputation is an amputator . 
amputation is the removal of a limb by trauma ,  medical illness ,  or surgery . 
in some rare cases when a person has become trapped in a deserted place ,  with no means of communication or hope of rescue ,  the victim has amputated his or her own limb . 
wind direction is calculated from these cyclical changes in cupwheel speed ,  while wind speed is determined from the average cupwheel speed . 
the three-cup anemometer was further modified by the australian dr .  derek weston in 1991 to measure both wind direction and wind speed . 
two-dimensional  -lrb-  wind speed and wind direction  -rrb-  sonic anemometers are used in applications such as weather stations ,  ship navigation ,  aviation ,  weather buoys and wind turbines . 
an anemometer is a device used for measuring wind speed ,  and is also a common weather station instrument . 
when the particles are in great motion ,  they produce a doppler shift for measuring wind speed in the laser light ,  which is used to calculate the speed of the particles ,  and therefore the air around the anemometer . 
furthermore ,  since the wind varies in direction and the axis has to follow its changes ,  a wind vane or some other contrivance to fulfill the same purpose must be employed . 
theoretically ,  the speed of rotation of the anemometer should be proportional to the wind speed ,  because the force produced on an object is proportional to the speed of the fluid flowing past it ,  but other factors influence the rotational speed ,  including turbulence produced by the apparatus ,  increasing drag in opposition to the torque that is produced by the cups and support arms ,  and friction of the mount point . 
the feathers of `` archaeopteryx '' were asymmetrical . 
specimens of `` archaeopteryx '' were most notable for their well-developed flight feathers . 
as in the wings of modern birds ,  the flight feathers of `` archaeopteryx '' were somewhat asymmetrical and the tail feathers were rather broad . 
unlike modern birds ,  `` archaeopteryx '' had small teeth ,  as well as a long bony tail ,  features which `` archaeopteryx '' shared with other dinosaurs of the time . 
over the years ,  twelve body fossil specimens of `` archaeopteryx '' and a feather that may belong to it have been found . 
comparisons between the scleral rings of `` archaeopteryx '' and modern birds and reptiles indicate that it may have been diurnal ,  similar to most modern birds . 
in particular ,  ostrom found that `` archaeopteryx '' was remarkably similar to the theropod family dromaeosauridae . 
in march 2018, scientists reported that `` archaeopteryx '' was likely capable of flight ,  but in a manner substantially different from that of modern birds . 
the lifestyle of `` archaeopteryx '' is difficult to reconstruct and there are several theories regarding it . 
the degree of asymmetry seen in `` archaeopteryx '' is more typical for slow flyers than for flightless birds . 
these features make `` archaeopteryx '' a clear candidate for a transitional fossil between non-avian dinosaurs and birds . 
after writing scripts for radio shows after college and then training films for the u . s .  army during world war ii ,  laurents turned to writing for broadway ,  producing a body of work that includes `` west side story ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1959 -rrb- ,  and `` hallelujah ,  baby ! `` 
after graduating from cornell university ,  laurents took an evening class in radio writing at new york university . 
he was short by one ,  the one he failed to get for `` the snake pit '' . 
his early film scripts include `` rope ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- for alfred hitchcock ,  followed by `` anastasia ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- ,  `` bonjour tristesse ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- ,  `` the way we were ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  and `` the turning point ''  -lrb-  1977 -rrb- . 
laurents died at the age of 93 at his home in manhattan on may 5, 2011 of pneumonia complications ,  as reported by `` the new york times '' . 
laurents also scripted `` anastasia ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- and `` bonjour tristesse ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- . 
the fox animated feature film `` anastasia ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- was based in part from his screenplay of the live-action 1956 film of the same title . 
lamo died in march 2018 at the age of 37.
there are eight associate justices on the supreme court . 
the justices ,  ordered by seniority ,  are:
associate justice of the supreme court of the united states is the title of all members of the supreme court of the united states other than the chief justice of the united states . 
lerner often struggled with writing his lyrics . 
in 1956, lerner and loewe unveiled `` my fair lady '' . 
lerner was inducted into the songwriters hall of fame in 1971.
born in new york city ,  he was the son of edith adelson lerner and joseph jay lerner ,  whose brother ,  samuel alexander lerner ,  was founder and owner of the lerner stores ,  a chain of dress shops . 
this was the same team who would later join with lerner and loewe to create `` gigi '' . 
due to his injury ,  lerner could not serve in world war ii . 
capp had it changed legally in 1949.
 !  , ``  and `` if you like crap ,  you'll like capp ! `` 
in 1947, capp earned a `` newsweek '' cover story . 
in early 1932, capp hitchhiked to new york city . 
also during this period ,  capp was working at night on samples for the strip that would eventually become `` li'l abner '' . 
capp was just as likely to parody himself; his self-caricature made frequent ,  tongue-in-cheek appearances in `` li'l abner '' . 
capp was also inducted into the will eisner award hall of fame in 2004.
fisher retaliated ,  doctoring photostats of `` li'l abner '' and falsely accusing capp of sneaking obscenities into his comic strip . 
's motion that capp agree to undergo psychiatric treatment . 
kitchen is currently compiling a biographical monograph on al capp . 
 -lrb-  capp also spoofed carson in his strip ,  in a 1970 episode called `` the tommy wholesome show '' .   -rrb- 
 ''comics , ``  wrote capp in 1970, `` can be a combination of the highest quality of art and text ,  and many of them are . `` 
capp is also the subject of an upcoming wnet-tv `` american masters '' documentary ,  `` the life and times of al capp '' ,  produced by his granddaughter ,  independent filmmaker caitlin manning . 
after capp quit his ghosting job on ham fisher's `` joe palooka '' in 1934 to launch his own strip ,  fisher badmouthed him to colleagues and editors ,  claiming that capp had `` stolen '' his idea . 
in the early 1960s ,  capp regularly wrote a column entitled `` al capp's column '' for the new york newspaper `` the schenectady gazette ''  -lrb-  currently the daily gazette  -rrb-  . 
capp was able to refute the accusation by simply showing the original artwork . 
capp's final years were marked by advancing illness and by family tragedy . 
another `` feud '' seemed to be looming when ,  in one run of sunday strips in 1957, capp lampooned the comic strip `` mary worth '' as `` mary worm '' . 
since his death in 1979, al capp and his work have been the subject of more than 40 books ,  including three biographies . 
al capp's life and career are the subjects of a new life-sized mural commemorating his 100th birthday . 
capp would resume visiting war amputees during the korean war and vietnam war . 
 ''li'l abner '' was also the subject of the first book-length ,  scholarly assessment of an american comic strip ever published . 
capp received the national cartoonists society's billy debeck memorial award in 1947 for cartoonist of the year . 
 -lrb-  leviticus was actually much closer to capp's later villains lem and luke scragg ,  than to the much more appealing and innocent li'l abner .   -rrb- 
the resulting publicity led to hundreds of papers dropping his comic strip ,  and capp ,  already in failing health ,  withdrew from public speaking . 
in 1959, capp recorded and released an album for folkways records  -lrb-  now owned by the smithsonian  -rrb-  on which he identified and described `` the mechanics of the comic strip '' . 
capp's father ,  a failed businessman and an amateur cartoonist ,  introduced him to drawing as a form of therapy . 
capp became a popular public speaker on college campuses ,  where he reportedly relished hecklers . 
the capp-fisher feud was well known in cartooning circles ,  and it grew more personal as capp's strip eclipsed `` joe palooka '' in popularity . 
besides his use of the comic strip to voice his opinions and display his humor ,  capp was a popular guest speaker at universities ,  and on radio and television . 
at the san diego comic con in july 2009, idw announced the upcoming publication of `` al capp's li'l abner: the complete dailies and color sundays '' as part of their ongoing the library of american comics series . 
druyan was born in queens ,  new york ,  the daughter of pearl a . 
well known locations for sourcing analcime include croft quarry in leicestershire ,  uk; the cyclopean islands east off sicily and near trentino in northern italy; victoria in australia; kerguelen island in the indian ocean; in the lake superior copper district of michigan ,  bergen hill ,  new jersey ,  golden ,  colorado ,  and at searles lake ,  california in the united states; and at cape blomidon ,  nova scotia and mont saint-hilaire ,  quebec in canada; and in iceland , and now in namibia . 
pajitnov was born on 14 march 1956 in moscow ,  in the soviet union . 
because he was employed by the soviet government ,  pajitnov did not receive royalties . 
the game ,  first available in the soviet union ,  appeared in the west in 1986.
`abdu'l-bahá's given name was `abbás . 
in 1892 `abdu'l-bahá was appointed in his father's will to be his successor and head of the bahá'í faith . 
`abdu'l-bahá received a haphazard education during his childhood . 
shoghi effendi also wrote that during the anticipated bahá'í dispensation of 1000 years there will be no equal to `abdu'l-bahá . 
during world war i  -lrb-  1914–1918 -rrb- `abdu'l-bahá stayed in palestine and was unable to travel . 
at the age of 24, `abdu'l-bahá was clearly chief-steward to his father and an outstanding member of the bahá’í community . 
when `abdu'l-bahá was a young man ,  speculation was rife amongst the bahá’ís to whom he would marry . 
when `abdu'l-bahá was seven ,  he contracted tuberculosis and was expected to die . 
the following is a list of some of `abdu'l-bahá's many books ,  tablets ,  and talks:
`abdu'l-bahá left a `` will and testament '' that was originally written between 1901-1908 and addressed to shoghi effendi ,  who at that time was only 4-11 years old . 
the end of the war brought about several political developments that `abdu'l-bahá commented on . 
`abdu’l-bahá again suffered from frostbite . 
after bahá'u'lláh died on 29 may 1892, the will and testament of bahá'u'lláh named `abdu'l-bahá as centre of the covenant ,  successor and interpreter of bahá'u'lláh's writings . 
by the end of 1898, western pilgrims started coming to akka on pilgrimage to visit `abdu'l-bahá; this group of pilgrims ,  including phoebe hearst ,  was the first time that bahá'ís raised up in the west had met `abdu'l-bahá . 
due to `abdu'l-bahá's political activities and alleged accusation against him by muhammad `ali ,  a commission of inquiry interviewed `abdu'l-bahá in 1905, with the result that he was almost exiled to fezzan . 
`abdu'l-bahá was born in tehran ,  iran on 23 may 1844  -lrb-  5th of jamadiyu'l-avval ,  1260 ah  -rrb-  ,  the eldest son of bahá'u'lláh and navváb . 
the total estimated number of tablets that `abdu'l-bahá wrote are over 27,000, of which only a fraction have been translated into english . 
one event that affected `abdu'l-bahá greatly during his childhood was the imprisonment of his father when `abdu'l-bahá was eight years old; the imprisonment led to his family being reduced to poverty and being attacked in the streets by other children . 
his death devastated the family – particularly his mother and father – and the grieving `abdu'l-bahá kept a night-long vigil beside his brother’s body . 
ambrose of alexandria  -lrb-  before 212 – c .  250 -rrb- was a friend of the christian theologian origen . 
the last mention of ambrose in the historical record is in origen's `` contra celsum , ``  which the latter wrote at the solicitation of ambrose . 
greywater systems reuse drained wash water to flush toilets or to water lawns and gardens . 
atmospheric water generators extract moisture from dry desert air and filter it to pure water . 
there are many methods of collecting and conserving water . 
new technologies ,  like reverse osmosis can create unlimited amounts of pure water from polluted water ,  ocean water ,  and even from humid air . 
power ,  including electricity ,  heat and water heating ,  is from solar power . 
solar stills can efficiently produce drinking water from ditch water or cistern water ,  especially high-efficiency multiple effect humidification designs ,  which separate the evaporator -lrb-  s  -rrb-  and condenser -lrb-  s  -rrb-  . 
cistern water is usually chlorinated ,  though reverse osmosis systems provide even better quality drinking water . 
 -lrb-  off-grid buildings would not lose power or water if public supplies were compromised for some reason .   -rrb- 
the sono arsenic filter eliminates unhealthy arsenic in well water . 
self-delivery is often possible by installing fabric water tanks that fit the bed of a pick-up truck . 
in regions with sufficient rainfall ,  it is often more economical to design a building to use rainwater harvesting ,  with supplementary water deliveries in a drought . 
some home sewage treatment systems use biological treatment ,  usually beds of plants and aquaria ,  that absorb nutrients and bacteria and convert greywater and sewage to clear water . 
use reduction is cost-effective . 
in the old kingdom ,  anubis was the most important god of the dead . 
in egypt's early dynastic period  -lrb-  c .  3100 – c .  2686 bc  -rrb-  ,  anubis was portrayed in full animal form ,  with a `` jackal '' head and body . 
the oldest known textual mention of anubis is in the pyramid texts of the old kingdom  -lrb-  c .  2686 – c .  2181 bc  -rrb-  ,  where he is associated with the burial of the pharaoh . 
despite being one of the most ancient and `` one of the most frequently depicted and mentioned gods '' in the egyptian pantheon ,  anubis played almost no role in egyptian myths . 
an egyptian papyrus from the roman period  -lrb-  30–380 ad  -rrb-  simply called anubis the `` son of isis . `` 
in a later article ,  jensen argued that his claims had been misunderstood:
reviewing this book ,  psychologist kenneth kaye endorsed jensen's distinction between bias and discrimination ,  saying that he found many of jensen's opponents to be more politically-biased than jensen was . 
jensen adds that gould made a number of misrepresentations ,  whether intentional or unintentional ,  while purporting to present jensen's own positions:
in arthur jensen's response to gould's criticisms ,  in the paper titled `` the debunking of scientific fossils and straw persons '' ,  jensen begins his paper with this observation:
paleontologist and evolutionary biologist stephen jay gould criticized jensen's work in his 1981 book `` the mismeasure of man '' . 
arthur robert jensen  -lrb-  august 24, 1923 – october 22, 2012 -rrb- was an american psychologist and author . 
while jensen recognizes the validity of some of gould's claims ,  in many places ,  he criticizes gould's general approach:
in 2006, the international society for intelligence research awarded jensen its lifetime achievement award . 
after the paper was released ,  large protests were held ,  demanding that jensen be fired . 
in 1980 jensen published a detailed book in defense of the tests used to measure mental abilities ,  entitled `` bias in mental testing '' . 
during jensen's period in san diego he spent time working as a social worker with the san diego department of public welfare . 
the show won several tony awards: best musical ,  best actor ,  best supporting actor  -lrb-  burns  -rrb-  ,  best book ,  and best director . 
the show won two tony awards ,  best leading actor in a musical for silvers ,  and best featured actor in a musical for blyden . 
one day ,  senex and domina go on a trip and leave pseudolus in charge of hero . 
every actor who has opened in the role of pseudolus on broadway  -lrb-  zero mostel ,  phil silvers ,  and nathan lane  -rrb-  has won a best leading actor tony award for his performance . 
from that point on ,  the show was a success . 
a happy ending prevails for all – except for poor senex ,  stuck with his shrewish wife domina . 
the musical's original 1962 broadway run won several tony awards ,  including best musical and best author  -lrb-  musical  -rrb-  . 
eventually ,  zero mostel was cast . 
 ''a funny thing happened on the way to the forum '' was made into a musical film in 1966, directed by richard lester ,  with mostel and gilford re-creating their broadway stage roles ,  leon greene reprising his west end stage role ,  and phil silvers in an expanded role as `` marcus lycus '' . 
lane won the 1996 tony award for best leading actor and the drama desk award ,  outstanding actor in a musical; the production was nominated for the 1996 tony award and drama desk award ,  revival of a musical . 
beginning in 1829, aleut was written in the cyrillic script . 
an aleut dictionary and grammar have been published ,  and portions of the bible were translated into aleut . 
when alaska became a state in 1959, section 4 of the alaska statehood act provided that any existing alaska native land claims would be unaffected by statehood and held in status quo . 
the state of alaska to date has been granted approximately 85% or of the land claims it has made under ancsa . 
alaska natives had three years from passage of ancsa to make land selections of the granted under the act . 
in 1971, barely one million acres of land in alaska was in private hands . 
the afn wanted rights to land ,  while then-governor keith miller believed natives did not have legitimate claims to state land in light of the provisions of the alaska statehood act . 
ancsa was intended to resolve long-standing issues surrounding aboriginal land claims in alaska ,  as well as to stimulate economic development throughout alaska . 
the settlement established alaska native claims to the land by transferring titles to twelve alaska native regional corporations and over 200 local village corporations . 
the alaska native claims settlement act  -lrb-  ancsa  -rrb-  was signed into law by president richard nixon on december 18, 1971, constituting at the time the largest land claims settlement in united states history . 
some natives have argued that ancsa has hastened cultural genocide of alaska natives . 
spanish advocates predicated the term `` adoptivus '' of christ only in respect to his humanity; once the divine son `` emptied himself '' of divinity and `` took the form of a servant ''  -lrb-  philippians 2:7 -rrb- ,  christ's human nature was `` adopted '' as divine . 
the 2nd-century work shepherd of hermas may also have taught that jesus was a virtuous man filled with the holy spirit and adopted as the son . 
a form of adoptionism surfaced in unitarianism during the 18th century as denial of the virgin birth became increasingly common ,  led by the views of joseph priestley and others . 
adoptionism ,  also called dynamic monarchianism ,  is a christian nontrinitarian theological doctrine which holds that jesus was adopted as the son of god at his baptism ,  his resurrection ,  or his ascension . 
adoptionism is sometimes ,  but not always ,  related to denial of the virgin birth of jesus . 
apollinaris' rejection that christ had a human mind was considered an over-reaction to arianism and its teaching that christ was not divine . 
it was declared to be a heresy in 381 by the first council of constantinople ,  since christ was officially depicted as fully human and fully god . 
an acid–base reaction is a chemical reaction that occurs between an acid and a base ,  which can be used to determine ph . 
the first scientific concept of acids and bases was provided by lavoisier in around 1776.
for example the current lewis model has the broadest definition of what an acid and base are ,  with the bronsted-lowry theory being a subset of what acids and bases are ,  and the arrhenius theory being the most restrictive . 
ali ibn al-husayn al-iṣfahānī  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as abul-faraj  -lrb-  897–967 ce  -rrb-  was an historian of arab-quraysh origin who is noted for collecting and preserving ancient arabic lyrics and poems in his major work ,  the `` kitāb al-aghānī '' . 
his later life was spent in various parts of the islamic world ,  in aleppo with its hamdanid governor sayf ad-dawlah  -lrb-  to whom he dedicated the `` book of songs ''  -rrb-  ,  in ray with the buwayhid vizier ibn 'abbad ,  and elsewhere . 
also to the northeast is the town of porto de mós with its rebuilt castle . 
the church contains the tombs of pedro i of portugal and his murdered mistress inês de castro and with it the story of the tragic liaison between pedro and inês . 
the city of alcobaça became notable after the first king of portugal ,  afonso henriques ,  decided to build a church to commemorate the conquest of santarém from the moors in 1147.
a town that only became notable in the 12th century when it was chosen as the future site of portugal's largest church . 
the amphisbaena  -lrb-   ,  plural: amphisbaenae;   -rrb-  is a mythological ,  ant-eating serpent with a head at each end . 
an amyl alcohol is any of 8 alcohols with the formula cho . 
when the amyl group is a linear or normal  -lrb-  n  -rrb-  alkyl group ,  the resulting amyl nitrite would have the structural formula ch -lrb-  ch  -rrb- ono . 
amyl nitrite is a chemical compound with the formula chono . 
autumn ,  also known as fall in american english and sometimes in canadian english ,  is one of the four temperate seasons . 
some cultures regard the autumnal equinox as `` mid-autumn '' ,  while others with a longer temperature lag treat it as the start of autumn . 
in north america ,  autumn traditionally starts on september 21 and ends on december 21.
the name `` backend '' ,  a once common name for the season in northern england ,  has today been largely replaced by the name autumn . 
autumn is associated with halloween  -lrb-  influenced by samhain ,  a celtic autumn festival  -rrb-  ,  and with it a widespread marketing campaign that promotes it . 
autumn ,  especially in poetry ,  has often been associated with melancholia . 
not all of alameda island is part of the city of alameda . 
the borders of alameda were made coextensive with the island in 1872, incorporating woodstock into alameda . 
coast guard island ,  a small island between alameda island and oakland ,  is also part of alameda and is the home of integrated support command alameda
alameda  -lrb-   ; spanish:   -rrb-  is a city in alameda county ,  california ,  united states . 
naval air station alameda  -lrb-  nas  -rrb-  ,  at alameda point ,  which was decommissioned in 1997, has been turned over to the city of alameda for civilian development . 
alameda point and southshore are built on bay fill . 
the island alameda occupies what was originally a peninsula connected to oakland . 
alameda was the site of the southern pacific's west alameda shops where all the electric trains were maintained and repaired . 
mark twain described alameda as being `` the garden of california . `` 
in september 2011 alameda and the navy reached an agreement on the terms of a no-cost conveyance for the entire 918 acres at alameda point . 
alameda is known for its victorian houses; 9% of all single-family houses  -lrb-  1500 -rrb- in alameda are victorian ,  and many more have been divided into two to four-unit dwellings . 
the 2010 united states census reported that alameda had a population of 73,812.
the modern era of winemaking in alameda begin in 1978 when alameda veterinarian kent rosenblum and his wife kathy founded rosenblum cellars . 
although alameda's nickname is `` the island city ''  -lrb-  or simply `` the island ''  -rrb-  ,  the current city occupies two islands as well as a small section of the mainland . 
alameda is home to the official offices and training facility of the oakland raiders american football team ,  which is located on bay farm island . 
the alameda terminal was the site of the arrival of the first train via the first transcontinental railroad into the san francisco bay area on september 6, 1869.
it is said that alameda has more pre-1906 earthquake era homes in the gold coast section than any other city in the bay area . 
like much of the rest of the bay area ,  alameda has been a democratic stronghold in presidential elections since 1988.
although nearly all of the island is in alameda city limits ,  a small portion of a dump site west of the former runways at alameda point extends far enough into san francisco bay that it is over the county line and part of the city and county of san francisco . 
the alpha helix is also called a classic pauling–corey–branson α-helix . 
the α-helix is tightly packed; there is almost no free space within the helix . 
the alpha helix  -lrb-  α-helix  -rrb-  is a common motif in the secondary structure of proteins and is a right hand-spiral conformation  -lrb-  i . e . 
the amino acids in an α-helix are arranged in a right-handed helical structure where each amino acid residue corresponds to a 100° turn in the helix  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the helix has 3.6 residues per turn  -rrb-  ,  and a translation of along the helical axis . 
the name 3.6-helix is also used for this type of helix ,  denoting the average number of residues per helical turn ,  with 13 atoms being involved in the ring formed by the hydrogen bond . 
the helical wheel does not change representation along the helix ,  while the wenxiang diagram is able to show the relative locations of the amino acids in an α-helix regardless of how long it is . 
a helix has an overall dipole moment due to the aggregate effect of the individual microdipoles from the carbonyl groups of the peptide bond pointing along the helix axis . 
helix  -rrb-  in which every backbone n−h group donates a hydrogen bond to the backbone c=o group of the amino acid located three or four residues earlier along the protein sequence . 
the amino acids that make up a particular helix can be plotted on a helical wheel ,  a representation that illustrates the orientations of the constituent amino acids  -lrb-  see the article for leucine zipper for such a diagram  -rrb-  . 
helices observed in proteins can range from four to over forty residues long ,  but a typical helix contains about ten amino acids  -lrb-  about three turns  -rrb-  . 
the helical wheel represents a helix by a projection of the c backbone structure down the helix axis ,  while the wenxiang diagram represents it more abstractly as a smooth spiral coiled on the plane of the page . 
long homopolymers of amino acids often form helices if soluble . 
the statistical mechanics of this transition can be modeled using an elegant transfer matrix method ,  characterized by two parameters: the propensity to initiate a helix and the propensity to extend a helix . 
often in globular proteins ,  as well as in specialized structures such as coiled-coils and leucine zippers ,  an α-helix will exhibit two `` faces '' one containing predominantly hydrophobic amino acids oriented toward the interior of the protein ,  in the hydrophobic core ,  and one containing predominantly polar amino acids oriented toward the solvent-exposed surface of the protein . 
most of the town is around 200m . 
accrington is a town in the hyndburn borough of lancashire ,  england . 
the 2001 census gave the population of accrington town as 35,200.
crime is very low in accrington compared to nearby towns . 
a new bus station is being built in accrington too . 
a memorial for the accrington pals may be built outside the town hall . 
accrington covers two townships which were established in 1507 following disafforestation; those of old accrington and new accrington which were merged in 1878 with the incorporation of the borough council . 
the name accrington appears to be anglo-saxon in origin . 
accrington became incorporated as a municipal borough in 1878.
in the 1842 'plug riots' a general strike spread from town to town due to conditions in the town . 
accrington is represented in parliament as a part of the constituency of hyndburn . 
accrington stanley football club has had its own pub in the town ,  the crown ,  since july 2007.
until the 2012-13 season ,  when fleetwood town entered the league ,  accrington was the smallest town in england and wales with a football league club . 
accrington observer is currently stationed within the market hall . 
until around 1830 visitors considered accrington to be just a `` considerable village '' . 
accrington was first represented nationally after the redistribution of seats act 1885 after the 1885 general election by accrington  -lrb-  uk parliament constituency  -rrb-  . 
one well-known association the town has is with the 'accrington pals' ,  the nickname given to the smallest home town battalion of volunteers formed to fight in the first world war . 
the word `` armageddon '' appears only once in the greek new testament ,  in  . 
megiddo is mentioned twelve times in the old testament ,  ten times in reference to the ancient city of megiddo ,  and twice with reference to `` the plain of megiddo '' ,  most probably simply meaning `` the plain next to the city '' . 
athlon comes from the ancient greek  -lrb-  `` athlon ''  -rrb-  meaning ``  -lrb-  sport  -rrb-  contest '' ,  or `` prize of a contest '' ,  or `` place of a contest; arena '' . 
amd has continued using the `` athlon '' name with the 64-bit athlon 64 architecture ,  the athlon ii ,  and accelerated processing unit  -lrb-  apu  -rrb-  chips targeting the socket am1 desktop soc architecture ,  and socket am4 zen microarchitecture . 
amnon was born in hebron to ahinoam and king david . 
although he was the heir-apparent to david's throne ,  amnon is best remembered for the rape of his half-sister tamar ,  daughter of david and maachah . 
the amu darya ,  also called the amu or amo river ,  and historically known by its latin name  ,  is a major river in central asia . 
the ancient greeks called the amu darya the `` oxus '' . 
during the soviet era ,  a resource-sharing system was instated in which kyrgyzstan and tajikistan shared water originating from the amu and syr daryas with kazakhstan ,  turkmenistan ,  and uzbekistan in summer . 
historical records state that in different periods ,  the river flowed into the aral sea  -lrb-  from the south  -rrb-  ,  into the caspian sea  -lrb-  from the east  -rrb-  ,  or both ,  similar to the syr darya  -lrb-  jaxartes ,  in ancient greek  -rrb-  . 
the caspian tiger used to occur along the river's banks . 
sometimes the flow through the two branches was more or less equal ,  but often most of the amu darya's flow split to the west and flowed into the caspian . 
before muslim rule ,  the regions of balkh  -lrb-  bactria or `` tokharistan ''  -rrb-  ,  herat and sistan were under sasanian rule . 
qutayba ibn muslim led the final conquest of balkh . 
the muslim conquests of afghanistan began during the muslim conquest of persia as the arab muslims were drawn eastwards to khorasan ,  sistan and transoxiana . 
yazdegerd later fled to balkh ,  where he was defeated by the arabs and fled across oxus river . 
balkh was also a part of khorasan along with other areas through varying extensions of time . 
during the muslim conquest of persia ,  the arabs were drawn eastwards from the iraqi plains to central and eastern persia ,  then to media ,  into khorasan ,  sistan and transoxania . 
abdullah b .  amir went to khorasan from kerman in 650 and sent out along with a vanguard of tamimi arabs and 1,000 asawira via quhistan . 
there is general agreement among arabic sources that khorasan's conquest began in the reign of uthman under abdallah b .  amir who had been appointed the governor of basra  -lrb-  r .  649-655 -rrb- . 
the earlier arabs called sistan as `` sijistan '' ,  from the persian `` sagestan '' . 
in 652, ibn amir sent al-ahnaf to invade tokharistan with 4,000 arabs and 1,000 iranian muslims  -lrb-  evidently the tamimis and asawira  -rrb-  ,  probably because of assistance of its ruler to yazdegerd's son peroz . 
in 652, ibn amir sent al-ahnaf to invade tokharistan with 4,000 arabs and 1,000 iranian muslims  -lrb-  evidently the tamimis and asawira  -rrb-  ,  probably because of assistance of its ruler to yazdegerd's son peroz . 
he arrived in kirman in 651 and sent a force under rabi ibn ziyad al-harithi to sistan . 
among balkh's buddhist monasteries ,  the largest was `` nava vihara '' ,  later persianized to `` naw bahara '' after the islamic conquest of balkh . 
this could be because of confusion of ahnaf's later activities under ibn amir and an attempt to magnify his role in khorasan's conquest . 
mediaeval islamic scholars divided modern-day afghanistan into two regions - the provinces of khorasan and sistan . 
he advanced to balkh and made a peace treaty with the locals who had revolted after al-ahnaf's earlier treaty . 
hui'chao who visited around 726, mentions the arabs ruled it and all the inhabitants were buddhists . 
ali shah was another son of timur shah . 
after the death of nader shah in 1747, the region of kandahar was claimed by ahmad shah durrani . 
ayub shah was another son of timur shah ,  who deposed sultan ali shah . 
yet another of timur shah's sons ,  shuja shah  -lrb-  or shah shuja  -rrb-  ,  ruled for only six years . 
leaving his second son timur shah to safeguard his interests ,  ahmad shah left india to return to afghanistan . 
he earned recognition as ahmad shah baba ,  or `` father '' of afghanistan . 
ahmad shah was succeeded by his son ,  timur shah ,  who had been deputed to administer his father's conquests in northern india ,  but had been driven out by the marathas . 
mahmud shah's first reign lasted for only two years before he was replaced by shuja shah . 
the durrani empire  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the afghan empire  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was founded and built by ahmad shah durrani . 
other sources state that the aimaq hazara are one of the `` chahar '' ,  with the temuri instead being of the `` lesser aimaqs '' or `` aimaq-e digar ''  -lrb-  `` other aimaqs ''  -rrb-  along with the tahiri ,  zuri ,  maleki ,  and mishmast . 
aimaq tribes estimates of the aimaq population vary between 250,000 and 500,000.
arcturus ,  also designated α boötis  -lrb-  latinized to alpha boötis ,  abbreviated alpha boo ,  α boo  -rrb-  ,  is the brightest star in the constellation of boötes ,  the fourth-brightest in the night sky ,  and the brightest in the northern celestial hemisphere . 
herodotus first wrote of `` andropophagi '' in his `` histories '' ,  where he described them as one of several tribes near scythia . 
pliny the elder later wrote in his `` naturalis historia '' that the same cannibals near scythia wore the scalps of men on their chest . 
brooks directed his first feature film ,  `` real life '' ,  in 1979.
brooks also acted in other writers' and directors' films during the 1980s and 1990s . 
 ''dory '' is brooks's largest grossing film to date . 
 -lrb-  he got starring credits in the film ,  although his character dies within roughly the first half-hour of the film .   -rrb- 
in 2006 he appeared in the documentary film `` wanderlust '' as david howard from `` lost in america '' . 
in 1975, brooks directed six short films for the first season of nbc's `` saturday night live '':
he has written ,  directed ,  and starred in several comedy films ,  such as `` modern romance ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- ,  `` lost in america ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  and `` defending your life ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
brooks continued his voiceover work in pixar's `` finding nemo ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- ,  as the voice of marlin ,  one of the film's protagonists . 
 ''α scorpii ''  -lrb-  latinised to `` alpha scorpii ''  -rrb-  is the star's bayer designation . 
antares appears as a single star at naked eye ,  but it is actually a binary star with its two components called α scorpii a and α scorpii b . 
 ''α tauri '' is the star's bayer designation . 
it is now so entered in the iau catalog of star names . 
in western astrology ,  the star altair was ill-omened ,  portending danger from reptiles . 
altair is a type-a main sequence star with about 1.8 times the mass of the sun and 11 times its luminosity . 
in chinese ,  the asterism consisting of altair ,  β aquilae ,  and γ aquilae is known as `` hé gǔ ''  -lrb-  ; lit . 
along with β aquilae and γ aquilae ,  altair forms the well-known line of stars sometimes referred to as the `` family of aquila '' or `` shaft of aquila '' . 
it is now so entered in the iau catalog of star names . 
at the same time ,  the abc's multimedia division was renamed `` abc new media '' ,  becoming an output division of the abc alongside television and radio . 
on 8 february 2008, abc tv was rebranded as abc1, complementing the existing abc2 digital-only channel which was launched on 7 march 2005.
the abc now provides television ,  radio ,  online and mobile services throughout metropolitan and regional australia and overseas through abc australia and radio australia . 
the australian broadcast radio spectrum was constituted of the abc and the commercial sector . 
the australian broadcasting corporation  -lrb-  abc  -rrb-  is australia's national broadcaster founded in 1929.
abc budget cuts began in 1976 and continued until 1985.
the abc multimedia unit was established in july 1995, to manage the new abc website  -lrb-  launched in august  -rrb-  . 
in the same year ,  `` kindergarten of the air '' began on abc radio in perth ,  and was later broadcast nationally . 
abc radio was restructured significantly again in 1985 – radio one became the metropolitan network ,  while radio 2 became known as radio national  -lrb-  callsigns ,  however ,  were not standardised until 1990 -rrb- . 
a new online video-on-demand service launched in july of the same year ,  titled abc iview ,  and the abc launched digital radio broadcasts in the same month . 
in 2002, the abc launched abc asia pacific – the replacement for the defunct australia television international operated previously by the seven network . 
the abc headquarters is in ultimo ,  an inner-city suburb of sydney ,  new south wales . 
in 619, alexandria fell to the sassanid persians . 
ibn battuta left alexandria with the intent of visiting him . 
alexandria was the intellectual and cultural center of the ancient world for some time . 
alexandria is also a popular tourist destination . 
in reference to alexandria ,  egypt ,  ibn battuta speaks of great saints that resided here . 
alexandria was not only a center of hellenism ,  but was also home to the largest urban jewish community in the world . 
alexandria figured prominently in the military operations of napoleon's expedition to egypt in 1798.
alexandria is believed to have been founded by alexander the great in april 331 bc as  -lrb-  `` alexandreia ''  -rrb-  . 
alexandria is located at  . 
alexandria was platted in 1836, when it was certain that the indiana central canal would be extended to that point . 
alexandria was incorporated as a town in 1819 and received a city charter in 1832.
while admiral porter expressed sympathy for the suffering alexandria residents ,  he declared the `` burning of alexandria a fit termination of the unfortunate red river expedition . `` 
the earliest deed that survives for an alexandria resident is from june 24, 1805 when a william cochren ,  who identifies himself as a `` of the town of alexandria '' ,  sold a tract of land across the red river to a william murrey . 
porter left behind the gunboat `` uss lafayette '' in alexandria and posted the `` uss pittsburg '' on the black river to the northeast . 
alexandria is the ninth-largest city in the state of louisiana and is the parish seat of rapides parish ,  louisiana ,  united states . 
the circuit of the old walls can still be traced . 
alexandria troas  -lrb-  `` alexandria of the troad ''; ;   -rrb-  is the site of an ancient greek city situated on the aegean sea near the northern tip of turkey's western coast ,  a little south of tenedos  -lrb-  modern bozcaada  -rrb-  . 
troas is also a titular see of the orthodox church under the ecumenical patriarchate . 
in 2001, the population of the town was 13,444.
alexandria  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a town in west dunbartonshire ,  scotland . 
the town is reputed to be the only uk town with a railway station and a pub in the middle of a roundabout . 
angela vincent  -lrb-  born 1942 -rrb- is emeritus professor at the university of oxford and a fellow of somerville college ,  oxford . 
in 2011, she was elected a fellow of the royal society  -lrb-  frs  -rrb-  and was also elected a fellow of the academy of medical sciences  -lrb-  fmedsci  -rrb-  . 
in mathematics ,  the arithmetic–geometric mean  -lrb-  agm  -rrb-  of two positive real numbers and is defined as follows:
toriyama married his wife on may 2, 1982.
by 2008, the manga had sold over 35 million copies in japan . 
in 1984, `` weekly shōnen jump '' began serializing toriyama's `` dragon ball '' ,  which became an instant hit . 
toriyama lives in his home studio in kiyosu . 
he currently contributes to the `` dragon ball super '' anime and manga since june 2015.
akira toriyama was born in nagoya ,  aichi ,  japan . 
he earned the 1981 shogakukan manga award for best `` shōnen '' or `` shōjo '' manga with `` dr .  slump '' ,  and it went on to sell over 35 million copies in japan . 
manga critic jason thompson declared toriyama's art influential ,  saying that his `` extremely personal and recognizable style '' was a reason for `` dragon ball '''s popularity . 
toriyama's `` dragon ball '' and `` sand land '' were published in the magazine in the first issue ,  which also included an in-depth interview with him . 
according to `` hipparcos '' ,  alioth is from the sun . 
epsilon ursae majoris  -lrb-  latinised from ε ursae majoris ,  abbreviated epsilon uma ,  ε uma  -rrb-  ,  officially named alioth ,  is ,  despite being designated `` ε ''  -lrb-  epsilon  -rrb-  ,  the brightest star in the constellation of ursa major ,  and at magnitude 1.77 is the thirty-second brightest star in the sky . 
 ''ε ursae majoris ''  -lrb-  latinised to `` epsilon ursae majoris ''  -rrb-  is the star's bayer designation . 
the earliest amiga 500 models use nearly the same original amiga chipset as the amiga 1000.
the amiga 500, also known as the a500, is the first low-end commodore amiga 16/32-bit multimedia home/personal computer . 
the amiga 500 has a `` trap-door '' slot on the underside for a ram upgrade  -lrb-  typically of   -rrb-  . 
this connector is electronically identical with the amiga 1000's ,  but swapped on the other side . 
the original amiga 500 proved to be commodore's best-selling amiga model ,  enjoying particular success in europe . 
in fact ,  all the custom chips can be upgraded to the amiga enhanced chip set  -lrb-  ecs  -rrb-  versions . 
outwardly resembling the commodore 128 and codenamed `` rock lobster '' during development ,  the amiga 500 houses the keyboard and cpu in one shell ,  unlike the amiga 1000.
before the release of the amiga 500 and amiga 2000 models in 1987, the a1000 was simply called `` amiga '' . 
the commodore amiga 1000, also known as the a1000 and originally simply as the amiga ,  is the first personal computer released by commodore international in the amiga line . 
the original amiga 1000 is the only model to have 256 kb of amiga chip ram ,  which can be expanded to 512 kb with the addition of a daughterboard under a cover in the center front of the machine . 
the first ntsc systems lacks the ehb video mode which is present in all later amiga models . 
the amiga 1000 features an 86-pin expansion port  -lrb-  electrically identical to the later amiga 500 expansion port ,  though the a500's connector is inverted  -rrb-  . 
in the us ,  the a1000 was marketed as `` the amiga from commodore '' ,  with the commodore logo omitted from the case . 
in 2006, `` pc world '' rated the amiga 1000 as the 7th greatest pc of all time . 
joe pillow extended his fifteen minutes of fame when the amiga went to production . 
for example ,  for the function
consider the graph of the function formula_1 shown to the right . 
the line `` x '' = `` a '' is a `` vertical asymptote '' of the graph of the function if at least one of the following statements is true:
where formula_11 is the limit as `` x '' approaches the value `` a '' from the left  -lrb-  from lesser values  -rrb-  ,  and formula_12 is the limit as `` x '' approaches `` a '' from the right . 
an oblique asymptote has a slope that is non-zero but finite ,  such that the graph of the function approaches it as `` x '' tends to
the function `` ƒ '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  may or may not be defined at `` a '' ,  and its precise value at the point `` x '' = `` a '' does not affect the asymptote . 
tanenbaum also served as a lobbyist for the sierra club . 
in 1987, tanenbaum wrote a clone of unix ,  called minix  -lrb-  mini-unix  -rrb-  ,  for the ibm pc . 
although minix and linux have diverged ,  minix continues to be developed ,  now as a production system as well as an educational one . 
tanenbaum has also been involved in numerous other research projects in the areas of operating systems ,  distributed systems ,  and ubiquitous computing ,  often as supervisor of ph . d .  students or a postdoctoral researcher . 
it was started sometime before 1981 and andrew tanenbaum was the architect from the start until version 5.5.
tanenbaum was born in new york city and grew up in suburban white plains ,  new york . 
his book ,  `` operating systems: design and implementation '' and minix were linus torvalds' inspiration for the linux kernel . 
tanenbaum has had a number of ph . d .  students who themselves have gone on to become widely known computer science researchers . 
the second stage is on top of the main stage and below the payload . 
ariane 5’s cryogenic h173 main stage  -lrb-  h158 for ariane 5 g ,  g+ ,  and gs  -rrb-  is called the epc  -lrb-  `` étage principal cryotechnique ''—cryotechnic main stage  -rrb-  . 
the rockets are launched by arianespace from the guiana space centre in french guiana . 
ariane 5 eca uses the esc  -lrb-  `` étage supérieur cryotechnique ''—cryogenic upper stage  -rrb-  ,  which is fueled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen . 
after the main cryogenic stage runs out of fuel ,  it re-enters the atmosphere for an ocean splashdown . 
on 21 october 2011 arianespace launched the first soyuz rocket ever from outside former soviet territory . 
 ,  arianespace had launched more than 550 satellites in 254 launches over years  -lrb-  236 ariane missions minus the first 8 flights handled by cnes ,  17 soyuz-2 missions and 9 vega missions  -rrb-  . 
the company offers a number of different launch vehicles: the heavy-lift ariane 5 for dual launches to geostationary transfer orbit ,  the soyuz-2 as a medium-lift alternative ,  and the solid-fueled vega for lighter payloads . 
arianespace sa is a multinational company founded in 1980 as the world's first commercial launch service provider . 
it was discontinued and replaced by the amiga 600 in summer 1992, making it the shortest lived amiga model . 
the commodore amiga 500 plus  -lrb-  often a500 plus or simply a500+  -rrb-  is an enhanced version of the original amiga 500 computer . 
modern cpus are typically 2-operand or 3-operand machines . 
the 12-bit pdp-8 was one of the first minicomputers to use accumulators ,  and inspired many later machines . 
the characteristic which distinguishes one register as being the accumulator of a computer architecture is that the accumulator  -lrb-  if the architecture were to have one  -rrb-  would be used as an `` implicit '' operand for arithmetic instructions . 
mathematical operations often take place in a stepwise fashion ,  using the results from one operation as the input to the next . 
accumulators dramatically improve performance in systems like these by providing a scratchpad area where the results of one operation can be fed to the next one for little or no performance penalty . 
the 64-bit extension of x86, x86-64, has been further generalized to 16 instead of 8 general registers . 
zubaydah was turned over to the cia . 
after his transfer ,  the cia denied access to zubaydah . 
while in cia custody ,  zubaydah lost his left eye . 
videotapes of some of zubaydah's interrogations are amongst those destroyed by the cia in 2005.
joseph margulies was a lawyer for zubaydah . 
it was later reported that zubaydah was denied painkillers during his interrogation . 
zubaydah was one of three or more high-value detainees to be waterboarded . 
the final memo mentioned zubaydah several times . 
zubaydah was interrogated by two separate interrogation teams: the first from the fbi and one from the cia . 
because of the urgency felt about the interrogation of zubaydah ,  the cia had consulted with the president about how to proceed . 
at his combatant status review tribunal in 2007, zubaydah said he was told that the cia realized he was not significant . 
at his combatant status review tribunal in 2007, zubaydah said he was told that the cia realized he was not significant . 
john kiriakou ,  a cia officer who had seen the cables regarding zubaydah's interrogation ,  publicly said in 2009 that zubaydah was waterboarded once for 35 seconds before he started talking . 
less than one month after zubaydah's capture ,  justice department officials said zubaydah was `` a near-ideal candidate for a tribunal trial . `` 
by 1999, the united states government was attempting to surveil zubaydah . 
zubaydah and ten other `` high-value detainees '' were transferred to guantanamo in september 2006.
the cia flew in a doctor from johns hopkins university to ensure zubaydah would survive during transit out of pakistan . 
the bush administration relied on some of zubaydah's claims in justifying the invasion of iraq . 
less than 18 months later ,  zubaydah and the thirteen other high-value detainees who had been in secret cia custody were transferred to the guantanamo bay detention camp . 
in its simple form ,  addition combines two numbers ,  the `` addends '' or `` terms '' ,  into a single number ,  the `` sum '' of the numbers  -lrb-  such as or   -rrb-  . 
repeated addition of the number 1 is the most basic form of counting ,  the result of adding is usually called the successor of the original number . 
the terms `` arithmetic '' and `` higher arithmetic '' were used until the beginning of the 20th century as synonyms for `` number theory '' and are sometimes still used to refer to a wider part of number theory . 
for numbers with a fractional part ,  such as 546.934, they used negative powers of 60 instead of negative powers of 10 for the fractional part 0.934.
early number systems that included positional notation were not decimal ,  including the sexagesimal  -lrb-  base 60 -rrb- system for babylonian numerals and the vigesimal  -lrb-  base 20 -rrb- system that defined maya numerals . 
adding finitely many numbers can be viewed as repeated simple addition; this procedure is known as summation ,  a term also used to denote the definition for `` adding infinitely many numbers '' in an infinite series . 
during the american civil war ,  it was the site of a prisoner-of-war camp ,  which is now andersonville national historic site . 
the canal opened in 1874.
the canal receives its water from the yamuna river at okhla ,  about 10 km to the south of new delhi . 
the islands are served by amakusa airfield ,  located on the north end of shimoshima . 
amakusa pottery has been recognised by the government . 
the largest island of the amakusa group is shimoshima ,  which is 26.5 miles long and 13.5 miles at its widest  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
at present ,  the islands are organized as amakusa district ,  amakusa city ,  and kami-amakusa city ,  all of which are under the administration of kumamoto prefecture . 
an afterglow is a broad arch of whitish or pinkish sunlight in the sky that is scattered by fine particulates like dust suspended in the atmosphere . 
true alpenglow ,  which occurs long after sunset or long before sunrise ,  is caused by the backscattering of red sunlight by aerosols and fine dust particles low in the atmosphere . 
the algebraic closure of a field `` k '' has the same cardinality as `` k '' if `` k '' is infinite ,  and is countably infinite if `` k '' is finite . 
an algebraic closure `` k '' of `` k '' contains a unique separable extension `` k '' of `` k '' containing all  -lrb-  algebraic  -rrb-  separable extensions of `` k '' within `` k '' . 
in general ,  the absolute galois group of `` k '' is the galois group of `` k '' over `` k '' . 
with formula_9.
power management events: power management functions: there are 21 apm function calls defined that the apm driver can use to query power management statuses ,  or request power state transitions . 
in this way the apm driver is an intermediary between the bios and the operating system . 
communication occurs both ways; power management events are sent from the bios to the apm driver ,  and the apm driver sends information and requests to the bios via function calls . 
antoine-joseph sax was born on 6 november 1814, in dinant ,  in what is now belgium ,  to charles-joseph sax and his wife . 
sax faced many near-death experiences . 
his neighbors called him `` little sax ,  the ghost '' . 
sax suffered from lip cancer between 1853 and 1858 but made a full recovery . 
 -lrb-  see voice onset time .   -rrb- 
in icelandic ,  preaspirated stops contrast with double stops and single stops:
for instance ,  represents the voiceless bilabial stop ,  and represents the aspirated bilabial stop . 
stops are distinguished primarily by voicing ,  and voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated ,  while voiced stops are usually unaspirated . 
the spanish voiceless stops have voice onset times  -lrb-  vots  -rrb-  of about 5, 10, and 30 milliseconds ,  whereas english aspirated have vots of about 60, 70, and 80 ms .  voice onset time in korean has been measured at 20, 25, and 50 ms for and 90, 95, and 125 for  . 
armenian and cantonese have aspiration that lasts about as long as english aspirated stops ,  in addition to unaspirated stops . 
preaspirated stops also occur in most sami languages . 
english voiceless stops are aspirated for most native speakers when they are word-initial or begin a stressed syllable ,  as in `` pill '' ,  `` till '' ,  `` kill '' . 
avms are usually congenital and belong to the rasopathies . 
symptoms of avm vary according to the location of the malformation . 
