bemani python 2 would also be used in the followup `` ddr supernova 2 '' . 
a version of ddr was also produced for the pc in north america . 
with the implementation of e-amusement in ddr ,  mixes after supernova have contained multiple songs as extra stages ,  often based on specific conditions ,  such as playing specific difficulties or songs . 
each game usually has a song that max out a category within the radar . 
the groove radar was not very popular among seasoned ddr veterans . 
the default song for the extra stage is predetermined ,  although as of extreme ,  any song can be played on the extra stage ,  although there is still a song that is designated as `` the '' extra stage  -lrb-  which usually is marked with red letters* on the song wheel ,  and must be unlocked for regular play  -rrb-  . 
however ,  the replicant-d action event in ddr x2 did not allow players to select modifiers for its encore extra stage . 
these new charts were used as the default maniac stepchart in ddr 5th mix while the older ones were removed . 
this mode later become the basis for `` tag play '' in newer games . 
additionally ,  players can use `` workout mode '' to make a diary of calories burned playing ddr and any self-reported changes in the player's weight . 
with `` ddr a '' ,  bemani pc type 4 is replaced by type 5, that is still used to this day . 
along with the cabinet change ,  `` ddr x '' also changes its hardware to the pc-based bemani pc type 4.
although ddr supernova still has the foot ratings ,  it removed the flashing 10-foot that existed on certain songs for unknown reasons . 
other `` ddr '' players choose to incorporate complex or flashy techniques into their play movements ,  and some of these `` freestyle '' players develop intricate dance routines to perform during a song . 
all of the 6th mix songs on 7thmix received foot-ratings ,  excluding songs that are removed from ddrmax2.
from 7th mix onward ,  the bpm of extra stage songs was displayed as a random ,  changing number ,  instead of the song's true bpm . 
cyber coach has sold in excess of 600 systems in schools in the uk and features the `` ddr '' game `` disco disco 2 '' . 
however ,  all songs from the previous games remain identical ,  with very few changes to certain song difficulties . 
although the quantity of calories burned by playing `` ddr '' have not been scientifically measured ,  the amount of active movement required to play implies that `` ddr '' provides at least some degree of healthy exercise . 
konami uses music from its other rhythm game series such as `` beatmania '' and `` beatmania iidx '' ,  `` drummania '' ,  `` guitarfreaks '' ,  and `` pop'n music '' ,  as well as making references to `` ddr '' in its other games and vice versa . 
during world war i ,  however ,  italy did not go to war immediately with its allies but stayed neutral . 
germany’s otto von bismarck saw the alliance as a way to prevent the isolation of the german empire ,  which had just been founded a few years before ,  and to preserve peace ,  as russia would not wage war against both empires . 
developmental psychologists have a number of methods to study changes in individuals over time . 
developmental psychology employs many of the research methods used in other areas of psychology . 
developmental psychologists who are interested in social development examine how individuals develop social and emotional competencies . 
developmental psychology is the scientific study of how and why human beings change over the course of their life . 
developmental psychology involves a range of fields ,  such as educational psychology ,  child psychopathology ,  forensic developmental psychology ,  child development ,  cognitive psychology ,  ecological psychology ,  and cultural psychology . 
sigmund freud ,  whose concepts were developmental ,  significantly affected public perceptions . 
developmental psychology examines the influences of nature `` and '' nurture on the process of human development ,  and processes of change in context and across time . 
one of the ways this relationship has been explored in recent years is through the emerging field of evolutionary developmental psychology . 
other accounts ,  such as that of lev vygotsky ,  have suggested that development does not progress through stages ,  but rather that the developmental process that begins at birth and continues until death is too complex for such structure and finality . 
piaget claimed that logic and morality develop through constructive stages . 
most developmental studies ,  regardless of whether they employ the experimental ,  correlational ,  or case study method ,  can also be constructed using research designs . 
jean piaget ,  a swiss developmental psychologist ,  proposed that learning is an active process because children learn through experience and make mistakes and solve problems . 
a significant issue in developmental psychology is the relationship between innateness and environmental influence in regard to any particular aspect of development . 
with the advent of cognitive neuroscience ,  embryology and the neuroscience of prenatal development is of increasing interest to developmental psychology research . 
this is also the stage where one can also have closure and accept death without fearing anything . 
kohlberg used the heinz dilemma to apply to his stages of moral development . 
from birth until the first year ,  the child is referred to as an infant . 
during the genital stage ,  puberty starts happening . 
each of these methods have its strengths and weaknesses but the experimental method when appropriate is the preferred method of developmental scientists because it provides a controlled situation and conclusions to be drawn about cause-and-effect relationships . 
he believed that humans developed in stages throughout their lifetimes and this would affect their behaviors  -lrb-  similar ideas to sigmund freud  -rrb- 
evolutionary developmental psychology is a research paradigm that applies the basic principles of darwinian evolution ,  particularly natural selection ,  to understand the development of human behavior and cognition . 
john b .  watson and jean-jacques rousseau are typically cited as providing the foundations for modern developmental psychology . 
michael commons enhanced and simplified bärbel inhelder and piaget's developmental theory and offers a standard method of examining the universal pattern of development . 
also ,  because members of a cohort all experience historical events unique to their generation ,  apparently normative developmental trends may ,  in fact ,  be universal only to their cohort . 
edp considers both the reliably developing ,  species-typical features of ontogeny  -lrb-  developmental adaptations  -rrb-  ,  as well as individual differences in behavior ,  from an evolutionary perspective . 
developmental psychology is concerned not only with describing the characteristics of psychological change over time but also seeks to explain the principles and internal workings underlying these changes . 
directionality has consequences in dna synthesis ,  because dna polymerase can synthesize dna in only one direction by adding nucleotides to the 3' end of a dna strand . 
the rna primers are then removed and replaced with dna ,  and the fragments of dna are joined together by dna ligase . 
dna polymerases are a family of enzymes that carry out all forms of dna replication . 
dna polymerase has 5′–3′ activity . 
dna is always synthesized in the 5' to 3' direction . 
this sort of dna replication is continuous . 
as helicase unwinds dna at the replication fork ,  the dna ahead is forced to rotate . 
multiple dna polymerases take on different roles in the dna replication process . 
dna replication  -lrb-  dna amplification  -rrb-  can also be performed `` in vitro ''  -lrb-  artificially ,  outside a cell  -rrb-  . 
dna is made up of a double helix of two complementary strands . 
as a consequence ,  the dna polymerase on this strand is seen to `` lag behind '' the other strand . 
dna replication occurs during the s-stage of interphase . 
topoisomerases are enzymes that temporarily break the strands of dna ,  relieving the tension caused by unwinding the two strands of the dna helix; topoisomerases  -lrb-  including dna gyrase  -rrb-  achieve this by adding negative supercoils to the dna helix . 
because `` e .  coli '' methylates gatc dna sequences ,  dna synthesis results in hemimethylated sequences . 
for a cell to divide ,  it must first replicate its dna . 
the leading strand is the strand of nascent dna which is being synthesized in the same direction as the growing replication fork . 
as dna synthesis continues ,  the original dna strands continue to unwind on each side of the bubble ,  forming a replication fork with two prongs . 
four distinct mechanisms for dna synthesis are recognized:
donald then throws a tantrum . 
donald also faced problems resulting from his own voice in `` donald's dream voice ''  -lrb-  may 21, 1948 -rrb- . 
since 1999 daisy ,  like donald duck has her own magazine in the netherlands . 
daisy duck is a cartoon character created in 1940 by walt disney studios as the girlfriend of donald duck . 
daisy was also the actual protagonist of `` donald's dilemma ''  -lrb-  july 11, 1947 -rrb- . 
besides her love for donald ,  daisy is also shown to be more sophisticated and intelligent than him . 
their relationship problems were also focused on in `` donald's double trouble ''  -lrb-  june 28, 1946 -rrb- . 
the short introduced daisy's theme song `` crazy over daisy , ``  and in later appearances ,  donald can be heard whistling the tune ,  such as in `` out on a limb '' and `` donald the dude duck . `` 
her next appearance in `` sleepy time donald ''  -lrb-  may 9, 1947 -rrb- involved daisy attempting to rescue a sleepwalking donald from wandering into danger . 
daisy's speaking role again came 4 years later in `` donald's crime '' . 
donna made her sole animated appearance in the short film `` don donald ''  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- ,  directed by ben sharpsteen . 
daisy herself sometimes exhibits a temper ,  but she has much greater self-control than donald . 
donald has to agree but points early on that daisy herself has the temper of a `` wild-eyed wildcat '' . 
at the end of the story she spitefully abandons donald in the desert after his car breaks down . 
the short stands out among other donald shorts of the period for its use of modern music and surreal situations throughout . 
according to the encyclopedia of animated disney shorts and the big cartoon database ,  `` don donald '' is considered daisy's debut . 
daisy usually shows a strong affinity towards donald ,  although she is often characterized as being more sophisticated than him . 
daisy briefly appears in a non-speaking role in donald's daydream ,  imagining how pleased she will be . 
duck steps out '' ,  daisy ,  along with donald and the nephews ,  made a brief cameo in the `` mickey mouse '' short `` the nifty nineties '' ,  cementing her position as a recurring character . 
since her early appearances ,  daisy is attracted to donald and devoted to him in the same way he is often devoted to her . 
on march 10, 2000, the nasdaq composite stock market index peaked at 5,048.62.
by the end of the stock market downturn of 2002, stocks had lost $5 trillion in market capitalization since the peak . 
even though the nasdaq composite rose 85.6% and the s&p 500 index rose 19.5% in 1999, more stocks fell in value than rose in value as investors sold stocks in slower growing companies to invest in internet stocks . 
on march 15, 2000, yahoo ! 
the nasdaq composite stock market index ,  which included many internet-based companies ,  peaked in value on march 10, 2000, before crashing . 
by that time ,  most internet stocks had declined in value by 75% from their highs ,  wiping out $1.755 trillion in value . 
all this generated high interest in investing in internet companies . 
and ebay ended merger talks and the nasdaq fell 2.6% but the s&p 500 index rose 2.4% as investors shifted from strong performing technology stocks to poor performing established stocks . 
on friday ,  april 14, 2000, the nasdaq composite index fell 9% ,  ending a week in which it fell 25% . 
at its trough on october 9, 2002, the nasdaq-100 had dropped to 1,114, down 78% from its peak . 
investors were forced to sell stocks ahead of tax day ,  the due date to pay taxes on gains realized in the previous year . 
the sum of all future cash flows ,  both incoming and outgoing ,  is the net present value  -lrb-  npv  -rrb-  ,  which is taken as the value of the cash flows in question . 
thus the discounted present value  -lrb-  for one cash flow in one future period  -rrb-  is expressed as:
the most widely used method of discounting is exponential discounting ,  which values future cash flows as `` how much money would have to be invested currently ,  at a given rate of return ,  to yield the cash flow in future . `` 
dachau is northwest of munich . 
dachau was founded in the 9th century . 
dachau  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a town in upper bavaria ,  in the southern part of germany . 
to the east the greater district dachau borders on the greater district of munich with the community of oberschleißheim . 
in 1933 the dachau concentration camp was built east of the city by the nazis and operated until 1945.
 ''drosophila '' species are found all around the world ,  with more species in the tropical regions . 
 ''drosophila '' species vary widely in their reproductive capacity . 
 ''drosophila '' species are small flies ,  typically pale yellow to reddish brown to black ,  with red eyes . 
personalist dictatorships are regimes in which all power lies in the hands of a single individual . 
however ,  one of the most recent classification of dictatorships ,  formulated ,  do not identify totalitarianism as a form of dictatorship . 
hybrid dictatorships are regimes that blend qualities of personalist ,  singleparty ,  and military dictatorships . 
the most common forms of hybrid dictatorships are personalist/single-party hybrids and personalist/military hybrids . 
since world war ii ,  a broader range of dictatorships has been recognized ,  including third world dictatorships ,  theocratic or religious dictatorships and dynastic or family-based dictatorships . 
according to barbara geddes ,  a dictatorial government may be classified in five typologies: military dictatorships ,  single-party dictatorships ,  personalist dictatorships ,  monarchies ,  hybrid dictatorships . 
there are also many films depicting latin american military dictatorships . 
in the first half of the 20th century ,  communist and fascist dictatorships appeared in a variety of scientifically and technologically advanced countries ,  which are distinct from dictatorships in latin america and post-colonial dictatorships in africa and asia . 
in latin use ,  a `` dictator '' was a judge in the roman republic temporarily invested with absolute power . 
reinhardt was attracted to music at an early age ,  first playing the violin . 
hylton offered him a job on the spot ,  and reinhardt accepted . 
during the years after the fire ,  reinhardt was rehabilitating and experimenting on the guitar that his brother had given him . 
hearing their music apparently triggered in reinhardt a vision and goal of becoming a jazz professional . 
while developing his interest in jazz ,  reinhardt met stéphane grappelli ,  a young violinist with similar musical interests . 
before he had a chance to start with the band ,  however ,  reinhardt nearly died . 
in 1992, plato was one of the first celebrities to star in a video game . 
plato married lanny lambert in 1984 and the couple had one son . 
during her years on `` diff'rent strokes '' ,  plato struggled with drug and alcohol problems . 
on may 7, 1999, the day before she died ,  plato appeared on `` the howard stern show '' . 
plato separated from lambert in january 1988, the same week her mother died of scleroderma . 
plato appeared on the show from 1978 until 1984 and again from 1985 to 1986; during her tenure the show appeared on two different networks . 
in december 1983, plato moved in with her boyfriend ,  rock guitarist lanny lambert . 
during her march 1990 divorce ,  plato lost custody of her son to lambert and was given visitation rights . 
it involves a player dropping the ball and then kicking it when it bounces off the ground . 
in rugby union ,  a drop kick is used for the kick-off and restarts and to score a drop goal  -lrb-  sometimes called a field goal  -rrb-  . 
a drop kick is a type of kick in various codes of football . 
the names derry and londonderry are not limited to ireland . 
in european parliament elections ,  it was part of the northern ireland constituency . 
the name derry is very much in popular use throughout ireland for the naming of places ,  and there are at least six towns bearing that name and at least a further 79 places . 
derry ,  officially londonderry  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is the second-largest city in northern ireland and the fourth-largest city on the island of ireland . 
derry was a focal point for the nascent civil rights movement in northern ireland . 
the council merged with strabane district council in april 2015 under local government reorganisation to become derry and strabane district council . 
derry is one of the oldest continuously inhabited places in ireland . 
apart from the name of derry city council ,  the city is usually known as londonderry in official use within the uk . 
according to the city's royal charter of 10 april 1662, the official name is `` londonderry '' . 
on 23 july 2015, the council voted in favour of a motion to change the official name of the city to derry and to write to mark h .  durkan ,  northern ireland minister of the environment ,  to ask how the change could be effected . 
the town became strategically more significant during the tudor conquest of ireland and came under frequent attack . 
the name `` derry '' is preferred by nationalists and it is broadly used throughout northern ireland's catholic community ,  as well as that of the republic of ireland ,  whereas many unionists prefer `` londonderry ''; however in everyday conversation derry is used by most protestant residents of the city . 
during the 1640s ,  the city suffered in the wars of the three kingdoms ,  which began with the irish rebellion of 1641, when the gaelic irish insurgents made a failed attack on the city . 
during the irish war of independence ,  the area was rocked by sectarian violence ,  partly prompted by the guerilla war raging between the irish republican army and british forces ,  but also influenced by economic and social pressures . 
while the city is more usually known colloquially as derry ,  londonderry is also commonly used and remains the legal name . 
in 1863 dost mohammad retook herat with british acquiescence . 
abandoning the provocative policy of maintaining a british resident in kabul ,  but having achieved all their other objectives ,  the british withdrew . 
after months of chaos in kabul ,  mohammad akbar khan secured local control and in april 1843 his father dost mohammad ,  who had been released by the british ,  returned to the throne in afghanistan . 
in 1926, amanullah ended the emirate of afghanistan and proclaimed the kingdom of afghanistan with himself as king . 
it soon became apparent to the british that sikh participation ,  advancing toward kabul through the khyber pass while shuja and the british advanced through kandahar ,  would not be forthcoming . 
afghan forces loyal to akbar khan besieged the remaining british contingents at kandahar ,  ghazni and jalalabad . 
but the crafty afghan ruler clearly viewed the war as an opportunity to play one side off against the other ,  for he also offered the british to resist a central powers attack on india in exchange for an end to british control of afghan foreign policy . 
with british forces occupying much of the country ,  sher ali's son and successor ,  mohammad yaqub khan ,  signed the treaty of gandamak in may 1879 to prevent a british invasion of the rest of the country . 
during the indian rebellion of 1857, some british officials suggested restoring peshawar to dost mohammad ,  in return for his support against the rebellious sepoys of the bengal army ,  but this view was rejected by british political officers on the north west frontier ,  who believed that dost mohammad would see this as a sign of weakness and turn against the british . 
the british ,  however ,  refused to give any assurances to the disappointed sher ali . 
as far as british interests were concerned ,  abdur rahman answered their prayers: a forceful ,  intelligent leader capable of welding his divided people into a state; and he was willing to accept limitations to his power imposed by british control of his country's foreign affairs and the british buffer state policy . 
in practice ,  the plan replaced dost mohammad with a british figurehead whose autonomy would be as limited as that of other indian princes . 
at the same time ,  the russians feared permanent british occupation in central asia as the british encroached northward ,  taking the punjab ,  sindh ,  and kashmir; later to become pakistan . 
british forces used airpower to shock the afghans ,  and the king's home was directly attacked in what is the first case of aerial bombardment in afghanistan's history . 
the british denied that they were invading afghanistan ,  instead claiming they were merely supporting its legitimate shuja government `` against foreign interference and factious opposition '' . 
by 1854 the british wanted to resume relations with dost mohammad ,  whom they had essentially ignored in the intervening twelve years . 
when auckland refused to put the agreement in writing ,  dost mohammad turned his back on the british and began negotiations with vitkevich . 
of the british only one ,  dr .  william brydon ,  reached jalalabad ,  while a few others were captured . 
nadir khan accused amanullah khan of kufr with his pro western policies . 
until 1952 the terms dementia praecox and schizophrenia were used interchangeably in american psychiatry ,  with occasional use of the hybrid terms `` dementia praecox  -lrb-  schizophrenia  -rrb- ``  or `` schizophrenia  -lrb-  dementia praecox  -rrb- ``  . 
without kahlbaum and hecker there would be no dementia praecox . 
schizophrenia was mentioned as an alternate term for dementia praecox in the 1918 `` statistical manual '' . 
but it was not until 1900 and 1901 that the first three american publications regarding dementia praecox appeared ,  one of which was a translation of a few sections of kraepelin's 6th edition of 1899 on dementia praecox . 
kraepelin continued to equate dementia praecox with hebephrenia for the next six years . 
kraepelin viewed dementia praecox as a progressively deteriorating disease from which no one recovered . 
over the years ,  the term `` dementia praecox '' was gradually replaced by `` schizophrenia '' ,  which remains in current diagnostic use . 
in this edition dementia praecox is still essentially hebephrenia ,  and it ,  dementia paranoides and catatonia are described as distinct psychotic disorders among the `` metabolic disorders leading to dementia '' . 
the term `` dementia praecox '' was first used in 1891 by arnold pick  -lrb-  1851–1924 -rrb- ,  a professor of psychiatry at charles university in prague . 
jung ,  eased the adoption of his broader version of dementia praecox  -lrb-  schizophrenia  -rrb-  in america over kraepelin's narrower and prognostically more negative one . 
in the seventh ,  1904, edition of `` psychiatrie '' ,  kraepelin accepted the possibility that a small number of patients may recover from dementia praecox . 
 ''dementia '' is an ancient term which has been in use since at least the time of lucretius in 50 b . c . e . 
a military dolphin is a dolphin trained for military uses . 
dolphins have few marine enemies . 
dolphins range in size from the long and maui's dolphin to the and killer whale . 
the most common dolphin species kept is the bottlenose dolphin ,  while there are around 60 captive killer whales . 
there are 40 extant species named as dolphins . 
dolphins and other smaller cetaceans are also hunted in an activity known as dolphin drive hunting . 
some dolphin species are at risk of extinction ,  especially some river dolphin species such as the amazon river dolphin ,  and the ganges and yangtze river dolphin ,  which are critically or seriously endangered . 
dolphins were sacred to both aphrodite and apollo . 
dolphins are sometimes hunted in places such as japan ,  in an activity known as dolphin drive hunting . 
dolphins have rather small ,  unidentifiable spouts . 
the dolphins' reward is the fish that escape the nets . 
male bottlenose dolphins have been known to engage in infanticide . 
various species of dolphin have been known to engage in sexual behavior up to and including copulation with dolphins of other species . 
a group of dolphins is called a `` school '' or a `` pod '' . 
male dolphins are called `` bulls '' ,  females `` cows '' and young dolphins are called `` calves '' . 
some dolphins are adapted for diving to great depths . 
dolphins engage in acts of aggression towards each other . 
in 1933, three strange dolphins beached off the irish coast; they appeared to be hybrids between risso's and bottlenose dolphins . 
dolphins have long played a role in human culture . 
dolphins are known to teach ,  learn ,  cooperate ,  scheme ,  and grieve . 
cooked dolphin meat has a flavor very similar to beef liver . 
dolphins are sometimes used as symbols ,  for instance in heraldry . 
organizations such as the mote marine laboratory rescue and rehabilitate sick ,  wounded ,  stranded or orphaned dolphins while others ,  such as the whale and dolphin conservation and hong kong dolphin conservation society ,  work on dolphin conservation and welfare . 
the dolphin ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment . 
the renewed popularity of dolphins in the 1960s resulted in the appearance of many dolphinaria around the world ,  making dolphins accessible to the public . 
a shark culling program in kwazulu-natal has killed at least 2,310 dolphins . 
an unusual and very rare hybrid dolphin ,  known as a wolphin ,  is kept at the sea life park in hawaii ,  which is a cross between a bottlenose dolphin and a false killer whale . 
dolphins have conical teeth ,  as opposed to porpoises' spade-shaped teeth . 
there was a temple to poseidon and a statue of arion riding the dolphin . 
another learned behavior was discovered among river dolphins in brazil ,  where some male dolphins use weeds and sticks as part of a sexual display . 
because dolphins are generally associated in groups ,  communication is necessary . 
a division ring is a type of noncommutative ring under the looser definition where `` noncommutative ring '' refers to rings which are not `` necessarily '' commutative . 
all fields are division rings; more interesting examples are the non-commutative division rings . 
all division rings are simple ,  i . e . 
in abstract algebra ,  a division ring ,  also called a skew field ,  is a ring in which division is possible . 
the center of a division ring is commutative and therefore a field . 
dia loads and saves diagrams in a custom xml format which is ,  by default ,  gzipped to save space . 
dia has a modular design with several shape packages available for different needs: flowchart ,  network diagrams ,  circuit diagrams ,  and more . 
the next spacecraft to use autonav was `` deep impact '' . 
deep space 1  -lrb-  ds1 -rrb- was a nasa technology demonstration spacecraft which flew by an asteroid and a comet . 
therefore ,  it was a primary mission of the `` deep space 1 '' demonstration to show long-duration use of an ion thruster on a scientific mission . 
 ''deep space 1 '' was the first nasa spacecraft to use ion propulsion rather than the traditional chemical-powered rockets . 
the use of autonav reduces mission cost and dsn demands . 
launched on 24 october 1998, the `` deep space 1 '' spacecraft carried out a flyby of asteroid 9969 braille ,  which was its primary science target . 
prior to launch ,  `` deep space 1 '' was intended to visit comet 76p/west–kohoutek–ikemura and asteroid 3352 mcauliffe . 
the small deep space transponder  -lrb-  sdst  -rrb-  is a compact and lightweight radio-communications system . 
the purpose of `` deep space 1 '' was technology development and validation for future missions; 12 technologies were tested:
the autonav system can also be used in reverse ,  tracking the position of bodies relative to the spacecraft . 
both pepe and micas were similar in capabilities to larger instruments or suites of instruments on other spacecraft . 
it was thought that the ion engine exhaust might interfere with other spacecraft systems ,  such as radio communications or the science instruments . 
david was sometimes referred to as `` david of the tumor '' . 
in rome ,  david painted his famous `` oath of the horatii '' ,  1784.
for this painting ,  david was not honored by a royal `` works of encouragement '' . 
for the salon of 1787, david exhibited his famous `` death of socrates '' . 
there ,  david attended the royal academy ,  based in what is now the louvre . 
the shift in david's perspective played an important role in the paintings of david's later life ,  including this one of sieyès . 
david was made a chevalier de la légion d'honneur in 1803.
david had to work quickly ,  but the result was a simple and powerful image . 
one of the works david was commissioned for was `` the coronation of napoleon in notre dame '' . 
vernet blamed david for her death ,  and the episode followed him for the rest of his life and after . 
david then began work on something that would later hound him: propaganda for the new republic . 
jacques-louis david was born into a prosperous french family in paris on 30 august 1748.
david's painting of brutus was shown during the play `` brutus '' by voltaire . 
 ''the death of marat '' ,  perhaps david's most famous painting ,  has been called the pietà of the revolution . 
despite david's reputation ,  he was more fiercely criticized right after his death than at any point during his life . 
david ,  then a powerful member of the national assembly ,  stood idly by and watched . 
 ''the death of marat '' ,  1793, became the leading image of the terror and immortalized both marat and david in the world of the revolution . 
when david was leaving a theater ,  a carriage struck him ,  and he later died ,  on 29 december 1825.
in 1989 during the `` david against david '' conference albert boime was able to prove ,  on the basis of a document dated in 1787, the painter's membership in the `` la moderation '' masonic lodge . 
nevertheless ,  this work was important in david's career because it was the first completed painting of the french revolution ,  made in less than three months ,  and a work through which he initiated the regeneration process that would continue with `` the death of marat '' ,  david's masterpiece . 
the director barras believed that david was `` tricked '' into signing ,  although one of david's students recalled that in 1798 his master lamented the fact that masterpieces had been imported from italy . 
as the music of the world was evolving ,  so was the drum set . 
louie bellson also assisted in the innovative sizes and sounds of the 1940s drum set by pioneering the use of two bass drums ,  or the double bass drum kit . 
in the 1980s ,  some drummers began to use electronic drums . 
before the development of the drum set ,  drums and cymbals used in military and orchestral music settings were played separately by different percussionists; if the score called for bass drum ,  triangle and cymbals ,  three percussionists would be hired to play these three instruments . 
the modern drum kit was developed in the vaudeville era during the 1920s in new orleans . 
a drum kit — also called a drum set ,  trap set  -lrb-  a term using a contraction of the word ,  `` contraption ''  -rrb-  ,  or simply drums — is a collection of drums and other percussion instruments ,  typically cymbals ,  which are set up on stands to be played by a single player ,  with drumsticks held in both hands ,  and the feet operating pedals that control the hi-hat cymbal and the beater for the bass drum . 
by world war i ,  drum kits were often marching band-style military bass drums with many percussion items suspended on and around them . 
jazz drummers were influential in developing the concept of the modern drum kit and extending playing techniques . 
william f .  ludwig ,  sr .  ,  and his brother ,  theobald ludwig ,  founded the ludwig & ludwig co .  in 1909 and patented the first commercially successful bass drum pedal system ,  paving the way for the modern drum kit . 
the dying earth subgenre of science fiction is named in recognition of vance's role in standardizing a setting ,  the entropically dying earth and sun . 
the dying earth exists alongside several overworlds and underworlds . 
the tribute anthology `` songs of the dying earth ''  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- contains short fiction set in the world of the dying earth by numerous writers alongside tributes to vance's work and influence . 
each short story in the anthology is set on the dying earth ,  and concludes with a short acknowledgement by the author of vance's influence on them . 
magic in the dying earth is performed by memorizing syllables ,  and the human brain can only accommodate a certain amount at once . 
dying earth is a fantasy series by the american author jack vance ,  comprising four books originally published from 1950 to 1984.
the stories of the `` dying earth '' series are set in the distant future ,  at a point when the sun is almost exhausted and magic has asserted itself as a dominant force . 
the archonate stories by matthew hughes — the 1994 novel `` fools errant '' and numerous works in this millennium — take place in `` the penultimate age of old earth , ``  a period of science and technology that is on the verge of transforming into the magical era of the time of the dying earth . 
while most remaining civilizations on the dying earth are utterly unique in their customs and cultures ,  there are some common threads . 
there is an official `` dying earth '' role-playing game published by pelgrane press with an occasional magazine `` the excellent prismatic spray ''  -lrb-  named after a magic spell  -rrb-  . 
the term `` dispute resolution '' may also be used interchangeably with `` conflict resolution '' ,  where conflict styles can be used for different scenarios , and is a judicial system which supply a apparatus for resolution of antagonisms between citizens , between citizens and the government , between two state government and between the centre and state governments . 
catan: cities & knights  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  formerly `` the cities and knights of catan '' is an expansion to the board game `` the settlers of catan '' for three to four players  -lrb-  five to six player play is also possible with the `` settlers '' and `` cities & knights '' five to six player extensions; two-player play is possible with the ``  '' expansion  -rrb-  . 
in this scenario ,  players begin with a pre-placed settlement on a main island . 
however ,  the supply of number tokens is smaller than the number of hexes in the scenario: when the number tokens run out and players expand into a new part of the outlying islands ,  number tokens are moved from the main island to the outlying islands . 
in other scenarios ,  the board is divided into islands ,  and if the player builds a settlement on an island other than the ones they begin on ,  the settlement is worth extra victory points . 
players may claim up to two of the islands as their home islands ,  and settling on any of the other islands awards a special victory point . 
in this scenario ,  there are a number of `` wonders '' ,  each with a large cost of building as well as a prerequisite . 
players may not expand into the outlying islands ,  but by building ships so that they border the outlying islands ,  players may be awarded with victory points ,  development cards ,  or harbors that players may place on the coast of the main island at a later time . 
players begin with settlements on the outside of the map ,  but may build ships to reach the forgotten tribe's islands ,  which are in the center . 
 ''the fog island ''  -lrb-  `` oceans '' in older editions  -rrb-  is the first scenario where exploration is used . 
 ''new world '' is a scenario that blankets all other scenarios that may be created from the parts of `` settlers '' and `` seafarers '' . 
 ''seafarers '' provides scenarios for three or four players  -lrb-  the older fourth edition used the same maps for three- and four-player versions of the scenarios  -rrb-  ,  while the extension provides scenarios for six players  -lrb-  the older third edition also included separate maps for five- and six-player scenarios  -rrb-  . 
the scenario was previously available for older editions as a downloadable scenario  -lrb-  but only in german  -rrb-  ,  titled `` coffee for catan '' . 
in mathematics ,  a dynamical system is a system in which a function describes the time dependence of a point in a geometrical space . 
a dynamical system is a manifold `` m '' called the phase  -lrb-  or state  -rrb-  space endowed with a family of smooth evolution functions φ that for any element of `` t '' ∈ `` t '' ,  the time ,  map a point of the phase space back into the phase space . 
at any given time ,  a dynamical system has a state given by a tuple of real numbers  -lrb-  a vector  -rrb-  that can be represented by a point in an appropriate state space  -lrb-  a geometrical manifold  -rrb-  . 
points in this straight line run into the fixed point . 
when `` b '' = 0, the eigenvalues of `` a '' determine the structure of the phase space . 
for a flow ,  the vector field φ -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  is an affine function of the position in the phase space ,  that is ,  with `` a '' a matrix ,  `` b '' a vector of numbers and `` x '' the position vector . 
the equation gives the time derivative ,  represented by the dot ,  of a trajectory `` x '' -lrb-  `` t ''  -rrb-  on the phase space starting at some point `` x '' . 
one of the implications of the theorem is that if a discrete dynamical system on the real line has a periodic point of period 3, then it must have periodic points of every other period . 
these papers included the poincaré recurrence theorem ,  which states that certain systems will ,  after a sufficiently long but finite time ,  return to a state very close to the initial state . 
the concept of a dynamical system has its origins in newtonian mechanics . 
under sharia ,  the dhimmi communities were usually subjected to their own special laws ,  and exempt from some laws applicable to the muslim community . 
dhimmis were exempt from certain duties assigned specifically to muslims ,  and did not enjoy certain privileges and freedoms reserved for muslims ,  but were otherwise equal under the laws of property ,  contract ,  and obligation . 
muslim states ,  sects ,  schools of thought and individuals differ as to exactly what sharia law entails . 
jews and christians living under early muslim rule were considered dhimmis ,  a status that was later also extended to other non-muslims like hindus . 
dhimmi communities were also allowed to engage in certain practices that were usually forbidden for the muslim community ,  such as the consumption of alcohol and pork . 
according to law professor h .  patrick glenn of mcgill university ,  `` today it is said that the dhimmi are 'excluded from the specifically muslim privileges ,  but on the other hand they are excluded from the specifically muslim duties' while  -lrb-  and here there are clear parallels with western public and private law treatment of aliens—fremdenrecht ,  la condition de estrangers  -rrb-  ,  'for the rest ,  the muslim and the dhimmi are equal in practically the whole of the law of property and of contracts and obligations' . `` 
the continuing and growing pressure from the european powers combined with pressure from muslim reformers gradually relaxed the inequalities between muslims and non-muslims . 
in addition to other legal limitations ,  christians were not considered equals to muslims and several prohibitions were placed on them . 
the wide variety in forms of government ,  systems of law ,  attitudes toward modernity and interpretations of sharia are a result of the ensuing drives for independence and modernity in the muslim world . 
the doctor v64 unit was the first commercially available backup device for the nintendo 64 unit . 
original doctor v64 units sold by bung did not allow the playing of backups . 
the doctor v64 came out in 1996 and was priced around $450 usd . 
following the doctor v64's success ,  bung released the doctor v64 jr .  in december 1998.
the doctor v64  -lrb-  also referred to simply as the v64 -rrb- is a development and backup device made by bung enterprises ltd that is used in conjunction with the nintendo 64.
by the early-mid-1930s ,  de havilland had a reputation for innovative high-speed aircraft with the dh . 88 comet racer . 
at a meeting in early october 1938 with geoffrey de havilland and charles walker  -lrb-  de havilland's chief engineer  -rrb-  ,  the air ministry showed little interest ,  and instead asked de havilland to build wings for other bombers as a sub-contractor . 
to appease the ministry ,  de havilland built mock-ups with a gun turret just aft of the cockpit but ,  apart from this compromise ,  de havilland made no changes . 
based on a total loaded weight of it would have a top speed of and cruising speed of at  . 
based on his experience with the albatross ,  geoffrey de havilland believed that a bomber with a good aerodynamic design and smooth ,  minimal skin area ,  would exceed the p . 13/36 specification . 
on 12 november ,  at a meeting considering fast bomber ideas put forward by de havilland ,  blackburn ,  and bristol ,  air marshal freeman directed de havilland to produce a fast aircraft ,  powered initially by merlin engines ,  with options of using progressively more powerful engines ,  including the rolls-royce griffon and the napier sabre . 
in 1941 it was one of the fastest operational aircraft in the world . 
the mosquito was only reinstated as a priority in july 1940, after de havilland's general manager l . c . l murray ,  promised lord beaverbrook 50 mosquitos by december 1941.
the de havilland dh . 98 mosquito is a british twin-engine shoulder-winged multi-role combat aircraft ,  introduced during the second world war ,  unusual in that its frame was constructed almost entirely of wood . 
still believing this could be improved ,  and after examining more concepts based on the albatross and the new all-metal dh . 95 flamingo ,  de havilland settled on designing a new aircraft that would be aerodynamically clean ,  wooden and powered by the merlin ,  which offered substantial future development . 
then on 25 november ,  the prototype made its first flight ,  piloted by geoffrey de havilland jr .  ,  accompanied by john e .  walker ,  the chief engine installation designer . 
in september 1958, `` w4050 '' was returned to the salisbury hall hangar where it was built ,  restored to its original configuration ,  and became one of the primary exhibits of the de havilland aircraft heritage centre . 
campaign of 1984.
thomas ,  realizing that his success as a high school dropout might convince other teenagers to quit school  -lrb-  something he later claimed was a mistake  -rrb-  ,  became a student at coconut creek high school . 
thomas ,  who considered ending his schooling the greatest mistake of his life ,  did not graduate from high school until 1993, when he obtained a ged . 
thomas founded the chain sisters chicken and biscuits in 1978, named in reference to his other 3 daughters . 
 '' ,  a reunion tv movie based upon `` the six million dollar man '' and `` the bionic woman '' . 
thomas was sent by the clauss family in the mid-1960s to help turn around four failing kfc stores they owned in columbus ,  ohio . 
drivers may interface with:
microsoft has attempted to reduce system instability due to poorly written device drivers by creating a new framework for driver development ,  called windows driver foundation  -lrb-  wdf  -rrb-  . 
kernel space can be accessed by user module only through the use of system calls . 
because of the diversity of hardware and operating systems ,  drivers operate in many different environments . 
apple has an open-source framework for developing drivers on macos called the i/o kit . 
dimona is at an average height of about above sea level . 
dimona  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an israeli city in the negev desert ,  to the south of beersheba and west of the dead sea above the arava valley in the southern district of israel . 
this has resulted in dimona widely being identified with the israeli nuclear program . 
in 2016, dc announced a line-wide relaunch titled dc rebirth . 
on june 4, 2013, dc unveiled two new digital comic innovations to enhance interactivity: `` dc '' and `` dc multiverse '' . 
this logo would also serve as the round body of johnny dc ,  dc's mascot in the 1960s . 
dc comics ,  inc .  is an american comic book publisher . 
the july 1972 dc titles featured a new circular logo . 
in july 1987, dc released variant editions of `` justice league '' #3 and `` the fury of firestorm '' #61 with a new dc logo . 
dc entertainment announced a new identity and logo for another iconic dc comics universe brand on may 17, 2016.
the november 1941 dc titles introduced an updated logo . 
dc's first logo appeared on the april 1940 issues of its titles . 
in march 2012, dc unveiled a new logo consisting of the letter `` d '' flipping back to reveal the letter `` c '' and `` dc entertainment '' . 
on may 8, 2005, a new logo  -lrb-  dubbed the `` dc spin ''  -rrb-  was unveiled ,  debuting on dc titles in june 2005 with `` dc special: the return of donna troy '' #1 and the rest of the titles the following week . 
the small logo ,  with no background ,  read simply ,  `` a dc publication '' . 
this successful revitalization of the silver age teen titans led dc's editors to seek the same for the wider dc universe . 
despite logo changes since 2005, the old `` dc bullet '' continues to be used only on the dc archive editions series . 
in october 1970, dc briefly retired the circular logo in favour of a simple `` dc '' in a rectangle with the name of the title ,  or the star of the book; the logo on many issues of `` action comics '' ,  for example ,  read `` dc superman '' . 
in october 2013, dc entertainment announced that the dc comics offices would be moved from new york city to warner bros .  burbank ,  california ,  headquarters in 2015.
dc licensed characters from the archie comics imprint red circle comics by 2007.
dc's introduction of the reimagined superheroes did not go unnoticed by other comics companies . 
in 2011, dc rebooted all of its running titles following the flashpoint storyline . 
dc entertainment and warner bros .  digital networks announced in april 2017 dc universe digital service to be launched in 2018 with two original series . 
dc entered into a publishing agreement with milestone media that gave dc a line of comics featuring a culturally and racially diverse range of superhero characters . 
 ''dc '' will first appear in the upcoming digital-first title ,  `` batman '66 '' ,  based on the 1960s television series and `` dc multiverse '' will first appear in ``  '' ,  a digital-first title based on the  . 
in 1935, jerry siegel and joe shuster ,  the future creators of superman ,  created doctor occult ,  who is the earliest dc comics character to still be in the dc universe . 
in 2014, dc announced an eight-issue miniseries titled ``  ''convergence '' '' which began in april 2015.
the hermite normal form is substantially easier to compute than the smith normal form . `` 
hermite normal form may also be used for solving systems of linear diophantine equations . 
the simplest linear diophantine equation takes the form  ,  where  ,  and are given integers . 
more generally ,  every system of linear diophantine equations may be solved by computing the smith normal form of its matrix ,  in a way that is similar to the use of the reduced row echelon form to solve a system of linear equations over a field . 
using matrix notation every system of linear diophantine equations may be written where is an matrix of integers ,  is an column matrix of unknowns and is an column matrix of integers . 
the system to be solved may thus be rewritten as calling the entries of and those of  ,  this leads to the system this system is equivalent to the given one in the following sense: a column matrix of integers is a solution of the given system if and only if for some column matrix of integers such that  . 
moreover ,  the integer solutions that define a given rational point are all sequences of the form  where is any integer ,  and is the greatest common divisor of the formula_15
for proving that there is no solution ,  one may reduce the equation modulo . 
thus systems of linear diophantine equations are basic in this context ,  and textbooks on integer programming usually have a treatment of systems of linear diophantine equations . 
little is known about the life of diophantus . 
duke paoa kahinu mokoe hulikohola kahanamoku  -lrb-  august 24, 1890 – january 22, 1968 -rrb- was a native hawaiian competition swimmer who popularized the ancient hawaiian sport of surfing . 
growing up on the outskirts of waikiki ,  kahanamoku spent his youth as a bronzed beach boy . 
according to kahanamoku ,  he was born in honolulu at haleʻākala ,  the home of bernice pauahi bishop which was later converted into the arlington hotel . 
separate distinguished service medals exist for the different branches of the military as well as a fifth version of the medal which is a senior award of the united states department of defense . 
the army version of the distinguished service medal is typically referred to simply as the `` distinguished service medal '' while the other branches of service use the service name as a prefix . 
the medal was created on july 9, 1970 by president richard nixon in  . 
the medal is gold in color and on the obverse it features a medium blue enameled pentagon  -lrb-  point up  -rrb-  . 
dacoity is a term used for `` banditry '' in bengali ,  odiya ,  hindi ,  kannada and urdu . 
in hindi ,  `` dacoity ''  -lrb-  hindi: डकैती `` ḍakaitī '' ,  urdu: ڈکیتی `` ḍakaitī '' ,  bengali: ডাকাতি `` ḍakati '' ,  or odiya ଡକାୟତି  -rrb-  means `` armed robbery '' . 
the word `` dacoity '' ,  the anglicized version of the hindustani word `` ḍakaitī ''  -lrb-  historically spelled `` dakaitee '' ,  hindi डकैती or urdu ڈکیتی or bengali ডাকাতি ,  or odiya ଡକାୟତି   -rrb-  ,  comes from `` ḍākū ''  -lrb-  historically spelled `` dakoo '' ,  hindi: डाकू ,  urdu: ڈاکو ,  meaning `` armed robber ''  -rrb-  or bengali `` ḍakat ''  -lrb-  ডাকাত ,  or odiya ଡକାୟତି  -rrb-  . 
in the city ,  the population age distribution was 18.6% under the age of 18, 30.9% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 16.7% from 45 to 64, and 6.6% who were 65 years of age or older . 
the population age and sex distribution was 10,760 people  -lrb-  16.4%  -rrb-  under the age of 18, 21,757 people  -lrb-  33.2%  -rrb-  aged 18 to 24, 14,823 people  -lrb-  22.6%  -rrb-  aged 25 to 44, 12,685 people  -lrb-  19.3%  -rrb-  aged 45 to 64, and 5,597 people  -lrb-  8.5%  -rrb-  who were 65 years of age or older . 
about 5.4% of families and 24.5% of the population were below the poverty line ,  including 6.8% of those under age 18 and 2.8% of those age 65 or over . 
for every 100 females age 18 and over ,  there were 88.0 males . 
for every 100 females age 18 and over ,  there were 87.8 males . 
davis' asian population of 14,355 was apportioned among 1,631 indian americans ,  6,395 chinese americans ,  1,560 korean americans ,  1,185 vietnamese americans ,  1,033 filipino americans ,  953 japanese americans ,  and 1,598 other asian americans . 
davis lies in the sacramento valley ,  the northern portion of the central valley ,  in northern california ,  at an elevation of about above sea level . 
there were 24,873 households ,  of which 6,119  -lrb-  24.6%  -rrb-  had children under the age of 18 living in them ,  9,343  -lrb-  37.6%  -rrb-  were opposite-sex married couples living together ,  1,880  -lrb-  7.6%  -rrb-  had a female householder with no husband present ,  and 702  -lrb-  2.8%  -rrb-  had a male householder with no wife present . 
there were 22,948 households of which 26.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them ,  38.3% were married couples living together ,  8.2% had a female householder with no husband present ,  and 50.8% were non-families . 
as in other areas of northern california ,  the tule fog is a leading cause of road accidents in the winter season . 
in present-day pueblo ,  runyon field ,  the damon runyon repertory theater company ,  and runyon lake are named in his honor . 
the family plot of damon runyon is located at woodlawn cemetery in the bronx ,  new york . 
runyon died in new york city from throat cancer in late 1946, at age 66.
damon runyon was born alfred damon runyan to alfred lee and elizabeth  -lrb-  damon  -rrb-  runyan . 
after ellen runyon's death ,  runyon and del grande married on july 7, 1932; that marriage ended in 1946 when she left him for a younger man . 
alfred damon runyon  -lrb-  october 4, 1880 – december 10, 1946 -rrb- was an american newspaperman and short-story writer . 
also in 2006, devo worked on a project with disney known as devo 2.0.
a documentary film about devo ,  entitled `` are we not men ? `` 
devo performed sporadically from 1997 onwards . 
devo  -lrb-   ,  originally   -rrb-  is an american rock band from akron ,  ohio formed in 1973.
these songs were often played as house music before devo concerts . 
the first form of devo was the `` sextet devo '' which performed at the 1973 kent state performing arts festival . 
it contained a set of covers of devo songs interspersed with renditions of popular songs in devo's style . 
devo released their sixth album ,  `` shout '' ,  in 1984 to poor reviews . 
devo gained a new level of visibility with 1980's `` freedom of choice '' . 
throughout the band's career ,  they would often be considered a `` joke band '' by the music press . 
a recording of an early devo performance from 1975 with the quartet lineup appears on ``  '' ,  ending with the promoters unplugging devo's equipment . 
in august 1981, the band's `` dev-o live '' ep spent three weeks at the top of the australian charts . 
in 1990, `` smooth noodle maps '' ,  devo's last album for twenty years ,  was released . 
robert mothersbaugh ,  sr .  ,  father of mark ,  bob ,  and jim mothersbaugh ,  who portrayed general boy in various devo films ,  died on may 22, 2016, according to the mothersbaugh family . 
after the band achieved this success ,  co-founder bob lewis asked for accreditation and compensation in 1978 for his contributions to the band . 
dale chihuly  -lrb-  born september 20, 1941 -rrb- is an american glass sculptor and entrepreneur . 
called chihuly garden and glass ,  it opened may 21, 2012.
in 1971, with the support of john hauberg and anne gould hauberg ,  chihuly cofounded the pilchuck glass school near stanwood ,  washington . 
chihuly also founded the hilltop artists program in tacoma ,  washington at jason lee middle school and wilson high school . 
during his career kamen has won numerous awards . 
in 2009 kamen claimed his company deka was now working on solar power inventions . 
dean l .  kamen  -lrb-  born april 5, 1951 -rrb- is an american engineer ,  inventor ,  and businessman . 
in 2017, first held its first annual global counterpart of the frc - fgc -lrb-  first global challenge  -rrb-  in washington dc . 
kamen was already a successful and wealthy inventor ,  after inventing the first drug infusion pump and starting a company ,  `` autosyringe '' ,  to market and manufacture the pump . 
in 2017, kamen was honored with an institutional honorary degree from université de sherbrooke . 
kamen was a keynote speaker at the 2015 congress of future science and technology leaders . 
kamen and deka also developed the deka arm system or `` luke '' ,  a prosthetic arm replacement that offers its user much more fine motor control than traditional prosthetic limbs . 
the credit risk equivalent of the derivative contracts was estimated at $3.3 trillion . 
to give an idea of the size of the derivative market ,  `` the economist '' has reported that as of june 2011, the over-the-counter  -lrb-  otc  -rrb-  derivatives market amounted to approximately $700 trillion ,  and the size of the market traded on exchanges totaled an additional $83 trillion . 
cds notional value in early 2012 amounted to $25.5 trillion ,  down from $55 trillion in 2008.
for the fourth quarter 2017 the european securities market authority estimated the size of european derivatives market at a size of €660 trillion with 74 million outstanding contracts . 
hence ,  specifically the market price risk of the underlying asset can be controlled in almost every situation . 
the divine right of kings ,  divine right ,  or god's mandate is a political and religious doctrine of royal and political legitimacy . 
this was the direct precursor to the concept of `` divine right of kings '' ,  as well as in the egyptian and roman religions . 
for instance ,  the right of a father to respect from his son did not indicate a right for the son to receive a return from that respect; and the divine right of kings ,  which permitted absolute power over subjects ,  did not leave a lot of room for many rights for the subjects themselves . 
adomnan of iona is one of the earliest christian proponents of this concept of kings ruling with divine right . 
historically ,  many notions of rights were authoritarian and hierarchical ,  with different people granted different rights ,  and some having more rights than others . 
the scots textbooks of the divine right of kings were written in 1597–1598 by james vi of scotland . 
in contrast ,  modern conceptions of rights often emphasize liberty and equality as among the most important aspects of rights ,  for example in the american revolution and the french revolution . 
the doctrine implies that any attempt to depose the king or to restrict his powers runs contrary to the will of god and may constitute a sacrilegious act . 
in the middle ages ,  the idea that god had granted earthly power to the monarch ,  just as he had given spiritual authority and power to the church ,  especially to the pope ,  was already a well-known concept long before later writers coined the term `` divine right of kings '' and employed it as a theory in political science . 
it is often expressed in the phrase `` by the grace of god '' ,  attached to the titles of a reigning monarch . 
in the pagan world ,  kings were often seen as either ruling with the backing of heavenly powers or perhaps even being divine beings themselves . 
the french prelate jacques-bénigne bossuet made a classic statement of the doctrine of divine right in a sermon preached before king louis xiv:
these daleks presumably become the `` imperial daleks '' ,  first seen in `` remembrance of the daleks '' . 
davros appears as the emperor dalek in `` remembrance of the daleks '' ,  with his white and gold daleks now based on skaro and termed `` imperial daleks '' ,  fighting against the grey `` renegade dalek '' faction . 
 ''terror firma '' may contradict the events of the eighth doctor adventures novel `` war of the daleks '' by john peel ,  in which an unmerged davros is placed on trial by the dalek prime ,  a combination of the dalek emperor and the dalek supreme . 
the fourth doctor  -lrb-  tom baker  -rrb-  first encountered davros  -lrb-  michael wisher  -rrb-  in `` genesis of the daleks '' when he and his companions were sent to skaro to avert the creation of the daleks . 
cast in the role of davros was michael wisher ,  who had previously appeared in several different roles on `` doctor who '' and had provided dalek voices in the serials `` frontier in space '' ,  `` planet of the daleks '' and `` death to the daleks '' . 
in the fifth doctor story `` resurrection of the daleks '' ,  davros  -lrb-  terry molloy  -rrb-  is released from his space station prison by small dalek force aided by human mercenaries and dalek duplicates . 
 ''davros '' ,  which does not feature the daleks ,  apparently fills in the gaps between `` resurrection of the daleks '' and `` revelation of the daleks '' ,  and has the scientist trying to manipulate the galaxy's economy into a war footing similar to skaro's . 
in `` the juggernauts '' ,  davros is on the run from the original daleks . 
during the revived series ,  davros was referred to in the episode `` dalek ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- by the ninth doctor  -lrb-  christopher eccleston  -rrb-  ,  who explains that the daleks were created by `` a genius .  .  .  a man who was king of his own little world '' ,  and again by the tenth doctor  -lrb-  david tennant  -rrb-  in the episode `` evolution of the daleks ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- ,  where he refers to the daleks' creator as believing that `` removing emotions makes you stronger '' . 
he later names these creatures `` daleks '' ,  an anagram of kaleds . 
however ,  the dalek force is destroyed by the doctor ,  and davros is captured and imprisoned in suspended animation by the humans ,  before being taken to earth to face trial . 
the allusion is most obvious in the dalek stories written by nation ,  in particular `` the dalek invasion of earth ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- and `` genesis of the daleks ''  -lrb-  1975 -rrb- . 
two `` doctor who '' movies starring peter cushing featured the daleks as the main villains: `` dr .  who and the daleks '' ,  and `` daleks - invasion earth 2150 ad '' ,  based on the television serials `` the daleks '' and `` the dalek invasion of earth '' ,  respectively . 
the doctor then uses his regeneration energy to obliterate the daleks on the planet . 
new dalek props were built for the 21st century version of `` doctor who '' . 
to his indignant surprise ,  in `` asylum of the daleks '' ,  the eleventh doctor  -lrb-  matt smith  -rrb-  learns that the daleks have designated him as `` the predator '' . 
a single dalek appeared in `` dalek '' ,  written by robert shearman ,  which was broadcast on bbc one on 30 april 2005.
four books focusing on the daleks were published in the 1960s . 
the twelfth doctor's first encounter with the daleks is in his second full episode ,  `` into the dalek ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- ,  where he encounters a damaged dalek ,  which he names 'rusty' ,  aboard a human resistance ship . 
the daleks were conceived by science-fiction writer terry nation and first appeared in the 1963 `` doctor who '' serial `` the daleks '' ,  in the shells designed by raymond cusick . 
a `` rel '' is a dalek and kaled unit of measurement . 
however ,  this was reversed in `` the time of the doctor '' ,  when the daleks regained knowledge of the doctor through the memory of an old acquaintance of the doctor ,  tasha lem . 
a novella ,  `` the dalek factor '' by simon clark ,  was published in 2004, and two books featuring the daleks and the tenth doctor  -lrb-  `` i am a dalek '' by gareth roberts ,  2006, and `` prisoner of the daleks '' by trevor baxendale ,  2009 -rrb- have been released as part of the new series adventures . 
the framing device for the ``  '' audio plays is a dalek trial to determine if davros should be the daleks' leader once more . 
the lower half of a dalek's shell is covered with hemispherical protrusions ,  or `` dalek bumps '' ,  which are shown in the episode `` dalek '' to be spheres embedded in the casing . 
besides hawkins and graham ,  other voice actors for the daleks have included roy skelton ,  who first voiced the daleks in the 1967 story `` the evil of the daleks '' and provided voices for five additional dalek serials including `` planet of the daleks '' ,  and for the one-off anniversary special `` the five doctors '' . 
the dalek obsession with their own superiority is illustrated by the schism between the renegade and imperial daleks seen in `` revelation of the daleks '' and `` remembrance of the daleks '': the two factions each consider the other to be a perversion despite the relatively minor differences between them . 
eventually the daleks were cleared to appear in the first series . 
the concept for these `` spider daleks '' was abandoned ,  but picked up again in several `` doctor who '' spin-offs . 
the thirteenth doctor encountered a dalek in a new year's day episode ,  `` resolution ''  -lrb-  2019 -rrb- . 
the instant appeal of the daleks caught the bbc off-guard ,  and transformed `` doctor who '' into a national phenomenon . 
dalek casings are made of a bonded polycarbide material called `` dalekanium '' by a member of the human resistance in `` the dalek invasion of earth '' and by the cult of skaro in `` daleks in manhattan '' . 
these props were repainted in grey for the seventh doctor serial `` remembrance of the daleks '' and designated as `` renegade daleks ''; another redesign ,  painted in cream and gold ,  became the `` imperial dalek '' faction . 
micky dolenz and peter tork also appeared alongside jones as judges . 
tork also joined dolenz ,  jones ,  boyce & hart on stage at disneyland on 4 july 1976, and also joined dolenz and jones on stage at the starwood in hollywood ,  california ,  in 1977.
they also released an album of new material appropriately as dolenz ,  jones ,  boyce & hart ,  additionally a live album `` concert in japan '' was released by capitol in 1976 -rrb- . 
monkees activity ceased until 1996 when jones reunited with dolenz ,  tork and michael nesmith to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the band . 
after the group disbanded in 1971, jones reunited with micky dolenz as well as monkees songwriters tommy boyce and bobby hart in 1974 as a short-lived group called dolenz ,  jones ,  boyce & hart . 
he appeared in two episodes each of `` love ,  american style '' and `` my two dads '' . 
jones was married three times . 
jones is the next closest member of the monkees  -lrb-  to micky dolenz  -rrb-  who had worked with the band since its inception . 
the exceptions have been the new songs recorded in 1986 and since his death  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
guitarist michael nesmith stated that jones's `` spirit and soul live well in my heart ,  among all the lovely people ,  who remember with me the good times ,  and the healing times ,  that were created for so many ,  including us . 
in 1967 the album was issued in the uk ,  in mono only ,  on the pye records label  -lrb-  npl 18178 -rrb- . 
from 1966 to 1971, jones was a member of the monkees ,  a pop-rock group formed expressly for a television show of the same name . 
jones married his second wife anita pollinger on 24 january 1981, and also had two daughters with her – jessica lillian  -lrb-  born 4 september 1981 -rrb- and annabel charlotte  -lrb-  born 26 june 1988 -rrb- . 
jones is considered one of the great teen idols . 
dolenz and jones took advantage of this ,  joining ex-monkees songwriters tommy boyce and bobby hart to tour the united states . 
it was the last time all four monkees performed together . 
