 -lrb-  see list of bantu peoples  -rrb-  . 
the term 'narrow bantu' was coined by the `` benue–congo working group '' to distinguish bantu as recognized by guthrie ,  from the bantoid languages not recognized as bantu by guthrie . 
there is no true genealogical classification of the  -lrb-  narrow  -rrb-  bantu languages . 
the bantu languages  -lrb-  english:  ,  proto-bantu: *bantʊ̀  -rrb-  technically the narrow bantu languages ,  as opposed to `` wide bantu '' ,  a loosely defined categorization which includes other `` bantoid '' languages ,  are a large family of languages spoken by the bantu peoples throughout sub-saharan africa . 
northwest bantu is more divergent internally than central bantu ,  and perhaps less conservative due to contact with non-bantu niger–congo languages; central bantu is likely the innovative line cladistically . 
the prefix `` ba- '' in bantu specifically refers to people ,  not language . 
at a broader level ,  the family is commonly split in two depending on the reflexes of proto-bantu tone patterns: many bantuists group together parts of zones a through d  -lrb-  the extent depending on the author  -rrb-  as `` northwest bantu '' or `` forest bantu '' ,  and the remainder as `` central bantu '' or `` savanna bantu '' . 
this bantu expansion came to dominate sub-saharan africa east of cameroon ,  an area where bantu peoples now constitute nearly the entire population . 
northwest bantu is clearly not a coherent family ,  but even for central bantu the evidence is lexical ,  with little evidence that it is a historically valid group . 
the term `` narrow bantu '' ,  excluding those languages classified as bantoid by guthrie  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- ,  was introduced in the 1960s . 
the bomarc became the f-99.
the bomarc a and bomarc b targets were designated as cqm-10a and cqm-10b ,  respectively . 
the liquid-fuel booster of the bomarc a was no optimal solution . 
the first usaf operational bomarc squadron was the 46th air defense missile squadron  -lrb-  adms  -rrb-  ,  organized on 1 january 1959 and activated on 25 march . 
at the height of the program ,  there were 14 bomarc sites located in the us and two in canada . 
the bomarc missile program was highly controversial in canada . 
as soon as high-thrust solid-fuel rockets became a reality in the mid-1950s ,  the usaf began to develop a new solid-fueled bomarc variant ,  the im-99b bomarc b . 
boeing built 570 bomarc missiles between 1957 and 1964, 269 cim-10a ,  301 cim-10b . 
in late 1957, boeing received the production contract for the im-99a bomarc a interceptor missile ,  and in september 1959, the first im-99a squadron became operational . 
after the inactivation of the 4751st adw -lrb-  m  -rrb-  on 1 july 1962 and transfer of hurlburt to tactical air command for air commando operations the 4751st air defense squadron  -lrb-  missile  -rrb-  remained at hurlburt and santa rosa island for training purposes . 
in april 1972, the last bomarc b in u . s .  air force service was retired at mcguire and the 46th adms inactivated and the base was deactivated . 
the branco river  -lrb-  ; engl: `` white river ''  -rrb-  is the principal affluent of the rio negro from the north . 
currently in the rainy season much of the rupununi area floods ,  with water draining both to the amazon  -lrb-  via the branco river  -rrb-  and the essequibo river . 
the branco river has ph 6–7 and low levels of dissolved organic carbon . 
the first mechanically propelled omnibus appeared on the streets of london on 22 april 1833.
hundreds saw military service on the western front during the first world war . 
daimler also produced one of the earliest motor-bus models in 1898, selling a double-decker bus to the motor traction company which was first used on the streets of london on 23 april 1898.
leeds and bradford became the first cities to put trolleybuses into service in great britain on 20 june 1911.
accessible vehicles also have wider entrances and interior gangways and space for wheelchairs . 
as well as a novel weight-saving integral design ,  it also introduced for the first time on a bus independent front suspension ,  power steering ,  a fully automatic gearbox ,  and power-hydraulic braking . 
steam carriages were much less likely to overturn ,  they travelled faster than horse-drawn carriages ,  they were much cheaper to run ,  and caused much less damage to the road surface due to their wide tyres . 
horse-drawn buses were used from the 1820s ,  followed by steam buses in the 1830s ,  and electric trolleybuses in 1882.
another commercial bus line using the same model benz omnibuses ran for a short time in 1898 in the rural area around llandudno ,  wales . 
bali has no railway lines . 
these islands are separated from bali by the badung strait . 
in 1963 the bali beach hotel in sanur was built by sukarno ,  and boosted tourism in bali . 
wisnu airfield is on the north-west bali . 
there are an estimated 30,000 expatriates living in bali . 
bali was the host of 2008 asian beach games . 
in football ,  bali is home to the football club bali united ,  which plays in the liga 1.
bali  -lrb-  balinese:   -rrb-  is a province of indonesia and the westernmost of the lesser sunda islands . 
bali received the best island award from travel and leisure in 2010.
the island of bali lies east of java ,  and is approximately 8 degrees south of the equator . 
the first governor of bali ,  anak agung bagus suteja ,  was appointed by president sukarno in 1958, when bali became a province . 
the population of bali was 3,890,757 as of the 2010 census; the latest estimate  -lrb-  for january 2014 -rrb- is 4,225,384.
bali is the only hindu-majority province in indonesia ,  with 83.5% of the population adhering to balinese hinduism . 
imperial japan occupied bali during world war ii . 
bali is indonesia's main tourist destination ,  which has seen a significant rise in tourists since the 1980s . 
until the early 20th century ,  bali was home to several large mammals: the wild banteng ,  leopard and the endemic bali tiger . 
dutch rule over bali came later and was never as well established as in other parts of indonesia such as java and maluku . 
bali was the host of miss world 2013  -lrb-  63rd edition of the miss world pageant  -rrb-  . 
being just 8 degrees south of the equator ,  bali has a fairly even climate all year round . 
bali is part of the coral triangle ,  the area with the highest biodiversity of marine species . 
last year bali received nearly 5.7 million tourists ,  according to the regional government . 
a team of scientists conducted a survey from 29 april 2011 to 11 may 2011 at 33 sea sites around bali . 
in 1597, the dutch explorer cornelis de houtman arrived at bali ,  and the dutch east india company was established in 1602.
according to bbc travel released in 2011, bali is one of the world's best islands ,  ranking second after santorini ,  greece . 
bali authorities reported the island had 2.88 million foreign tourists and 5 million domestic tourists in 2012, marginally surpassing the expectations of 2.8 million foreign tourists . 
the bali tradition adopted the pre-existing animistic traditions of the indigenous people . 
other than balinese sacred rituals and festivals ,  the government presents bali arts festival to showcase bali's performing arts and various artworks produced by the local talents that they have . 
in march 2017, tripadvisor named bali as the world's top destination in its traveller's choice award . 
kawi and sanskrit are also commonly used by some hindu priests in bali ,  as hindu literature was mostly written in sanskrit . 
three small islands lie to the immediate south east and all are administratively part of the klungkung regency of bali: nusa penida ,  nusa lembongan and nusa ceningan . 
the longest river ,  ayung river ,  flows approximately  -lrb-  see list of rivers of bali  -rrb-  . 
a memorandum of understanding has been signed by two ministers ,  bali's governor and indonesian train company to build of railway along the coast around the island . 
 ''bulgarian '' was the first `` slavic '' language attested in writing . 
one can divide the development of the bulgarian language into several periods . 
eventually the eastern dialects prevailed ,  and in 1899 the bulgarian ministry of education officially codified a standard bulgarian language based on the drinov-ivanchev orthography . 
an `` n ''-gonal bipyramid has 2 ''n '' triangle faces ,  3 ''n '' edges ,  and 2 + `` n '' vertices . 
there is no significant threat to livestock from a 'big cat' in bodmin moor . `` 
the beast of bodmin moor ,  also known as the beast of bodmin  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a phantom wild cat purported to live in cornwall ,  england . 
nicholas brown ,  his son nicholas brown ,  jr .   -lrb-  class of 1786 -rrb- ,  john brown ,  joseph brown ,  and moses brown were all instrumental in moving the college to providence and securing its endowment . 
nicholas brown ,  jr .  became a financier of the movement under the guidance of his uncle moses brown ,  one of the leading abolitionists of his day . 
brown's main campus is located in the college hill historic district in the city of providence ,  rhode island . 
it is sometimes erroneously supposed that brown university was named after john brown ,  whose commercial activity included the transportation of african slaves . 
at its foundation ,  brown was the first college in the u . s .  to accept students regardless of their religious affiliation . 
brown university is a private ivy league research university in providence ,  rhode island ,  united states . 
the origin of brown university can be dated to 1761, when three residents of newport ,  rhode island drafted a petition to the general assembly of the colony:
the character of brown's urban campus is then european organic rather than american landscaped . 
brown is the largest institutional landowner in providence ,  with properties on college hill and in the jewelry district . 
in 1971, brown's coordinate women's institution ,  pembroke college ,  was fully merged into the university; pembroke campus now includes dormitories and classrooms used by all of brown . 
 ,  8 nobel prize winners have been affiliated with brown university as alumni ,  faculty members or researchers . 
atkinson worked at apple computer from 1978 to 1990.
atkinson now works as a nature photographer . 
in 1994, atkinson received the eff pioneer award for his contributions . 
bill atkinson  -lrb-  born 1951 -rrb- is an american computer engineer and photographer . 
they resulted in victory for the royalists commanded by king charles over the parliamentarians commanded by the earl of essex . 
the battles of lostwithiel or lostwithiel campaign ,  took place near lostwithiel and fowey in cornwall during the first english civil war in 1644.
on 21 august ,  the royalists attacked essex's positions north of lostwithiel ,  capturing the ruins of restormel castle . 
the first clashes took place on 2 august ,  but little action took place for several days ,  as the king waited for all his forces to arrive and essex waited for the fleet . 
he later said of his imprisonment:
ultimatum means war .  .  .  end this madness . 
he wrote a great many letters to world leaders during this period . 
bertrand russell was opposed to war from early on ,  his opposition to world war i being used as grounds for his dismissal from trinity college at cambridge . 
from 1927 to 1932 russell wrote 34 letters to fox . 
it advanced a thesis of logicism ,  that mathematics and logic are one and the same . 
after he left the school in 1932, dora continued it until 1943.
russell delivered his lectures on logical atomism ,  his version of these ideas ,  in 1918, before the end of world war i .  wittgenstein was ,  at that time ,  serving in the austrian army and subsequently spent nine months in an italian prisoner of war camp at the end of the conflict . 
in a speech in 1948, russell said that if the ussr's aggression continued ,  it would be morally worse to go to war after the ussr possessed an atomic bomb than before it possessed one ,  because if the ussr had no bomb the west's victory would come more swiftly and with fewer casualties than if there were atom bombs on both sides . 
russell was one of the best known patrons of the congress ,  until he resigned in 1956
he was in contact with lionel rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film `` good times ,  wonderful times '' in the 1960s . 
when russell was eleven years old ,  his brother frank introduced him to the work of euclid ,  which he described in his autobiography as `` one of the great events of my life ,  as dazzling as first love . `` 
before world war ii ,  russell taught at the university of chicago ,  later moving on to los angeles to lecture at the ucla department of philosophy . 
russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in political causes primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the vietnam war . 
on a tour through the us in 1927 russell met barry fox  -lrb-  later barry stevens  -rrb-  who became a well-known gestalt therapist and writer in later years . 
a later conviction for publicly lecturing against inviting the us to enter the war on the united kingdom's side resulted in six months' imprisonment in brixton prison  -lrb-  see `` bertrand russell's views on society ''  -rrb-  in 1918.
during world war i ,  russell was one of the few people to engage in active pacifist activities and in 1916, because of his lack of a fellowship ,  he was dismissed from trinity college following his conviction under the defence of the realm act 1914.
in the preface to the trinity pamphlet ,  hardy wrote:
in 1905 he wrote the essay `` on denoting '' ,  which was published in the philosophical journal `` mind '' . 
russell had two siblings: brother frank  -lrb-  nearly seven years older than bertrand  -rrb-  ,  and sister rachel  -lrb-  four years older  -rrb-  . 
russell and peter had one son ,  conrad sebastian robert russell ,  5th earl russell ,  who became a prominent historian and one of the leading figures in the liberal democrat party . 
during these formative years he also discovered the works of percy bysshe shelley . 
in 1962 russell played a public role in the cuban missile crisis: in an exchange of telegrams with soviet leader nikita khrushchev ,  khrushchev assured him that the soviet government would not be reckless . 
the 767 is the first twinjet wide-body type to reach 1,000 aircraft delivered . 
several military 767s have been derived from the 767-200er ,  the longest-range version of the aircraft . 
the 10-month 767 flight test program utilized the first six aircraft built . 
the 767-300, the first stretched version of the aircraft ,  entered service with japan airlines in 1986.
the 767-200er was the first extended-range model and entered service with el al in 1984.
longer-range variants include the 767-200er and 767-300er ,  while cargo models include the 767-300f ,  a production freighter ,  and conversions of passenger 767-200 and 767-300 models . 
the 767 has left-side exit doors near the front and rear of the aircraft . 
the tanker order encompassed 179 aircraft and was expected to sustain 767 production past 2013.
the type's main competitor was the airbus a300.
the type's main competitor is the airbus a330-200.
the 767-300er ,  the extended-range version of the 767-300, entered service with american airlines in 1988.
the 767-300f ,  the production freighter version of the 767-300er ,  entered service with ups airlines in 1995.
regulatory approval spurred the expansion of transoceanic 767 flights and boosted the aircraft's sales . 
one 767-400er aircraft was produced as a testbed for systems integration ,  but the program was terminated in january 2009 and the prototype was sold to bahrain as a vip transport . 
to distribute the aircraft's weight on the ground ,  the 767 has a retractable tricycle landing gear with four wheels on each main gear and two for the nose gear . 
the first kc-767s were delivered in 2008 to the japan self-defense forces . 
the 767-400er ,  the first boeing wide-body jet resulting from two fuselage stretches ,  entered service with continental airlines in 2000.
the 767 interior introduced larger overhead bins and more lavatories per passenger than previous aircraft . 
in 2000, a 777-style interior ,  known as the boeing signature interior ,  debuted on the 767-400er . 
the 767-200 ceased production in the late 1980s ,  superseded by the extended-range 767-200er . 
in 1977, walsh was hired as the head coach at stanford where he stayed for two seasons . 
walsh was the pac-8 conference coach of the year in 1977.
after coaching at cal ,  walsh did a stint at stanford as an assistant coach ,  before beginning his pro coaching career . 
walsh had lost a son ,  steve ,  in 2002.
initially ,  walsh started out as the wide receivers coach from 1968 to 1970 before also coaching the quarterbacks from 1971 to 1975.
in 1994, after consecutive losing seasons ,  walsh left stanford and retired from coaching . 
bill walsh was viewed as a strong advocate for african-american head coaches in the nfl and ncaa . 
walsh was coaching in fremont when he interviewed for an assistant coaching position with marv levy ,  who had just been hired as the head coach at the university of california ,  berkeley . 
during his time with nbc ,  rumors began to surface that walsh would coach again in the nfl . 
walsh directly helped propel dennis green into the nfl head coaching ranks by offering to take on the head coaching job at stanford . 
many former and current nfl head coaches trace their lineage back to bill walsh on his coaching tree ,  shown below . 
to date ,  he is the most recent super bowl head coach who has passed away . 
under walsh the team rose from the cellar to the top of the nfl in just two seasons . 
other names for the tool are `` box cutter '' or `` boxcutter '' ,  `` razor blade knife '' ,  `` razor knife '' ,  `` carpet knife '' ,  `` pen knife '' ,  `` stationery knife '' ,  `` sheetrock knife '' ,  or `` drywall knife '' . 
there is also a utility knife for kitchen use ,  which is between a chef's knife and paring knife in size . 
a utility knife is a knife used for general or utility purposes . 
the fixed or folding blade utility knife is popular for both indoor and outdoor use . 
in turkey ,  they are known as `` maket bıçağı ''  -lrb-  which literally translates as `` model knife ''  -rrb-  . 
there are many different bronze alloys ,  but typically modern bronze is 88% copper and 12% tin . 
commercial bronze  -lrb-  90% copper and 10% zinc  -rrb-  and architectural bronze  -lrb-  57% copper ,  3% lead ,  40% zinc  -rrb-  are more properly regarded as brass alloys because they contain zinc as the main alloying ingredient . 
bismuth bronze is a bronze alloy with a composition of 52% copper ,  30% nickel ,  12% zinc ,  5% lead ,  and 1% bismuth . 
aluminium is also used for the structural metal aluminium bronze . 
bronze is an alloy consisting primarily of copper ,  commonly with about 12–12.5% tin and often with the addition of other metals  -lrb-  such as aluminium ,  manganese ,  nickel or zinc  -rrb-  and sometimes non-metals or metalloids such as arsenic ,  phosphorus or silicon . 
though bronze is generally harder than wrought iron ,  with vickers hardness of 60–258 vs .  30–80, the bronze age gave way to the iron age after a serious disruption of the tin trade: the population migrations of around 1200–1100 bc reduced the shipping of tin around the mediterranean and from britain ,  limiting supplies and raising prices . 
it was only later that tin was used ,  becoming the major non-copper ingredient of bronze in the late 3rd millennium bc . 
the bronze age was followed by the iron age starting from about 1300 bc and reaching most of eurasia by about 500 bc ,  although bronze continued to be much more widely used than it is in modern times . 
bronze was still used during the iron age ,  and has continued in use for many purposes to the modern day . 
the main institutions of the union are the committee of ministers ,  the benelux parliament ,  the council of the union and the secretariat-general ,  while the benelux office for intellectual property and the benelux court of justice cover the same territory but are not part of the union . 
the benelux union  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is a politico-economic union of three neighbouring states in western europe: belgium ,  netherlands and luxembourg . 
the benelux general secretariat is located in brussels . 
in 1847, the `` boston herald '' absorbed the boston `` american eagle '' and the boston `` daily times '' . 
murdoch changed the paper's name back to the `` boston herald '' . 
in october 1917, john h .  higgins ,  the publisher and treasurer of the boston herald bought out its next door neighbor `` the boston journal '' and created `` the boston herald and boston journal ''
the `` sunday advertiser '' and `` record american '' would ultimately be merged in 1972 into `` the boston herald traveler '' a line of newspapers that stretched back to the old `` boston herald '' . 
on august 5, 2013, the `` herald '' launched an internet radio station named boston herald radio which includes radio shows by much of the herald staff . 
the boston herald is an american daily newspaper whose primary market is boston ,  massachusetts and its surrounding area . 
the `` boston daily advertiser '' was established in 1813 in boston by nathan hale . 
the original `` boston herald '' was founded in 1846 by a group of boston printers jointly under the name of john a .  french & company . 
ruth remained productive in 1933.
ruth hit  . 345 during the season ,  with 46 home runs and 154 rbis . 
ruth joined the grays on august 18, 1914.
in 1934, ruth played in his last full season with the yankees . 
during the 1919 season ,  ruth was used as a pitcher in only 17 of his 130 games and compiled an 8–5 record . 
ruth's penchant for hitting home runs altered how baseball is played . 
during his career ,  ruth led the al in home runs during a season twelve times . 
the school's influence remained with ruth in other ways . 
the 21-year-old hoyt became close to ruth:
after the season ,  ruth was a guest at an elks club banquet ,  set up by ruth's agent with yankee team support . 
ruth hit  . 378, winning his only al batting title ,  with a league-leading 46 home runs . 
ruth finished the regular season with 59 home runs ,  batting  . 378 and with a slugging percentage of  . 846.
ruth returned to his normal production during 1926, when he batted  . 372 with 47 home runs and 146 rbis . 
ruth and navin negotiated over the phone while ruth was in hawaii ,  but those talks foundered when navin refused to give ruth a portion of the tigers' box office proceeds . 
on july 11, 1914, ruth arrived in boston with egan and shore . 
ruth had two hits in the second game of the season ,  but it quickly went downhill both for him and the braves from there . 
however ,  mack later dropped the idea ,  saying that ruth's wife would be running the team in a month if ruth ever took over . 
there was considerable attention as ruth reported for spring training . 
ruth hit home runs early and often in the 1921 season ,  during which he broke roger connor's mark for home runs in a career ,  138.
in 1920 and afterwards ,  ruth was aided in his power hitting by the fact that a . j . 
on march 6, 1922, ruth signed a new contract for three years at $52,000 a year . 
as he approached ruth's record ,  aaron stated ,  `` i can't remember a day this year or last when i did not hear the name of babe ruth . `` 
during his lifetime ,  ruth had become a symbol of the united states . 
a babe ruth home run was an event unto itself ,  one that meant anything was possible . `` 
on june 5, 1948, a `` gaunt and hollowed out '' ruth visited yale university to donate a manuscript of `` the babe ruth story '' to its library . 
around this time ,  developments in chemotherapy offered some hope for ruth . 
ruth made his first appearance as a professional ballplayer in an inter-squad game on march 7, 1914.
ruppert called the deal `` the greatest opportunity ruth ever had '' . 
once the regular season began ,  ruth was a star pitcher who was also dangerous at the plate . 
in 1930, ruth hit  . 359 with 49 home runs  -lrb-  his best in his years after 1928 -rrb- and 153 rbis ,  and pitched his first game in nine years ,  a complete game victory . 
manager carrigan allowed ruth to pitch two exhibition games in mid-august . 
by the end of the first month of the season ,  ruth concluded he was finished even as a part-time player . 
ruth was the first baseball star to be the subject of overwhelming public adulation . 
early in the 1934 season ,  ruth openly campaigned to become the yankees manager . 
on january 7, 1930, salary negotiations between the yankees and ruth quickly broke down . 
his second wife ,  claire merritt ruth ,  would be interred with him 28 years later in 1976.
two home runs by ruth on july 5, and one in each of two consecutive games a week later ,  raised his season total to 11, tying his career best from 1918.
the improvement was only a temporary remission ,  and by late 1947, ruth was unable to help with the writing of his autobiography ,  `` the babe ruth story '' ,  which was almost entirely ghostwritten . 
canal barges are usually made for the particular canal in which they will operate . 
on the british canal system ,  the term 'barge' is used to describe a boat wider than a narrowboat  -lrb-  7ft  -rrb-  ,  and the people who move barges are often known as lightermen . 
a barge is a flat-bottomed ship ,  built mainly for river and canal transport of heavy goods . 
these are often called 'pike poles' . 
these towboats travel between ports and are also called line-haul boats . 
the barge and canal system contended favourably with the railways in the early industrial revolution before around the 1850s–1860s – for example ,  the erie canal in new york state is credited by economic historians with giving the growth boost needed for new york city to eclipse philadelphia as america's largest port and city – but such canal systems with their locks ,  need for maintenance and dredging ,  pumps and sanitary issues were eventually outcompeted in the carriage of high-value items by the railways due to the higher speed ,  falling costs and route flexibility of rail transport . 
the major divisions are normally classified as english english  -lrb-  or english as spoken in england ,  which encompasses southern english dialects ,  west country dialects ,  east and west midlands english dialects and northern english dialects  -rrb-  ,  ulster english in northern ireland ,  welsh english  -lrb-  not to be confused with the welsh language  -rrb-  ,  and scottish english  -lrb-  not to be confused with the scots language  -rrb-  . 
british english is the standard dialect of english language as spoken and written in the united kingdom . 
when distinguished from american english ,  the term `` british english '' is sometimes used broadly as a synonym for the various varieties of english spoken in some member states of the commonwealth of nations . 
a tendency to drop grammatical number in collective nouns ,  stronger in british english than in north american english ,  exists . 
the more idiomatic ,  concrete and descriptive english is ,  the more it is from anglo-saxon origins . 
it is frequently used as a model for teaching english to foreign learners . 
other consonants subject to this usage in cockney english are `` p '' ,  as in paer and `` k '' as in baer . 
estuary english has been gaining prominence in recent decades: it has some features of rp and some of cockney . 
aircraft began becoming much more prominent in the spanish civil war and especially world war ii . 
during world war i ,  the primary use was for reconnaissance ,  and small-scale bombardment . 
chemical warfare also emerged with the use of poisonous gas during world war i . 
although the use of aircraft has for the most part always been used as a supplement to land or naval engagements ,  since their first major military use in world war i aircraft have increasingly taken on larger roles in warfare . 
an extreme case are the twelve battles of the isonzo—first to twelfth—between italy and austria-hungary during the first world war . 
many combats are too small to merit a name . 
another important use of aircraft came with the development of the helicopter ,  which first became heavily used during the vietnam war ,  and still continues to be widely used today to transport and augment ground forces . 
indirect combat through the use of aircraft and missiles now constitutes a large portion of wars in place of battles ,  where battles are now mostly reserved for capturing cities . 
a battle is a combat in warfare between two or more armed forces ,  or combatants . 
a new style ,  during world war i ,  known as trench warfare ,  developed nearly half a century later . 
by world war ii ,  the use of the smaller divisions ,  platoons and companies became much more important as precise operations became vital . 
often outnumber the front-line combat troops . 
sometimes in desert warfare ,  there is no nearby town name to use; map coordinates gave the name to the battle of 73 easting in the first gulf war . 
trench warfare had become largely obsolete in conflicts between advanced armies by the start of the second world war . 
american colonists and european forces continued using disciplined lines ,  continuing into the american civil war . 
however ,  during the many wars of the roman empire ,  barbarians continued using mob tactics . 
berenson was born in murray hill ,  manhattan . 
berenson died at age 53 in the september 11 attacks aboard american airlines flight 11, one day before the ninth anniversary of perkins's death . 
following a brief modeling career in the late 1960s ,  berenson became a freelance photographer . 
she also was a great-grandniece of giovanni schiaparelli ,  an italian astronomer who believed he had discovered the supposed canals of mars ,  and a second cousin ,  once removed ,  of art expert bernard berenson  -lrb-  1865–1959 -rrb- and his sister senda berenson  -lrb-  1868–1954 -rrb- ,  an athlete and educator who was one of the first two women elected to the basketball hall of fame . 
plant biochemistry is the study of the chemical processes used by plants . 
plant anatomy is the study of the structure of plant cells and tissues ,  whereas plant morphology is the study of their external form . 
botany ,  also called plant science -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  plant biology or phytology ,  is the science of plant life and a branch of biology . 
her books `` plant anatomy '' and `` anatomy of seed plants '' have been key plant structural biology texts for more than half a century . 
model plants such as `` arabidopsis thaliana '' are used for studying the molecular biology of plant cells and the chloroplast . 
these biochemical strategies are unique to land plants . 
the hypothesis that plant growth and development is coordinated by plant hormones or plant growth regulators first emerged in the late 19th century . 
bock created his own system of plant classification . 
phytochromes are the photoreceptors in a plant that are sensitive to light . 
plant physiology encompasses all the internal chemical and physical activities of plants associated with life . 
plant ecology is the science of the functional relationships between plants and their habitats – the environments where they complete their life cycles . 
palaeobotanists study ancient plants in the fossil record to provide information about the evolutionary history of plants . 
in addition to being the primary energy source for plants ,  light functions as a signalling device ,  providing information to the plant ,  such as how much sunlight the plant receives each day . 
the strictest definition of `` plant '' includes only the `` land plants '' or embryophytes ,  which include seed plants  -lrb-  gymnosperms ,  including the pines ,  and flowering plants  -rrb-  and the free-sporing cryptogams including ferns ,  clubmosses ,  liverworts ,  hornworts and mosses . 
sucrose produced by photosynthesis is transported from the leaves to other parts of the plant in the phloem and plant hormones are transported by a variety of processes . 
this relationship the indigenous people had with plants was recorded by ethnobotanists . 
some plants reproduce sexually ,  some asexually ,  and some via both means . 
nowadays ,  botanists  -lrb-  in the strict sense  -rrb-  study approximately 410,000 species of land plants of which some 391,000 species are vascular plants  -lrb-  including ca 369,000 species of flowering plants  -rrb-  ,  and ca 20,000 are bryophytes . 
nevertheless ,  there are some distinctive genetic differences between plants and other organisms . 
phytochemistry is a branch of plant biochemistry primarily concerned with the chemical substances produced by plants during secondary metabolism . 
plants synthesise a number of unique polymers like the polysaccharide molecules cellulose ,  pectin and xyloglucan from which the land plant cell wall is constructed . 
nonvascular land plants are embryophytes that lack the vascular tissues xylem and phloem . 
the bodies of vascular plants including clubmosses ,  ferns and seed plants  -lrb-  gymnosperms and angiosperms  -rrb-  generally have aerial and subterranean subsystems . 
in 1998, the angiosperm phylogeny group published a phylogeny for flowering plants based on an analysis of dna sequences from most families of flowering plants . 
during the 18th century ,  systems of plant identification were developed comparable to dichotomous keys ,  where unidentified plants are placed into taxonomic groups  -lrb-  e . g . 
botany originated as herbalism ,  the study and use of plants for their medicinal properties . 
there are also issues specific to bt transgenic crops . 
fish species are not susceptible to bt toxins if exposed . 
soil-dwelling organisms ,  potentially exposed to bt toxins through root exudates ,  are not impacted by the growth of bt crops . 
the most publicised problem associated with bt crops is the claim that pollen from bt maize could kill the monarch butterfly . 
several studies have documented surges in `` sucking pests ''  -lrb-  which are not affected by bt toxins  -rrb-  within a few years of adoption of bt cotton . 
studies have been conducted to evaluate the fate of bt toxins that are ingested in foods . 
bacillus thuringiensis  -lrb-  or bt  -rrb-  is a gram-positive ,  soil-dwelling bacterium ,  commonly used as a biological pesticide . 
in india ,  by 2014, more than seven million cotton farmers ,  occupying twenty-six million acres ,  had adopted bt cotton . 
in 1996 another class of insecticidal proteins in bt was discovered; the vegetative insecticidal proteins  -lrb-  vip  -rrb-  . 
the use of bt toxins as plant-incorporated protectants prompted the need for extensive evaluation of their safety for use in foods and potential unintended impacts on the environment . 
in 1996, genetically modified maize producing bt cry protein was approved ,  which killed the european corn borer and related species; subsequent bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae . 
new strains of bt are developed and introduced over time as insects develop resistance to bt ,  or the desire occurs to force mutations to modify organism characteristics or to use homologous recombinant genetic engineering to improve crystal size and increase pesticidal activity or broaden the host range of bt and obtain more effective formulations . 
concerns over possible environmental impact from accumulation of bt toxins from plant tissues ,  pollen dispersal ,  and direct secretion from roots have been investigated . 
phages often have dramatic effects on their hosts . 
phage display is a different use of phages involving a library of phages with a variable peptide linked to a surface protein . 
endotoxin  -rrb-  and lysis of bacteria . 
a bacteriophage  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known informally as a phage  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a virus that infects and replicates within bacteria and archaea . 
nine families infect bacteria only ,  nine infect archaea only ,  and one  -lrb-  `` tectiviridae ''  -rrb-  infects both bacteria and archaea . 
several attempts have been made to map protein–protein interactions among phage and their host . 
given the millions of different phages in the environment ,  phages' genomes come in a variety of forms and sizes . 
in contrast ,  the `` lysogenic cycle '' does not result in immediate lysing of the host cell . 
phages are widely distributed in locations populated by bacterial hosts ,  such as soil or the intestines of animals . 
many of these effects are probably indirect ,  hence the challenge becomes to identify the direct interactions among bacteria and phage . 
there have been results showing that t4 phages that are small in size and short-tailed can be helpful in detecting `` e . coli '' in the human body . 
in the case of the t4 phage ,  the construction of new virus particles involves the assistance of helper proteins . 
the use of phages has continued since the end of the cold war in georgia and elsewhere in central and eastern europe . 
a bactericide or bacteriocide ,  sometimes abbreviated bcidal ,  is a substance that kills bacteria . 
burroughs later stated that `` brion gysin was the only man i ever respected . `` 
on july 13, 1986 brion gysin died of lung cancer . 
a monograph on gysin was published in 2003 by thames and hudson . 
despite ,  or because of ,  attending a catholic school ,  gysin became an atheist . 
burroughs: a friend ,  brion gysin ,  an american poet and painter ,  who has lived in europe for thirty years ,  was ,  as far as i know ,  the first to create cut-ups . 
in a 1966 interview by conrad knickerbocker for the paris review ,  william s .  burroughs explained that brion gysin was ,  to his knowledge ,  `` the first to create cut-ups '' . 
a 1994 systematic review found that bcg reduces the risk of getting tb by about 50% . 
the main use of bcg is for vaccination against tuberculosis . 
the duration of protection of bcg is not clearly known . 
the word `` buteo '' is latin for a buzzard . 
the common buzzard  -lrb-  `` buteo buteo ''  -rrb-  is a medium-to-large bird of prey whose range covers most of europe and extends into asia . 
bh ,  bh ,  bh ,  and bh are more stable at around 1 s ,  and bh and bh have half-lives of about 10 s .  the heaviest isotopes are the most stable ,  with bh and bh having measured half-lives of about 61 s and 40 s respectively ,  and the even heavier unconfirmed isotope bh appearing to have an even longer half-life of about 690 s . 
bohrium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol bh and atomic number 107.
the lighter isotopes usually have shorter half-lives; half-lives of under 100 ms for bh ,  bh ,  bh ,  and bh were observed . 
two groups claimed discovery of the element . 
the chemical properties of bohrium are characterized only partly ,  but they compare well with the chemistry of the other group 7 elements . 
the atomic radius of bohrium is expected to be around 128 pm . 
pentavalent bohrium should have a larger ionic radius of 83 pm . 
olson was born barbara kay bracher in houston ,  texas ,  on december 27, 1955.
olson was a frequent critic of the bill clinton administration and wrote a book about then first lady hillary clinton ,  `` hell to pay: the unfolding story of hillary rodham clinton ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- . 
she married theodore olson in 1996, becoming his third wife . 
although barnard's star is an ancient star ,  it still experiences star flare events ,  one being observed in 1998.
the wgsn approved the name `` barnard's star '' for this star on 1 february 2017 and it is now included in the list of iau-approved star names . 
barnard's star has a mass of about 0.14 solar masses  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and a radius 15% to 20% of that of the sun . 
barnard's star shares much the same neighborhood as the sun . 
barnard's star has 10–32% of the solar metallicity . 
while sub-solar ,  barnard's star's metallicity is higher than that of a halo star and is in keeping with the low end of the metal-rich disk star range; this ,  plus its high space motion ,  have led to the designation `` intermediate population ii star '' ,  between a halo and disk star . 
stellar activity of this sort has created interest in using barnard's star as a proxy to understand similar stars . 
barnard's star was studied as part of project daedalus . 
m dwarfs such as barnard's star are more easily studied than larger stars in this regard because their lower masses render perturbations more obvious . 
in 2013, a research paper was published that further refined planet mass boundaries for the star . 
barnard's star was chosen as a target partly because it was believed to have planets . 
in 2016, the international astronomical union organized a working group on star names  -lrb-  wgsn  -rrb-  to catalogue and standardize proper names for stars . 
the original list of bayer designations contained 1,564 stars . 
as a result ,  the brightest star in each class did not always get listed first in bayer's order . 
bayer did not label `` permanent '' stars with uppercase letters  -lrb-  except for `` a '' ,  which he used in place of `` a ''  -rrb-  . 
in most constellations ,  bayer assigned greek and latin letters to stars within a constellation in rough order of apparent brightness ,  from brightest to dimmest . 
of the 88 modern constellations ,  there are at least 30 in which `` alpha '' is not the brightest star ,  and four of those lack an alpha star altogether . 
bayer used greek letters for the brighter stars ,  but the greek alphabet has only twenty-four letters ,  while a single constellation may contain fifty or more stars visible to the naked eye . 
other cases of multiple bayer designations arose when stars named by bayer in one constellation were transferred by later astronomers to a different constellation . 
most of the brighter stars were assigned their first systematic names by the german astronomer johann bayer in 1603, in his star atlas `` uranometria '' . 
wasp-23 is a star with one orbiting planet ,  wasp-23 b . 
there were also two weapons made up of a singular star . 
an apparent magnitude 4.18 type a0p star ,  lambda boötis is the prototype of a class of chemically peculiar stars ,  only some of which pulsate as delta scuti-type stars . 
its star is a k1v type star of apparent magnitude 12.7, far below naked-eye visibility ,  and smaller than the sun at and  . 
hd 131496 is also encircled by one planet ,  hd 131496 b . 
it is of class gm0.
only approximately 12 stars are resolved by an amateur instrument . 
nu boötis is an optical double star . 
the host star and planet are tidally locked ,  meaning that the planet's orbit and the star's particularly high rotation are synchronized . 
in ancient babylon ,  the stars of boötes were known as shu . pa . 
john flamsteed numbered 54 stars for the constellation . 
however ,  it has also been associated with three stars in coma berenices . 
there are two dimmer f-type stars ,  magnitude 4.83 12 boötis ,  class f8; and magnitude 4.93 45 boötis ,  class f5.
two dimmer g-type stars are magnitude 4.86 31 boötis ,  class g8, and magnitude 4.76 44 boötis ,  class g0.
kappa boötis is another wide double star . 
these stars are short period  -lrb-  six hours at most  -rrb-  pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology . 
epsilon boötis ,  also known as `` izar '' or `` pulcherrima '' ,  is a close triple star popular with amateur astronomers and the most prominent binary star in boötes . 
extrasolar planets have been discovered encircling ten stars in boötes as of 2012.
located 36.7 light-years from earth ,  arcturus ,  or alpha boötis ,  is the brightest star in boötes and the fourth-brightest star in the sky at an apparent magnitude of −0.05; it is also the brightest star north of the celestial equator ,  just shading out vega and capella . 
the other four dim stars are magnitude 4.91 6 boötis ,  class k4; magnitude 4.86 20 boötis ,  class k3; magnitude 4.81 omega boötis ,  class k4; and magnitude 4.83 a boötis ,  class k1.
also discovered through the radial velocity method ,  albeit a year earlier ,  is hd 136418 b ,  a 2-jupiter mass planet that orbits the star hd 136418 at a distance of 1.32 au with a period of 464.3 days . 
44 boötis  -lrb-  i boötis  -rrb-  is a double variable star 42 light-years away . 
bl boötis type stars are a subtype of rr lyrae variables . 
bl boötis is the prototype of its class of pulsating variable stars ,  the anomalous cepheids . 
another single planetary system in boötes is the hd 132563 system ,  a triple star system . 
hd 132563b b is one of very few planets found in triple star systems; it orbits the isolated member of the system ,  which is separated from the other components ,  a spectroscopic binary ,  by 400 au . 
in 1553 the accession of mary i drove ochino from england . 
ochino's reputation among protestants was low . 
bernardino ochino was born in siena ,  the son of the barber domenico ochino ,  and at the age of 7 or 8, in around 1504, was entrusted to the order of franciscan friars . 
ochino was not given opportunity to defend himself ,  and was banished from zürich . 
in 1545 ochino became minister of the italian protestant congregation at augsburg . 
there are several sub-bays off the bay of quinte ,  including hay bay ,  big bay ,  and muscote bay . 
the bay of quinte is a long ,  narrow bay shaped like the letter `` z '' on the northern shore of lake ontario in the province of ontario ,  canada . 
the mohawks of the bay of quinte  -lrb-  kenhtè:ke kanyen'kehá:ka  -rrb-  on traditional tyendinaga mohawk territory . 
the trent river is part of the trent-severn waterway ,  a canal connecting lake ontario to lake simcoe and then georgian bay on lake huron . 
the northern side of the bay is defined by ontario's mainland ,  while the southern side follows the shore of the prince edward county headland . 
bassoons are double reed instruments like the oboe . 
someone who plays the bassoon is called a bassoonist . 
a reed quintet is made up of an oboe ,  clarinet ,  saxophone ,  bass clarinet ,  and bassoon . 
the bassoon disassembles into six main pieces ,  including the reed . 
the complicated fingering and the problem of reeds make the bassoon more of a challenge to learn than some of the other woodwind instruments . 
brindley's logical bassoon was never marketed . 
multiphonics on the bassoon can be achieved by using particular alternative fingerings . 
there are also short-reach bassoons made for the benefit of young or petite players . 
it is written so that the first bassoon does not play; instead ,  the player's role is to place an extension in the bell of the fourth bassoon so that the note can be played . 
the bassoon quartet has also gained favor in recent times . 
the lower key is typically used for c .  the upper key is used for e ,  e ,  f ,  f ,  a ,  b ,  b ,  c ,  c ,  and d . 
the bassoon is infrequently used as a jazz instrument and rarely seen in a jazz ensemble . 
the belgian rock in opposition-band univers zero is also known for its use of the bassoon . 
compared to the heckel bassoon ,  buffet system bassoons have a narrower bore and simpler mechanism ,  requiring different fingerings for many notes . 
the modern buffet system has 22 keys with its range being about the same as the heckel . 
the tools used for adjusting reeds are very similar to those used to make the reeds themselves . 
the bassoon is even rarer as a regular member of rock bands . 
bassoon reeds ,  made of `` arundo donax '' cane ,  are often made by the players themselves ,  although beginner bassoonists tend to buy their reeds from professional reed makers or use reeds made by their teachers . 
the left thumb alone operates nine keys: b ,  b ,  c ,  d ,  d ,  c  -lrb-  also b  -rrb-  ,  two keys when combined create a ,  and the whisper key . 
antonio vivaldi brought the bassoon to prominence by featuring it in 37 concerti for the instrument . 
the modern bassoon exists in two distinct primary forms ,  the buffet system and the heckel system . 
tree kangaroos are able to walk or hop ,  most commonly alternating feet when moving arboreally and hopping on both feet simultaneously when on the ground . 
types of bipedal movement include walking ,  running ,  or hopping . 
the word is derived from the latin words `` bi -lrb-  s  -rrb- ``  'two' and `` ped- '' 'foot' ,  as contrasted with quadruped 'four feet' . 
bootstrapping can also refer to the development of successively more complex ,  faster programming environments . 
the computer term bootstrap began as a metaphor in the 1950s . 
as a computing term ,  bootstrap has been used since at least 1953.
historically ,  bootstrapping also refers to an early technique for computer program development on new hardware . 
sometimes the bootstrapper also installs other prerequisites for the software during the bootstrapping process . 
bootstrapping was also expanded upon in the book `` bootstrap business '' by richard christiansen ,  the harvard business review article `` the art of bootstrapping '' and the follow-up book `` the origin and evolution of new businesses '' by amar bhide . 
using an existing language to bootstrap a new language is one way to solve the `` chicken or the egg '' causality dilemma . 
old prussian ,  a western baltic language that became extinct in the 18th century ,  ranks as the most archaic of the baltic languages . 
the baltic languages are generally thought to form a single family with two branches ,  eastern and western . 
in cancer . 
the localization of proteins helps us to evaluate the role of a protein . 
common activities in bioinformatics include mapping and analyzing dna and protein sequences ,  aligning dna and protein sequences to compare them ,  and creating and viewing 3-d models of protein structures . 
other techniques for predicting protein structure include protein threading and `` de novo ''  -lrb-  from scratch  -rrb-  physics-based modeling . 
expression data can be used to infer gene regulation: one might compare microarray data from a wide variety of states of an organism to form hypotheses about the genes involved in each state . 
this currently remains the only way to predict protein structures reliably . 
there are well developed protein subcellular localization prediction resources available ,  including protein subcellualr location databases ,  and prediction tools . 
protein microarrays and high throughput  -lrb-  ht  -rrb-  mass spectrometry  -lrb-  ms  -rrb-  can provide a snapshot of the proteins present in a biological sample . 
several approaches have been developed to analyze the location of organelles ,  genes ,  proteins ,  and other components within cells . 
protein structure prediction is another important application of bioinformatics . 
although biological networks can be constructed from a single type of molecule or entity  -lrb-  such as genes  -rrb-  ,  network biology often attempts to integrate many different data types ,  such as proteins ,  small molecules ,  gene expression data ,  and others ,  which are all connected physically ,  functionally ,  or both . 
in structural biology ,  it aids in the simulation and modeling of dna ,  rna ,  proteins as well as biomolecular interactions . 
such studies are often used to determine the genes implicated in a disorder: one might compare microarray data from cancerous epithelial cells to data from non-cancerous cells to determine the transcripts that are up-regulated and down-regulated in a particular population of cancer cells . 
cellular protein localization in a tissue context can be achieved through affinity proteomics displayed as spatial data based on immunohistochemistry and tissue microarrays . 
one example of this is hemoglobin in humans and the hemoglobin in legumes  -lrb-  leghemoglobin  -rrb-  ,  which are distant relatives from the same protein superfamily . 
although both of these proteins have completely different amino acid sequences ,  their protein structures are virtually identical ,  which reflects their near identical purposes and shared ancestor . 
bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field that develops methods and software tools for understanding biological data . 
major research efforts in the field include sequence alignment ,  gene finding ,  genome assembly ,  drug design ,  drug discovery ,  protein structure alignment ,  protein structure prediction ,  prediction of gene expression and protein–protein interactions ,  genome-wide association studies ,  the modeling of evolution and cell division/mitosis . 
later into the 1990s and 2000s ,  de palma did other films . 
in 2015, he was the subject of a documentary film ,  `` de palma '' . 
making the film was a crushing experience for de palma ,  as smothers did not like many of de palma's ideas . 
in the 1970s ,  de palma went to hollywood where he worked on bigger budget films . 
when the shot finished ,  de palma moved to dinamarca . 
 ''dionysus in 69 ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- was de palma's other major documentary from this period . 
de palma followed this style with various small films for the naacp and the treasury department . 
the 1980s were denoted by de palma's other films `` dressed to kill '' ,  `` blow out '' ,  `` body double '' ,  and `` the untouchables '' . 
brian russell de palma  -lrb-  born september 11, 1940 -rrb- is an american film director and screenwriter . 
de palma is often cited as a leading member of the new hollywood generation of film directors . 
the b-25 was a safe and forgiving aircraft to fly . 
the b-25s of no . 
the royal canadian air force  -lrb-  rcaf  -rrb-  used the b-25 mitchell for training during the war . 
a development of the b-25 was the north american xb-28, designed as a high-altitude bomber . 
the usaaf did not use the b-25 in combat in the eto . 
in september 1939, the air corps ordered the na-62 into production as the b-25, along with the other new air corps medium bomber ,  the martin b-26 marauder `` off the drawing board '' . 
the north american b-25 mitchell is an american twin-engine ,  medium bomber manufactured by north american aviation  -lrb-  naa  -rrb-  . 
the royal air force  -lrb-  raf  -rrb-  was an early customer for the b-25 via lend-lease . 
342  -lrb-  lorraine  -rrb-  squadron of the french air force in april 1945.
naa built a total of 3,915 b-25cs and ds during world war ii . 
the usaaf antisubmarine command made great use of the b-25 in 1942 and 1943.
the four squadrons of the 1st bg  -lrb-  1st ,  2nd ,  3rd ,  and 4th  -rrb-  of the 1st medium bomber group were formed during the war . 
the air corps issued a specification for a medium bomber in march 1939: over at naa used the na-40b design to develop the na-62, which competed for the medium bomber contract . 
the five bombardment groups – 20 squadrons – of the ninth and twelfth air forces that used the b-25 in the mediterranean theater of operations were the only u . s .  units to employ the b-25 in europe . 
naa manufactured the greatest number of aircraft in world war ii ,  the first time a company had produced trainers ,  bombers ,  and fighters simultaneously  -lrb-  the at-6/snj texan ,  b-25 mitchell ,  and the p-51 mustang  -rrb-  . 
the majority of b-25s in american service were used in the war against japan in asia and the pacific . 
during world war ii ,  the mitchell served in fairly large numbers with the air force of the dutch government-in-exile . 
the last brazilian b-25 was finally declared surplus in 1970.
the u . s .  supplied 862 b-25s  -lrb-  b ,  d ,  g ,  and j types  -rrb-  to the soviet union under lend-lease during world war ii via the alaska–siberia alsib ferry route . 
four more squadrons were in the process of formation in late 1945, but had not yet deployed by the time the war ended . 
these aircraft often operated along with earlier pbj series in marine squadrons . 
b-25s that remained in soviet air force service after the war were assigned the nato reporting name `` bank '' . 
in 1947 legislation created an independent united states air force and by that time the b-25 inventory numbered only a few hundred . 
england lost that game 5–0 and charlton played poorly . 
england won 4–2 after extra time . 
this turned out to be one of charlton's most important games for england . 
england drew the opening game of the tournament 0–0 with uruguay ,  and charlton scored the first goal in the 2–0 win over mexico . 
england defeated argentina 1–0 – the game was the only international match in which charlton received a caution – and faced portugal in the semi finals . 
charlton's inevitable selection by ramsey for the tournament made him the first – and still ,  to date ,  only – england player to feature in four world cup squads . 
in 1959 he scored a hat-trick as england demolished the us 8–1; and his second england hat-trick came in 1961 in an 8–0 thrashing of mexico . 
charlton did not see his mother after 1992 as a result of the feud . 
charlton and hunt were now england's joint-highest scorers in the tournament with three each ,  and a final against west germany beckoned . 
england defeated the soviet union 2–0 in the third place match . 
charlton was the first injured survivor to leave hospital . 
in 1969, charlton was appointed an obe for services to football . 
charlton's next england game was his 75th as england beat northern ireland; 2 caps later and he had become england's second most-capped player ,  behind the veteran billy wright ,  who was approaching his 100th appearance when charlton was starting out and ended with 105 caps . 
he was selected for four world cups  -lrb-  1958, 1962, 1966 and 1970 -rrb- ,  and helped england to win the competition in 1966.
charlton played 14 times for united in that first season ,  scoring twice on his debut and managing a total of 12 goals in all competitions ,  and including a hat-trick in a 5–1 away win over charlton athletic in the february . 
charlton returned to playing in an fa cup tie against west bromwich albion on 1 march; the game was a draw and united won the replay 1–0.
a hat-trick in the 8–1 rout of switzerland in june 1963 took charlton's england goal tally to 30, equalling the record jointly held by tom finney and nat lofthouse and charlton's 31st goal against wales in october the same year gave him the record alone . 
charlton helped to promote manchester's bids for the 1996 and 2000 olympic games and the 2002 commonwealth games ,  england's bid for the 2006 world cup and london's successful bid for the 2012 summer olympics . 
ramsey ,  confident of victory and progress to the quarter final ,  wanted charlton to rest . 
further success with manchester united came at last when they beat leicester city 3–1 in the fa cup final of 1963, with charlton finally earning a winners' medal in his third final . 
kubrick began production on barry lyndon after his 1971 film ,  `` a clockwork orange '' . 
in addition ,  kubrick had the entire film push-developed by one stop . 
director martin scorsese has named `` barry lyndon '' as his favorite kubrick film ,  and it is also one of lars von trier's favorite films . 
kubrick felt that using a first-person narrative would not be useful in a film adaptation:
after completing post production ``  '' ,  kubrick resumed planning a film about napoleon . 
the film departs from the novel in several ways . 
barry lyndon is a 1975 british-american period drama film by stanley kubrick ,  based on the 1844 novel `` the luck of barry lyndon '' by william makepeace thackeray . 
as with any stanley kubrick film ,  there is a great deal of subtle messages and deeper meanings . 
roger ebert gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and wrote that the film `` is almost aggressive in its cool detachment . 
the cast featured leon vitali as the older lord bullingdon ,  who would then become kubrick's personal assistant ,  working as the casting director on his following films ,  and supervising film-to-video transfers for kubrick . 
in recent years ,  the film has gained a more positive reaction . 
the film's period setting allowed kubrick to indulge his penchant for classical music ,  and the film score uses pieces by bach ,  vivaldi ,  paisiello ,  mozart ,  and schubert . 
this helped the film `` fit  .  .  .  perfectly with kubrick's gilded-cage aesthetic – the film is consciously a museum piece ,  its characters pinned to the frame like butterflies . `` 
while barry is recovering ,  bullingdon re-takes control of the lyndon estate . 
alcott ,  adam and walker were among those who would win oscars for their `` amazing work '' on the film . 
this contrasts with his role as a father to lord bullingdon ,  whom he disregards and punishes . 
it is certainly in every frame a kubrick film: technically awesome ,  emotionally distant ,  remorseless in its doubt of human goodness . `` 
the study of cells is called cell biology . 
cells emerged on earth at least 3.5 billion years ago . 
whedon felt this made merrick's dialogue in the film disjointed and unintelligible . 
writer whedon sold the film to dolly parton's production company ,  sandollar ,  in the fall of 1991.
filming in los angeles included the ballroom of the park plaza hotel ,  where merrick lives and trains buffy; john marshall high school in los feliz; and the gymnasium of university high school in west los angeles ,  where the high school dance and vampire attack was filmed . 
the film was taken in a different direction from the one its writer joss whedon intended ,  and five years later ,  he created the darker and acclaimed tv series of the same name . 
all this led whedon to finally walk off the set . 
many of the details given in the film differ from the those of the later television series . 
according to the `` official buffy watcher's guide '' ,  whedon wrote the pilot to the tv series as a sequel to his original script ,  which is why the show makes references to events that did not occur in the film . 
later ,  when pike and his boss are discussing benny ,  pike tells him to run if he sees him . 
whedon was involved in an advisory role early in the production but departed after becoming dissatisfied with the direction the film was taking . 
in the film ,  merrick is hundreds of years old ,  having lived many lives training many slayers; in the series ,  watchers are mortal and specially trained for their role and mission . 
the film was released on vhs and laserdisc in the u . s .  in 1992 by fox video and re-released in 1995 under the twentieth century fox selections banner . 
barter is an option to those who cannot afford to store their small supply of wealth in money ,  especially in hyperinflation situations where money devalues quickly . 
the limitations of barter are often explained in terms of its inefficiencies in facilitating exchange in comparison to money . 
since direct barter does not require payment in money ,  it can be utilized when money is in short supply ,  when there is little information about the credit worthiness of trade partners ,  or when there is a lack of trust between those trading . 
morisot's mature career began in 1872.
during this period ,  morisot practiced watercolors for most of the time . 
at that time ,  morisot also became interested in pastel . 
morisot painted what she experienced on a daily basis . 
the family moved to paris in 1852, when morisot was a child . 
since 1885, drawing began to dominate in morisot's works . 
morisot was married to eugène manet ,  the brother of her friend and colleague édouard manet . 
morisot's works are almost always small in scale . 
morisot creates a sense of space and depth through the use of color . 
she eventually dropped out of barnard . 
both the college and columbia evaluate barnard faculty for tenure ,  and barnard graduates receive columbia university diplomas signed by both the barnard and columbia presidents . 
barnard students play on columbia athletics teams ,  and barnard uses columbia email ,  telephone and network services . 
barnard students can also join extracurricular activities or organizations at columbia university ,  while columbia university students are allowed in most ,  but not all ,  barnard organizations . 
smith and columbia president seth low worked to open columbia classes to barnard students . 
prior to 1975, students referred to themselves as the `` barnard honeybears '' . 
facebook includes barnard students and alumnae within the columbia interest group . 
barnard college was founded in 1889 as a response to columbia's refusal to admit women into its institution . 
 ,  barnard does not fully recognize the national panhellenic conference sororities at columbia ,  but it does provide some funding to account for barnard students living in columbia housing through these organizations . 
outside sources often describe barnard as part of columbia; `` the new york times '' in 2013, for example ,  called barnard `` an undergraduate women's college of columbia university '' . 
columbia describes barnard as an affiliated institution that is a faculty of the university or is `` in partnership with '' it . 
in the spring of 1960, columbia university president grayson kirk complained to the president of barnard that barnard students were wearing inappropriate clothing . 
while students are allowed to use the libraries at columbia university ,  barnard has always maintained a library of its own . 
the `` barnard bulletin '' in 1976 described the relationship between the college and columbia university as `` intricate and ambiguous '' . 
from 1955 columbia and barnard students could register for the other school's classes with the permission of the instructor; from 1973 no permission was needed . 
