bulgaria is a unitary state . 
bulgaria is in a state of demographic crisis . 
bulgaria  -lrb-  ;  ,  '  -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of bulgaria  -lrb-   ,  ' ,    -rrb-  ,  is a country in southeast europe . 
bulgaria has a civil law legal system . 
placed 39th in 2018, it is bulgaria's highest-ranked club in uefa . 
succeeding rulers strengthened the bulgarian state throughout the 8th and 9th centuries . 
the russo-turkish war of 1877–78 resulted in the formation of the current third bulgarian state . 
with a territory of  ,  bulgaria is europe's 16th-largest country . 
more than three-quarters of bulgarians subscribe to eastern orthodoxy . 
bulgaria then transitioned into a democracy and a market-based economy . 
bulgaria has made numerous contributions to space exploration . 
bulgaria hosted the 2018 presidency of the council of the european union at the national palace of culture in sofia . 
bulgaria's highest-ranked higher education institution is sofia university . 
bulgaria ranks 30th in the 2018 environmental performance index ,  but scores low on air quality . 
the western european enlightenment in the 18th century influenced the initiation of a national awakening of bulgaria . 
overall ,  bulgaria displays a pattern of unstable governments . 
the population of bulgaria is people according to the 2011 national census . 
bulgaria's first geostationary communications satellite—bulgariasat-1—was launched by spacex in june 2017.
rakia is a traditional fruit brandy that was consumed in bulgaria as early as the 14th century . 
this significantly contributed to bulgaria's militaristic foreign affairs approach during the first half of the 20th century . 
bulgarian is the only language with official status and native for % of the population . 
the thracians ,  one of the three primary ancestral groups of modern bulgarians ,  appeared on the balkan peninsula some time before the 12th century bc . 
ivan asen and peter laid the foundations of the second bulgarian empire with tarnovo as the capital . 
after simeon's death ,  bulgaria was weakened by wars with magyars and pechenegs and the spread of the bogomil heresy . 
grigor dimitrov is the first bulgarian tennis player in the top 3 atp rankings . 
bulgaria is also a regional leader in high performance computing and operates `` avitohol '' ,  the most powerful supercomputer in southeast europe . 
bryozoa  -lrb-  also known as the polyzoa ,  ectoprocta or commonly as moss animals  -rrb-  are a phylum of aquatic invertebrate animals . 
bryozoans' relationships with other phyla are uncertain and controversial . 
fossils of about 15,000 bryozoan species have been found . 
the phylum was originally called `` polyzoa '' ,  but this term was superseded by `` bryozoa '' in 1831.
indigenous snails do not feed on bryozoans . 
however ,  `` bryozoa '' has remained the more widely used term for the latter group . 
despite this ,  only a small number of basic growth forms have been found and have commonly reappeared throughout the history of the bryozoa . 
all bryozoans are colonial except for one genus ,  `` monobryozoon '' . 
this method is also used by phoronids ,  brachiopods and pterobranchs . 
the phylum was originally called `` polyzoa '' ,  but this name was soon replaced by ehrenberg's term `` bryozoa '' . 
some have used more than one approach in the same work . 
the ambiguity about the scope of the name `` bryozoa '' led to proposals in the 1960s and 1970s that it should be avoided and the unambiguous term `` ectoprocta '' should be used . 
the ectoproct coelom is formed by neither of the processes used by other bilaterians ,  enterocoely ,  in which pouches that form on the wall of the gut become separate cavities ,  nor schizocoely ,  in which the tissue between the gut and the body wall splits ,  forming paired cavities . 
a series of molecular phylogeny studies from 1996 to 2006 have also concluded that bryozoans  -lrb-  ectoprocts  -rrb-  and entoprocts are not sister groups . 
however ,  in bryozoans the blastopore closes ,  and a new opening develops to create the mouth . 
instead ,  it concluded that brachiopods and phoronids formed a monophyletic group ,  but bryozoans  -lrb-  ectoprocts  -rrb-  were closest to entoprocts ,  supporting the original definition of `` bryozoa '' . 
by 1891 bryozoans  -lrb-  ectoprocts  -rrb-  were grouped with phoronids in a super-phylum called `` tentaculata '' . 
they are also the only major phylum of exclusively clonal animals and are all colonial . 
bryozoans are generally associated with the term colonies . 
bryozoans ,  phoronids and brachiopods strain food out of the water by means of a lophophore ,  a `` crown '' of hollow tentacles . 
when entoprocts were discovered in the 19th century ,  they and bryozoans  -lrb-  ectoprocts  -rrb-  were regarded as classes within the phylum bryozoa ,  because both groups were sessile animals that filter-fed by means of a crown of tentacles that bore cilia . 
each colony grows by asexual budding from a single zooid known as the ancestrula ,  which is round rather than shaped like a normal zooid . 
both morphological and molecular phylogeny analyses disagree over bryozoans' relationships with entoprocts ,  about whether bryozoans should be grouped with brachiopods and phoronids in lophophorata ,  and whether bryozoans should be considered protostomes or deuterostomes . 
the bodies of all types have two main parts . 
nevertheless ,  some notable scientists have continued to regard the `` ectoprocta '' and entoprocta as close relatives and group them under `` bryozoa '' . 
some species have miniature nanozooids with small single-tentacled polypides ,  and these may grow on other zooids or within the body walls of autozooids that have degenerated . 
entoprocts ,  another phylum of filter-feeders ,  look rather like bryozoans but their lophophore-like feeding structure has solid tentacles ,  their anus lies inside rather than outside the base of the `` crown '' and they have no coelom . 
there are far fewer biennials than either perennial plants or annual plants . 
a biennial plant is a flowering plant that takes two years to complete its biological lifecycle . 
bay leaf is an aromatic leaf commonly used in cooking . 
the biota of the burgess shale appears to be typical of middle cambrian deposits . 
the burgess shale formation comprises 10 members ,  the most famous being the walcott quarry shale member comprising the greater phyllopod bed . 
the burgess shale was discovered by palaeontologist charles walcott on 30 august 1909, towards the end of the season's fieldwork . 
the burgess shale is a fossil-bearing deposit exposed in the canadian rockies of british columbia ,  canada . 
in february 2014, the discovery was announced of another burgess shale outcrop in kootenay national park to the south . 
stephen jay gould's book `` wonderful life '' ,  published in 1989, brought the burgess shale fossils to the public's attention . 
with parks canada and unesco recognising the significance of the burgess shale ,  collecting fossils became politically more difficult from the mid-1970s . 
sometime after the first release ,  a second set of time-life beavis and butt-head dvds was released . 
the letters page was answered by beavis and butt-head or one of their supporting characters . 
the third dvd release of beavis and butt-head was two series of three-disc sets released by time-life in december 2002.
beavis and butt-head is an american adult animated sitcom created by mike judge . 
in 2012, `` tv guide '' ranked `` beavis and butt-head '' as one of the top 60 greatest tv cartoons of all time . 
in the years following ,  many fans rumored the possibility of a sequel or follow-up to the film ,  tentatively titled `` beavis and butt-head: the sequel '' or `` beavis and butt-head 2 '' . 
as in the old series ,  beavis and butt-head are high school students who ,  among other things ,  criticize contemporary music videos . 
during the first video segment ,  `` werewolves of highland '' ,  the first new episode of the revival ,  beavis utters the word `` fire '' a total of 7 times within 28 seconds ,  with butt-head saying it once as well . 
in 1996, a full-length film featuring the duo titled `` beavis and butt-head do america '' was released in theaters . 
beavis and butt-head have been compared to idiot savants because of their creative and subversively intelligent observations of music videos . 
the volumes `` the final judgment '' and `` beavis & butt-head do christmas '' were also released on dvd during the early days of the format . 
on february 14, 2017, mtv released `` beavis and butt-head - the complete collection '' ,  a 12-disc set containing all four previous released volumes of `` the mike judge collection '' ,  along with a special collector's edition of `` beavis and butt-head do america '' . 
on august 31, 2009, during the promotion of `` extract '' ,  mike judge stated that he would like to see beavis and butt-head on the big screen again . 
the main title card displays the title as `` mike judge's beavis and butt-head '' with judge's name replacing the mtv logo . 
later ,  a lady gaga video convinced van toffler of the tenability of a `` beavis and butt-head '' revival: `` i felt like there was a whole crop of new artists—and what the world sorely missed was the point-of-view that only beavis and butt-head could bring . `` 
on july 14, 2010, a spokesperson for mtv networks informed a `` new york post '' reporter that mike judge was creating a new `` beavis and butt-head '' series ,  that judge would reprise his voice-acting roles for the show ,  and that the animation would be hand-drawn . 
a blu-ray and dvd release of season 8, titled `` beavis and butt-head – volume 4 '' ,  was released on february 15, 2012 in the u . s . 
most systems of classification have included this order ,  although sometimes under the name capparales  -lrb-  the name chosen depending on which is thought to have priority  -rrb-  . 
fidonet was platform-independent and would work with any bbs that was written to use it . 
the largest such network was fidonet . 
a bulletin board system or bbs  -lrb-  also called `` computer bulletin board service '' ,  `` cbbs ''  -rrb-  is a computer server running software that allows users to connect to the system using a terminal program . 
a number of systems also made forays into gui-based interfaces ,  either using character graphics sent from the host ,  or using custom gui-based terminal systems . 
bbs systems on other systems remained popular ,  especially home computers ,  largely because they catered to the audience of users running those machines . 
in comparison ,  a connection to a bbs allowed access only to the information on that system . 
this also gave rise to a new class of bbs systems ,  dedicated solely to file upload and downloads . 
unfortunately ,  the system was expensive to operate ,  and when their host machine became unavailable and a new one could not be found ,  the system closed in january 1975.
these systems attracted a particular type of user who used the bbs as a unique type of communications medium ,  and when these local systems were crowded from the market in the 1990s ,  their loss was lamented for many years . 
the introduction of the smartmodem led to the first real wave of bbs systems . 
fidonet is still in use today ,  though in a much smaller form ,  and many echomail groups are still shared with usenet via fidonet to usenet gateways . 
most early bbses operated as individual systems . 
internal modems could be software controlled to perform both outbound and inbound calls ,  but external modems had only the data pins to communicate with the host system . 
a precursor to the public bulletin board system was community memory ,  started in august 1973 in berkeley ,  california . 
most of the information was displayed using ordinary ascii text or ansi art ,  but a number of systems attempted character-based graphical user interfaces which began to be practical at 2400 bit/s . 
one particularly influential example was plato ,  which had thousands of users by the late 1970s ,  many of whom used the messaging and chat room features of the system in the same way that would become common on bbses . 
many bbses also offer online games in which users can compete with each other . 
some general purpose bulletin board systems had special levels of access that were given to those who paid extra money ,  uploaded useful files or knew the sysop personally . 
as time progressed ,  most terminal programs began using the ansi standard ,  but could use their native character set if it was available . 
it also improved usability for the caller ,  as most terminal software allowed different phone numbers to be stored and dialed on command ,  allowing the user to easily connect to a series of systems . 
this made the bbs possible for the first time ,  as it allowed software on the computer to pick up an incoming call ,  communicate with the user ,  and then hang up the call when the user logged off . 
in any case ,  beethoven was not to blame ,  as violinist joseph böhm recalled:
these are by far the largest forces needed for any beethoven symphony; at the premiere ,  beethoven augmented them further by assigning two players to each wind part . 
they were taken from the `` ode to joy '' ,  a poem written by friedrich schiller in 1785 and revised in 1803, with text additions made by the beethoven . 
although the performance was officially directed by michael umlauf ,  the theatre's kapellmeister ,  beethoven shared the stage with him . 
although his major works had primarily been premiered in vienna ,  beethoven was keen to have his latest composition performed in berlin as soon as possible after finishing it ,  as he thought that musical taste in vienna had become dominated by italian composers such as rossini . 
beethoven was flattered by the adoration of vienna ,  so the ninth symphony was premiered on 7 may 1824 in the theater am kärntnertor in vienna along with the overture `` the consecration of the house ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and three parts of the `` missa solemnis ''  -lrb-  the kyrie ,  credo ,  and agnus dei  -rrb-  . 
opus 70 is a set of two piano trios by ludwig van beethoven ,  written for piano ,  violin ,  and cello . 
although these two trios are sometimes numbered as `` no . 
the piano trio in b-flat major ,  op . 
the trio was written late in beethoven's so-called `` middle period '' . 
after a repeat of the work a few weeks later ,  beethoven did not appear again in public as a pianist . 
being a common barrator was an offence under the common law of england . 
in england and wales the common law offence of being a common barrator was abolished by section 13-lrb- 1 -rrb- -lrb-  a  -rrb-  of the criminal law act 1967.
jurisdictions that otherwise have no barratry laws may have slapp laws . 
its recommendation was implemented by the criminal law act 1967.
in 1966, the law commission recommended for the offence to be abolished . 
by the start of the war this included:
bombers are not intended to attack other aircraft although most were fitted with defensive weapons . 
this role is filled by tactical bomber class ,  which crosses and blurs with various other aircraft categories: light bombers ,  medium bombers ,  dive bombers ,  interdictors ,  fighter-bombers ,  attack aircraft ,  multirole combat aircraft ,  and others . 
while mainly used as a trainer ,  avro 504s were also briefly used as bombers at the start of the first world war by the royal naval air service  -lrb-  rnas  -rrb-  when they were used for raids on the german airship sheds . 
this heavy bomber was unrivaled in the early stages of the war ,  as the central powers had no comparable aircraft until much later . 
at the start of the cold war ,  bombers were the only means of carrying nuclear weapons to enemy targets ,  and had the role of deterrence . 
the german navy lost 53 of its 73 airships ,  and the german army lost 26 of its 50 ships . 
in 1912, during the first balkan war ,  bulgarian air force pilot christo toprakchiev suggested the use of aircraft to drop `` bombs ''  -lrb-  called grenades in the bulgarian army at this time  -rrb-  on turkish positions . 
historically ,  the umbrella term was billiards . 
in 2015, bursa had a population of 1,854,285.
the population of bursa was 45,000 in 1487.
bursa province had 2,842,000 inhabitants . 
bursa is the centre of the turkish automotive industry . 
bursa  -lrb-  ottoman turkish بورسا  -rrb-  was the first major and second overall capital of the ottoman state between 1335 and 1363.
in 1807, the british abolished the slave trade ,  followed by the united states the next year . 
he did not enjoy the position ,  and referred to the islands as `` a third-class british colony '' . 
in the 1820s during the period of the seminole wars in florida ,  hundreds of north american slaves and african seminoles escaped from cape florida to the bahamas . 
columbus's first landfall in the new world was on an island he named san salvador  -lrb-  known to the lucayans as `` guanahani ''  -rrb-  . 
the bahamas became a british crown colony in 1718, when the british clamped down on piracy . 
in 1782, following the british defeat at yorktown ,  a spanish fleet appeared off the coast of nassau . 
after us independence ,  the british resettled some 7,300 loyalists with their slaves in the bahamas ,  including two thousand from new york and at least 1,033 whites ,  2,214 blacks and a few creeks from east florida . 
the islands were mostly deserted from 1513 until 1648, when english colonists from bermuda settled on the island of eleuthera . 
before the news was received ,  however ,  the islands were recaptured by a small british force led by andrew deveaux . 
the `` creole '' case has been described as the `` most successful slave revolt in u . s .  history '' . 
the united states took possession of the island in 1857, claiming it under the guano islands act of 1856.
on august 11, 1943, a us army defense force arrived on baker island as part of the gilbert and marshall islands campaign . 
baker island and howland island are also the last pieces of land that experience the new year  -lrb-  earliest time zone -   -rrb-  . 
the island now forms the baker island national wildlife refuge and is an unincorporated and unorganized territory of the u . s .  which vouches for its defense . 
public entry to the island is only by special use permit from the u . s . 
captain baker claimed the island in 1855, then he sold his interest to a group who later formed the american guano company . 
the island is also believed to be a rest stop for arctic-breeding shorebirds . 
the united states claims an exclusive economic zone of and territorial sea of around baker island . 
bangladesh has a rail network operated by state-owned bangladesh railway . 
islam is the official religion of bangladesh . 
bangladesh  -lrb-  ;  ,   `` the country of bengal ''  -rrb-  ,  officially the people's republic of bangladesh  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country in south asia . 
dhaka is bangladesh's capital and largest city . 
hence ,  the name `` bangladesh '' means `` land of bengal '' or `` country of bengal '' . 
the geography of bangladesh is divided between three regions . 
most of bangladesh is covered by the bengal delta ,  the largest delta on earth . 
bangladesh is located in the indomalaya ecozone . 
pakistan recognized bangladesh in 1974 after pressure from most of the muslim countries . 
bangladesh has three seaports and 22 river ports . 
in 1972, bangladesh was south asia's first constitutionally-secular country . 
bangladesh is a middle power and a developing nation . 
bangladesh is home to a significant ismaili community . 
microfinance was pioneered in bangladesh by muhammad yunus . 
rights in bangladesh are enshrined in the country's constitution . 
since 1991, the bangladesh nationalist party  -lrb-  bnp  -rrb-  ,  and the bangladesh awami league ,  have been the two major political parties in bangladesh and have engaged in bitter rivalries and skirmishes . 
bengalis are 98 percent of the population . 
in 2015, bangladesh was ranked the 26th global it outsourcing destination . 
eighty percent of bangladesh's military equipment comes from china . 
islam is the largest and the official state religion of bangladesh ,  followed by 86.6 percent of the population . 
bangladesh has a low literacy rate ,  which was estimated at 66.5 percent for males and 63.1 percent for females in 2014.
bangladesh is predominantly rich fertile flat land . 
bangladesh joined the organization of islamic cooperation  -lrb-  oic  -rrb-  in 1973.
the bangladesh famine of 1974 also worsened the political situation . 
the first major intergovernmental organization joined by bangladesh was the commonwealth of nations in 1972.
bangladesh is one of the largest contributors to united nations peacekeeping forces . 
bangladesh was 14th on transparency international's 2014 corruption perceptions index . 
bangladesh had an installed electrical capacity of 10,289 mw in january 2014.
during its first five years of independence bangladesh adopted socialist policies . 
more than 98 percent of people in bangladesh speak bengali ,  sometimes called bangla ,  as their native language . 
the etymology of `` bangladesh ''  -lrb-  country of bengal  -rrb-  can be traced to the early 20th century ,  when bengali patriotic songs ,  such as `` namo namo namo bangladesh momo '' by kazi nazrul islam and `` aaji bangladesher hridoy '' by rabindranath tagore ,  used the term . 
altogether there are 506 urban centres in bangladesh among which 43 cities have a population of more than 100000.
bangladesh has an abundance of wildlife in its forests ,  marshes ,  woodlands and hills . 
after a year in office ,  sattar was overthrown in the 1982 bangladesh coup d'état . 
in september 1998, bangladesh saw the most severe flooding in modern world history . 
bangladesh has one of the world's oldest tea industries ,  and is a major exporter of fish and seafood . 
in southeastern bangladesh ,  experiments have been done since the 1960s to 'build with nature' . 
with an elevation of  ,  the highest peak of bangladesh is keokradong ,  near the border with myanmar . 
bangladesh is now widely recognised to be one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change . 
japan is bangladesh's largest economic-aid provider ,  and the countries have common political goals . 
pakistan and bangladesh have a us$550 million trade relationship ,  particularly in pakistani cotton imports for the bangladeshi textile industry . 
a number of slaves in bangladesh are forced to work in the fish and shrimp industries . 
bangladesh's world ranking in 2012 for travel and tourism's direct contribution to gdp ,  as a percentage of gdp ,  was 142 out of 176.
in the 13th century ,  the kalinago  -lrb-  island caribs  -rrb-  arrived from south america . 
barbados is situated in the atlantic ocean ,  east of the other west indies islands . 
a large proportion of the island is circled by coral reefs . 
barbados  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is an island country in the lesser antilles of the west indies ,  in the caribbean region of north america . 
furthermore ,  the island of barbuda in the leewards is very similar in name and was once named ``  ''las barbudas '' '' by the spanish . 
generally ,  bajans recognise and accept all `` children of the island '' as bajans ,  and refer to each other as such . 
also notable in the island is the rocky cape known as pico teneriffe or pico de tenerife ,  which is named after the fact that the island of tenerife in spain is the first land east of barbados according to the belief of the locals . 
among the island's earliest leading figures was the anglo-dutch sir william courten . 
many if not most believe the portuguese ,  en route to brazil ,  were the first europeans to come upon the island . 
it was introduced to the west indies in the late 17th century when slave trade ships travelled to the caribbean from west africa . 
as a coral-limestone island ,  barbados is highly permeable to seepage of surface water into the earth . 
colloquially ,  barbadians refer to their home island as `` bim '' or other nicknames associated with barbados ,  including `` bimshire '' . 
other major towns scattered across the island include holetown ,  in the parish of saint james; oistins ,  in the parish of christ church; and speightstown ,  in the parish of saint peter . 
the first english ship ,  which had arrived on 14 may 1625, was captained by john powell . 
it was rediscovered by the `` europa '' in 1774, whence the name `` europa rocks '' . 
mooring at bassas da india requires a permit from the french government . 
bassas da india is an uninhabited ,  roughly circular french atoll that is part of the french southern and antarctic lands . 
this asserted that the territories are all russian and all the peoples are also russian; in the case of the belarusians ,  they were variants of the russian people . 
a part of belarus under russian rule emerged as the byelorussian soviet socialist republic  -lrb-  byelorussian ssr  -rrb-  in 1919.
the belarusian people's republic was the first attempt to create an independent belarusian state under name `` belarus '' . 
after the failed revolt ,  the russian government reintroduced the use of cyrillic to belarusian in 1864 and no documents in belarusian were permitted by the russian government until 1905.
in 1945 the byelorussian ssr became a founding member of the united nations ,  along with the soviet union and the ukrainian ssr . 
the union between poland and lithuania ended in 1795 with the third partition of poland by imperial russia ,  prussia ,  and austria . 
in the aftermath of the 1917 russian revolution ,  belarus declared independence as the belarusian people's republic ,  which was conquered by soviet russia . 
belarus declared itself sovereign on 1990 by issuing the declaration of state sovereignty of the belarusian soviet socialist republic . 
the belarusian constitution forbids the use of special extrajudicial courts . 
the byelorussian ssr was one of the two soviet republics that joined the united nations along with the ukrainian ssr as one of the original 51 members in 1945.
the belarusian territories acquired by the russian empire under the reign of catherine ii were included into the belarusian governorate  -lrb-    -rrb-  in 1796 and held until their occupation by the german empire during world war i . 
joseph stalin implemented a policy of sovietization to isolate the byelorussian ssr from western influences . 
in 2000, belarus and russia signed a treaty for greater cooperation ,  forming the union state . 
on 2 february 1386, the grand duchy of lithuania and the kingdom of poland were joined in a personal union through a marriage of their rulers . 
incorporation into the grand duchy of lithuania resulted in an economic ,  political and ethno-cultural unification of belarusian lands . 
after the dissolution of the soviet union ,  under international law ,  belarus became the internationally recognized successor state to the byelorussian ssr ,  retaining its un membership . 
belarus and russia have been close trading partners and diplomatic allies since the breakup of the soviet union . 
the borders of the byelorussian ssr and poland were redrawn ,  in accord with the 1919-proposed curzon line . 
the western part of modern belarus remained part of poland . 
the term `` byelorussia ''  -lrb-  its names in other languages such as english being based on the russian form  -rrb-  was only used officially until 1991, when the supreme soviet of the byelorussian ssr decreed by law that the new independent republic should be called `` republic of belarus ''  -lrb-   spelled in russian  -rrb-  ,  as well its abridged form should be `` belarus '' . 
the republic of central lithuania was a short-lived political entity ,  which was the last attempt to restore lithuania in the historical confederacy state  -lrb-  it was also supposed to create lithuania upper and lithuania lower  -rrb-  . 
the name `` rus '' is often conflated with its latin forms `` russia '' and `` ruthenia '' ,  thus belarus is often referred to as `` white russia '' or `` white ruthenia '' . 
belarus borders five countries: latvia to the north ,  lithuania to the northwest ,  poland to the west ,  russia to the north and the east ,  and ukraine to the south . 
since 2014, following years of embrace of russian influence in the country ,  lukashenko has pressed a revival of belarusian identity ,  following the russian annexation of crimea and military intervention in eastern ukraine . 
belarus  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of belarus  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  formerly known by its russian name byelorussia or belorussia  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country in eastern europe bordered by russia to the northeast ,  ukraine to the south ,  poland to the west ,  and lithuania and latvia to the northwest . 
the british first appointed a superintendent over the belize area in 1786.
belize is on the caribbean coast of northern central america . 
while over 60% of belize's land surface is covered by forest ,  some 20% of the country's land is covered by cultivated land  -lrb-  agriculture  -rrb-  and human settlements . 
the belize barrier reef is a unesco-recognized world heritage site and is the second-largest barrier reef in the world ,  behind australia's great barrier reef . 
in 1836, after the emancipation of central america from spanish rule ,  the british claimed the right to administer the region . 
the many lagoons along the coasts and in the northern interior reduces the actual land area to  . 
the impact of guatemala's land claim on belizean indigenous populations ,  however ,  has yet to be investigated . 
it is known for its september celebrations ,  its extensive barrier reef coral reefs and punta music . 
the belize barrier reef is a long section of the long mesoamerican barrier reef system ,  which is continuous from cancún on the northeast tip of the yucatán peninsula through the riviera maya up to honduras making it one of the largest coral reef systems in the world . 
in 1862, great britain formally declared it a british crown colony ,  subordinate to jamaica ,  and named it british honduras . 
throughout belize's history ,  guatemala has claimed ownership of all or part of belizean territory . 
as a colony ,  belize began to attract british investors . 
the spanish granted the british settlers the right to occupy the area and cut logwood in exchange for their help suppressing piracy . 
the belize barrier reef is a series of coral reefs straddling the coast of belize ,  roughly offshore in the north and in the south within the country limits . 
under a new constitution britain granted british honduras self-government in 1964.
the mayan civilization spread into the area of belize between 1500 b . c . 
while only some 6.4% of forests inside of legally declared protected areas were cleared between 1980 and 2010, over a quarter of forests outside of protected areas were lost between 1980 and 2010.
by contrast ,  costa rica only has 27% of its land territory protected . 
when spanish explorers arrived in the 16th century ,  the area that is now belize included three distinct maya territories: chetumal province ,  which encompassed the area around corozal bay; dzuluinicob province ,  which encompassed the area between the new river and the sibun river ,  west to tipu; and a southern territory controlled by the manche ch'ol maya ,  encompassing the area between the monkey river and the sarstoon river . 
the maya civilization emerged at least three millennia ago in the lowland area of the yucatán peninsula and the highlands to the south ,  in the area of present-day southeastern mexico ,  belize ,  guatemala ,  and western honduras . 
it is claimed by scientists that over 40% of belize's coral reef has been damaged since 1998.
around 13.6% of belize's territorial waters ,  which contain the belize barrier reef ,  are also protected . 
defendants may ,  under certain circumstances ,  appeal their cases to the caribbean court of justice . 
the main british force left in 1994, three years after guatemala recognized belizean independence ,  but the united kingdom maintained a training presence via the british army training and support unit belize  -lrb-  batsub  -rrb-  and 25 flight aac until 2011 when the last british forces left ladyville barracks ,  with the exception of seconded advisers . 
it is yet to be seen if the belizean government will highlight the consequences of the territorial claim on indigenous land rights prior to the referendum vote in 2019.
the official language of benin is french . 
benin  -lrb-    ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of benin  -lrb-    -rrb-  and formerly dahomey ,  is a country in west africa . 
benin's climate is hot and humid . 
the new name ,  benin ,  was chosen for its neutrality . 
the majority of benin's population lives in the south . 
the form `` benin '' is the result of a portuguese corruption of the city of ubinu  -lrb-  now benin city  -rrb-  . 
in 1991, it was replaced by the current multi-party republic of benin . 
benin uses the cfa franc ,  which is pegged to the euro . 
on 30 november 1975, he renamed the country to the people's republic of benin . 
a marxist–leninist state called the people's republic of benin existed between 1975 and 1990.
the economy of benin is dependent on subsistence agriculture ,  cotton production ,  and regional trade . 
benin is a member of the organization for the harmonization of business law in africa  -lrb-  ohada  -rrb-  . 
the political system is derived from the 1990 constitution of benin and the subsequent transition to democracy in 1991.
benin's politics take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  in which the president of benin is both head of state and head of government ,  within a multi-party system . 
benin's economy has continued to strengthen over the past years ,  with real gdp growth estimated at 5.1 and 5.7% in 2008 and 2009, respectively . 
benin is divided into twelve departments  -lrb-  french: `` départements ''  -rrb-  which ,  in turn ,  are subdivided into 77 communes . 
the literacy rate in benin is among the lowest in the world: in 2015 it was estimated to be 38.4%  -lrb-  49.9% for males and 27.3% for females  -rrb-  . 
within this expenditure ,  benin devoted quite a large share to tertiary education: 0.97% of gdp . 
bermuda was discovered in 1505 by spanish explorer juan de bermúdez . 
the first english coins to circulate in north america were struck in bermuda . 
the government of bermuda eventually reached an agreement with the parliamentarians in england which left the status quo in bermuda . 
bermuda  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a british overseas territory in the north atlantic ocean . 
the first european known to have reached bermuda was the spanish sea captain juan de bermúdez in 1505, after whom the islands are named . 
the island was administered as an extension of virginia by the company until 1614.
loyalist privateers based in bermuda captured 114 prizes between 1777 and 1781, while 130 were captured in 1782.
it established a colony at jamestown ,  virginia ,  in 1607.
bolivia is named after simón bolívar ,  a leader in the spanish american wars of independence . 
bolivia  -lrb-   ,  ; ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the plurinational state of bolivia  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a landlocked country located in western-central south america . 
with of area ,  bolivia is the fifth largest country in south america and the 27th largest in the world . 
the region now known as bolivia had been occupied for over 2,500 years when the aymara arrived . 
bolivia's defeat by paraguay in the chaco war  -lrb-  1932–35 -rrb- ,  where bolivia lost a great part of the gran chaco region in dispute ,  marked a turning-point . 
bolivia is located in the central zone of south america ,  between 57°26'–69°38'w and 9°38'–22°53's . 
bolivia is very rich in minerals ,  including tin ,  silver ,  and lithium . 
bolivia was captured and recaptured many times during the war by the royalists and patriots . 
it gained control over much of what is now andean bolivia and extended its control into the fringes of the amazon basin . 
banzer was ousted in 1978 and later returned as the democratically elected president of bolivia from 1997 to 2001.
the sovereign state of bolivia is a constitutionally unitary state ,  divided into nine departments . 
in 1836, bolivia ,  under the rule of marshal andrés de santa cruz ,  invaded peru to reinstall the deposed president ,  general luis josé de orbegoso . 
in 2009, a new constitution changed the country's official name to `` plurinational state of bolivia '' in recognition of the multi-ethnic nature of the country and the enhanced position of bolivia's indigenous peoples under the new constitution . 
before spanish colonization ,  the andean region of bolivia was part of the inca empire ,  while the northern and eastern lowlands were inhabited by independent tribes . 
in 2003 the bolivian gas conflict broke out . 
a period of political and economic instability in the early-to-mid-19th century weakened bolivia . 
thus ,  since independence ,  bolivia has lost over half of its territory to neighboring countries . 
overall ,  close to 50% of bosnia and herzegovina is forested . 
the federation of bosnia and herzegovina consists of 10 cantons . 
around 5,200 serb families were forcibly expelled from bosnia and herzegovina . 
during the 1950s and 1960s bosnia was a political backwater of the republic of yugoslavia . 
it went unrecognized by the government of bosnia and herzegovina ,  which declared it illegal . 
the region was administered by the ottomans as the sanjak of herzegovina  -lrb-  `` hersek ''  -rrb-  within the eyalet of bosnia up until the formation of the short-lived herzegovina eyalet in the 1830s ,  which remerged in the 1850s ,  after which the entity became commonly known as `` bosnia and herzegovina '' . 
in time ,  bosnia formed a unit under its own ruler ,  who called himself bosnian . 
on 18 november 1990, multi-party parliamentary elections were held throughout bosnia and herzegovina . 
nonetheless ,  bosnia and herzegovina as a whole managed to escape the conflict relatively unscathed . 
following bosnia and herzegovina's declaration of independence ,  bosnian serb militias mobilized in different parts of the country . 
on initial proclamation of independence in 1992, the country's official name was the republic of bosnia and herzegovina but following the 1995 dayton agreement and the new constitution that accompanied it the official name was changed to bosnia and herzegovina . 
of the 75,000 muslims who lost their lives in bosnia and herzegovina during the war ,  approximately 30,000  -lrb-  mostly civilians  -rrb-  were killed by the chetniks . 
following world war i ,  bosnia and herzegovina joined the south slav kingdom of serbs ,  croats and slovenes  -lrb-  soon renamed yugoslavia  -rrb-  . 
bosnia has been inhabited by humans since at least the neolithic age . 
following his death in 1391 however ,  bosnia fell into a long period of decline . 
by the year 1377, bosnia was elevated into a kingdom with the coronation of tvrtko as the first bosnian king in mile near visoko in the bosnian heartland . 
a declaration of the sovereignty of bosnia and herzegovina on 15 october 1991 was followed by a referendum for independence on 29 february/1 march 1992, which was boycotted by the great majority of serbs . 
although the city is surrounded by croatian peninsulas ,  by international law ,  bosnia and herzegovina has a right of passage to the outer sea . 
bosnia is in the western balkans ,  bordering croatia  -lrb-    -rrb-  to the north and west ,  serbia  -lrb-    -rrb-  to the east ,  and montenegro  -lrb-    -rrb-  to the southeast . 
the names serb and croat ,  though occasionally appearing in peripheral areas ,  were not used in bosnia proper . 
at the end of the war the establishment of the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia ,  with the constitution of 1946, officially made bosnia and herzegovina one of six constituent republics in the new state . 
bosnia and herzegovina traces permanent human settlement back to the neolithic age ,  during and after which it was populated by several illyrian and celtic civilizations . 
bosnia and herzegovina is an almost landlocked country – it has a narrow coast at the adriatic sea ,  about long surrounding the town of neum . 
botswana  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of botswana  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country located in southern africa . 
at botswana is the world's 48th-largest country . 
botswana is the continent's oldest democracy . 
the stipulation of the us reducing botswana's debt is that botswana will focus on more extensive conservation of the land . 
it ruled that kasikili island belongs to botswana . 
botswana has diverse areas of wildlife habitat . 
botswana is topographically flat ,  with up to 70 percent of its territory being the kalahari desert . 
the first written records relating to modern-day botswana appear in 1824.
during the scramble for africa the territory of botswana was coveted by both germany and great britain . 
botswana faces two major environmental problems: drought and desertification . 
from that point on ,  the modern-day border between south africa and botswana was agreed on ,  and the afrikaners and batswana traded and worked together peacefully . 
the country's name means `` land of the tswana '' ,  referring to the dominant ethnic group in botswana . 
a mid-sized country of just over 2 million people ,  botswana is one of the most sparsely populated countries in the world . 
brunei's population was in  . 
the british have intervened in the affairs of brunei on several occasions . 
british residents were introduced in brunei under the supplementary protectorate agreement in 1906.
brunei gained its independence from the united kingdom on 1 january 1984.
brunei gained its independence from the united kingdom on 1 january 1984.
brunei  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  officially the nation of brunei ,  the abode of peace  -lrb-   ,  jawi:   -rrb-  ,  is a country located on the north coast of the island of borneo in southeast asia . 
britain attacked brunei in july 1846 due to internal conflicts over who was the rightful sultan . 
after world war ii ,  a new government was formed in brunei under the british military administration  -lrb-  bma  -rrb-  . 
the spanish agreed that if they succeeded in conquering brunei ,  pengiran seri lela would be appointed as the sultan ,  while pengiran seri ratna would be the new bendahara . 
once the japanese occupied brunei ,  they made an agreement with sultan ahmad tajuddin over governing the country . 
brunei lost much of its territory to him and his dynasty ,  known as the white rajahs . 
before 1941, the governor of the straits settlements ,  based in singapore ,  was responsible for the duties of british high commissioner for brunei ,  sarawak ,  and north borneo  -lrb-  now sabah  -rrb-  . 
the rebellion partially affected brunei's decision to opt out of the malaysian federation . 
the british virgin islands is a unitary territory . 
british virgin islanders are british overseas territories citizens and since 2002 are british citizens as well . 
the british virgin islands  -lrb-  bvi  -rrb-  ,  officially simply the virgin islands ,  are a british overseas territory in the caribbean ,  to the east of puerto rico . 
crime in the british virgin islands is comparatively low by caribbean standards  -lrb-  and indeed compared to the neighbouring us virgin islands  -rrb-  . 
the british virgin islands were administered variously as part of the british leeward islands or with st .  kitts and nevis ,  with an administrator representing the british government on the islands . 
the british virgin islands consist of the main islands of tortola ,  virgin gorda ,  anegada ,  and jost van dyke ,  along with over 50 other smaller islands and cays . 
the british virgin islands have a tropical rainforest climate ,  moderated by trade winds . 
only virgin islanders are permitted to work as taxi drivers . 
the official name of the territory is still simply the `` virgin islands '' ,  but the prefix `` british '' is often used . 
in 1968 the british government issued a memorandum requiring that the postage stamps in the territory should say `` british virgin islands ''  -lrb-  whereas previously they had simply stated `` virgin islands ''  -rrb-  ,  a practice which is still followed today . 
since 2001, financial services in the british virgin islands have been regulated by the independent financial services commission . 
although the territory is not part of the european union and not directly subject to eu law ,  british virgin islanders are deemed to be citizens of the eu by virtue of their british citizenship . 
burkina faso  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is a landlocked country in west africa . 
before attaining autonomy ,  it had been french upper volta and part of the french union . 
general elections were held in burkina faso on 29 november 2015.
political freedoms are severely restricted in burkina faso . 
burkina faso is therefore a relatively flat country . 
the french colony of upper volta was named for its location on the upper courses of the volta river  -lrb-  the black ,  red and white volta  -rrb-  . 
with french help ,  blaise compaoré seized power in a coup d'état in 1987.
through a complex series of events what is burkina faso eventually became a french protectorate in 1896.
 ,  burkina faso remains one of the least developed countries in the world . 
formerly called the republic of upper volta ,  the country was renamed `` burkina faso '' on 4 august 1984 by then-president thomas sankara . 
the northwestern part of present-day burkina faso was populated by hunter-gatherers from 14000 bc to 5000 bc . 
burkina faso has a primarily tropical climate with two very distinct seasons . 
burkina faso has a larger number of elephants than many countries in west africa . 
on 15 october 1987, sankara ,  along with twelve other officials ,  was killed in a coup d'état organized by blaise compaoré ,  sankara's former colleague and burkina faso's president until october 2014.
the 2018 cia world factbook provides this summary of the issues facing burkina faso . 
the country owes its former name of upper volta to three rivers which cross it: the black volta  -lrb-  or `` mouhoun ''  -rrb-  ,  the white volta  -lrb-  `` nakambé ''  -rrb-  and the red volta  -lrb-  `` nazinon ''  -rrb-  . 
blaise compaoré ,  resulted in a military coup d'état on 4 august 1983.
on 4 august 1984, on president sankara's initiative ,  the country's name was changed from upper volta to burkina faso or `` land of the honest men '';  -lrb-  the literal translation is `` land of the upright men '' .   -rrb- 
the colony was named for its location on the upper courses of the volta river  -lrb-  the black ,  red and white volta  -rrb-  . 
to bolster its administration ,  the colonial government separated the present territory of burkina faso from upper senegal and niger . 
starting in the early 1890s a series of british ,  french and german military officers made attempts to claim parts of what is today burkina faso . 
by 1898, the majority of the territory corresponding to burkina faso was nominally conquered; however ,  french control of many parts remained uncertain . 
during the early 16th century the songhai conducted many slave raids into what is today burkina faso . 
burkina faso employs numerous police and security forces ,  generally modeled after organizations used by french police . 
the republic of upper volta  -lrb-    -rrb-  was established on 11 december 1958 as a self-governing colony within the french community . 
the bahamas has no income tax ,  corporate tax ,  capital gains tax ,  or wealth tax . 
the bahamian government maintains the value of the bahamian dollar on a par with the u . s .  dollar . 
the bahamian parliament approved legislation in 1993 that extended most freeport tax and duty exemptions through 2054.
tourism alone provides an estimated 51% of the gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  and employs about half the bahamian workforce . 
barbadian law is rooted in english common law ,  and the constitution of barbados implemented in 1966, is the supreme law of the land . 
the functions of the judiciary: °to enforce laws °to interpret laws °to conduct court hearings °to hear court appeals
new acts are passed by the barbadian parliament and require royal assent by the governor-general to become law . 
the judiciary is the legal system through which punishments are handed out to individuals who break the law . 
the constitution of barbados is the supreme law of the nation . 
the cabinet is headed by the prime minister ,  who must be an elected member of parliament ,  and other ministers are appointed from either chamber by the governor-general ,  as advised by the prime minister . 
below are the 30 members of the council of ministers as of january 2017, as well as the head of the presidential administration and the chairmen of the state committees ,  who are not technically ministers but are included in the council of ministers . 
belarus is a member of the trans-european line  -lrb-  tel  -rrb-  ,  trans-asia-europe fibre-optic line  -lrb-  tae  -rrb-  and has access to the trans-siberia line  -lrb-  tsl  -rrb- ; three fibre-optic segments provide connectivity to latvia ,  poland ,  russia ,  and ukraine; worldwide service is available to belarus through this infrastructure; intelsat ,  eutelsat ,  and intersputnik earth stations . 
in 2006 it was announced that belarus and russia completed the second broadband link between the two countries ,  the yartsevo-vitebsk cable . 
in 1993 the 7th tank army was reorganised as the 7th army corps . 
it was formed in the 1990s on the base of the 334th regiment of the 120th 'rogachev' guards motor rifle division . 
weapons storage bases that have been disbanded include the 29th ,  30th ,  193rd ,  and the storage base that used to be the 8th guards tank division at marina gorka . 
in 1994 the 7th army corps was redesignated as the 65th army corps ,  still located at borisov . 
the 61st and 927th air bases have now merged into the 61st  -lrb-  fighter  -rrb-  air base at baranovichi ,  flying mig-29s ,  and the 206th air base  -lrb-  ross  -rrb-  has merged into the 116th guards assault air base at lida ,  flying su-25s . 
in 2012, it is reported that there are six mechanised brigades in the ground forces: three full-strength ,  the 6th  -lrb-  grodno  -rrb-  ,  11th  -lrb-  slonim  -rrb-  ,  and 120th guards mechanised brigade at minsk . 
in 2007, the land forces consisted of 29,600 soldiers  -lrb-  6th guards mechanised brigade  -lrb-  grodno  -rrb-  ,  11th guards mechanized brigade at slonim ,  the 120th guards mechanised brigade  -lrb-  minsk  -rrb-  ,  38th and 103rd mobile brigades  -lrb-  organized similarly to soviet airborne regiments ,  not all of them are equipped with bmd-1 -rrb- ,  5th spetsnaz brigade  -lrb-  maryina horka  -rrb-  ,  five artillery brigades and four regiments ,  two mrl regiments ,  15th ,  29th ,  115th ,  120th and 302nd sam brigades ,  two ssm brigades ,  two brigades and one regiment of engineers ,  8th independent nbc brigade ,  two signals brigades ,  40th independent nbc battalion . 
in late 1991 the 5th guards tank army comprised the 30th guards motor rifle division ,  newly arrived from czechoslovakia ,  and the 193rd tank division ,  plus two armament and equipment storage bases  -lrb-  the former 8th guards and 29th tank divisions  -rrb-  ,  and army troops . 
until 1991 the soviet belorussian military district comprised the 5th guards tank army  -lrb-  hq bobruisk  -rrb-  ,  the 7th tank army  -lrb-  hq borisov  -rrb-  ,  the 28th army  -lrb-  hq grodno  -rrb-  ,  the 120th guards motor rifle division ,  the 72nd guards district training center and logistical units and formations . 
all belarus ground forces were now grouped within these two commands ,  the western operational command at grodno ,  former from the previous 28th army corps ,  the former soviet 28th army ,  and the north western operational command ,  the former 65th army corps ,  at barysaw  -lrb-  borisov  -rrb-  . 
also arriving from the southern group of forces in hungary was the 19th guards tank division . 
it has also been in a supranational union with russia since 2 april 1996, although this has had little practical effect . 
both republics and the soviet union joined the un when the organization was founded in 1945.
the united states - along with the european union - has restricted the travel of president alexander lukashenko and members of his inner circle ,  as well as imposing economic sanctions . 
a resolution of the european parliament declared that the personal bank accounts of president lukashenko and other high-ranking belarusian officials should be tracked and frozen . 
belarusian exports to the eu consist mainly of agricultural and textile products ,  while imports from the eu are primarily machinery . 
in may 2009 belarus and the eu agree on cooperation in the eastern partnership  -lrb-  eap  -rrb-  . 
later in 2005 the belarusian riot police seized the headquarters of the union of poles in belarus ,  an association representing the 400,000 ethnic minority polish living in western areas the country that were part of poland until world war ii . 
the country code for belgium is be . 
 ''9000 '' is the postal code for ghent . 
transport in belgium is facilitated with well-developed road ,  air ,  rail and water networks . 
there are also a number of orbital roads in belgium around major cities . 
the road network in belgium is managed by regional authorities ,  meaning that a road section in flanders is managed by the flemish government ,  a road section in brussels by the brussels government and a road section in wallonia by the walloon government . 
brussels airport is belgium's biggest airport . 
regional transport in belgium is operated by regional companies: de lijn in flanders operates the kusttram and the antwerp pre-metro and tram ,  and the tram in gent ,  as well as a bus network both urban and interurban ,  tec in wallonia operates the charleroi pre-metro as well as a bus network and mivb/stib in the brussels capital-region operates the brussels metro as well as the brussels tram and bus network . 
benin has a lively and diversified microfinance sector . 
benin’s financial sector is dominated by banks ,  and in general remains shallow . 
benin is also a member of the economic community of west african states  -lrb-  ecowas  -rrb-  . 
the economy of benin remains underdeveloped and dependent on subsistence agriculture and cotton . 
despite its rapid growth ,  the economy of benin still remains underdeveloped and dependent on subsistence agriculture ,  cotton production ,  and regional trade . 
hydropower exports to india have boosted bhutan's overall growth ,  even though gdp fell in 2008 as a result of a slowdown in india ,  its predominant export market . 
model education ,  social ,  and environment programs are underway with support from multilateral development organisations . 
