atlanta is governed by a mayor and the atlanta city council . 
the atlanta falcons have played in atlanta since their inception in 1966.
by 1860, atlanta's population had grown to 9,554.
atlanta encompasses  ,  of which is land and is water . 
examples of street art in atlanta can be found on the atlanta street art map . 
atlanta is served by the `` atlanta journal-constitution '' ,  its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution . 
on august 2, 2018, it was announced that atlanta would have its own overwatch league team ,  atlanta reign . 
 ''atlanta '' magazine is an award-winning ,  monthly general-interest magazine based in and covering atlanta . 
atlanta has a dynamic ,  distinctly southern ,  culture . 
atlanta has had its own professional ice hockey franchises ,  both of which relocated after playing in atlanta less than 15 years . 
at the same time ,  the white population of atlanta has increased . 
overall ,  there are over 1,000 places of worship within atlanta . 
historically ,  atlanta has been a stronghold for the democratic party . 
atlanta is divided into 242 officially defined neighborhoods . 
atlanta contains several outdoor attractions . 
atlanta is home to professional franchises for four major team sports: the atlanta braves of major league baseball ,  the atlanta hawks of the national basketball association ,  the atlanta falcons of the national football league ,  and atlanta united fc of major league soccer . 
media is also an important aspect of atlanta's economy . 
as the state capital ,  atlanta is the site of most of georgia's state government . 
after the civil war ended in 1865, atlanta was gradually rebuilt . 
professional soccer has been played in some form in atlanta since 1967.
atlanta  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital of ,  and the most populous city in ,  the u . s .  state of georgia . 
the 2010 united states census reported that atlanta had a population of 420,003.
atlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 summer olympic games . 
the residents approved ,  and the town was incorporated as atlanta on december 29, 1847.
despite these improvements ,  atlanta lost over 100,000 residents between 1970 and 1990, over 20% of its population . 
atlanta is one of few united states cities with permanent ,  professional ,  and resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera  -lrb-  atlanta opera  -rrb-  ,  ballet  -lrb-  atlanta ballet  -rrb-  ,  orchestral music  -lrb-  atlanta symphony orchestra  -rrb-  ,  and theater  -lrb-  the alliance theatre  -rrb-  . 
the braves have a new home as of 2017, having moved from turner field to suntrust park ,  which is in the atlanta metropolitan area northwest of downtown atlanta in cumberland/galleria ,  georgia . 
as a national center for the arts ,  atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions . 
the term was first used by paul lapie ,  in 1902, and eduard von hartmann ,  in 1908.
between the 5th and 6th centuries bc ,  it was important in greece to be knowledgeable if you were to be successful . 
after the meeting with krogstad ,  torvald comes out of the study . 
nora realizes that her husband is not the strong and gallant man she thought he was ,  and that he truly loves himself more than he does nora . 
a maid enters ,  delivering a letter to nora . 
desperate after being fired by torvald ,  krogstad arrives at the house . 
torvald then retires to his study to work . 
nora tells kristine of her difficult situation . 
however ,  kristine decides that torvald should know the truth for the sake of his and nora's marriage . 
nora tells torvald that she is leaving him ,  and in a confrontational scene expresses her sense of betrayal and disillusionment . 
the reasons nora leaves her husband are complex ,  and various details are hinted at throughout the play . 
the play was first seen in america in 1883 in louisville ,  kentucky; helena modjeska acted nora . 
after literally dragging nora home from the party ,  torvald goes to check his mail but is interrupted by dr .  rank ,  who has followed them . 
krogstad ,  a lower-level employee at torvald's bank ,  arrives and goes into the study . 
torvald is unable to comprehend nora's point of view ,  since it contradicts all that he has been taught about the female mind throughout his life . 
krogstad informs nora that he has written a letter detailing her crime  -lrb-  forging her father's signature of surety on the bond  -rrb-  and put it in torvald's mailbox ,  which is locked . 
kristine arrives to help nora repair a dress for a costume function that she and torvald plan to attend the next day . 
concurrently with the development of the sparrow i ,  in 1951, raytheon began work on the semi-active radar homing version of sparrow family of missiles ,  the aam-n-6 `` sparrow iii '' . 
sparrow i was a limited and rather primitive weapon . 
the launching aircraft will illuminate the target with its radar . 
as early as 1950 douglas examined equipping the sparrow with an active radar seeker ,  initially known as xaam-n-2a `` sparrow ii ,  the original retroactively becoming sparrow i '' . 
the aam-n-3 sparrow ii was unique in that it had a fully active radar guidance system . 
the sparrow was also used as the basis for a surface-to-air missile ,  the rim-7 sea sparrow ,  which is used by a number of navies for air defense of their ships . 
a number of upgraded sparrow designs were developed to address these issues . 
with the retirement of the sparrow in the air-to-air role ,  a new version of the sea sparrow was produced to address this concern ,  producing the much larger and more capable rim-162 essm . 
to accommodate the active radar guidance system ,  the aam-n-3 sparrow ii had a much greater volume than its predecessor . 
the active radar made the sparrow ii a `` fire and forget '' weapon ,  allowing several to be fired at separate targets at the same time . 
skyguard i is an anti-aircraft system ,  utilizing ground-based aim-7 sparrow launchers . 
despite the significant advantages of this design over sarh guidance ,  all subsequent models of the sparrow use semi-active radar homing . 
its size would subsequently set the precedent for all future sparrow variants . 
in 1998 and 1999 amraams were again fired by usaf f-15 fighters at iraqi aircraft violating the no-fly-zone ,  but this time they failed to hit their targets . 
as of 2017, the aim-120 amraam has shot down ten aircraft  -lrb-  six mig-29s ,  one mig-25, one mig-23, one su-22, one soko j-21 jastreb ,  and two uh-60 black hawk  -rrb-  . 
amraam has an all-weather ,  beyond-visual-range  -lrb-  bvr  -rrb-  capability . 
on february 22, 2015 raytheon announced an extended range upgrade to nasams-launched amraam ,  calling it amraam-er . 
the targets included six mig-29s ,  a mig-25, a mig-23, two su-22s ,  a galeb and a us army blackhawk that was targeted by mistake . 
the paf got the first three f-16c/d block 50/52+ aircraft on july 3, 2010 and first batch of amraams on july 26, 2010.
the sale would include 288 amraam c-7 missiles . 
this combines the amraam seeker with the essm rocket motor . 
the amraam has been used in several engagements and is credited with ten air-to-air kills . 
amraam gained a second victory in january 1993 when an iraqi mig-23 was shot down by a usaf f-16c . 
once the missile closes to self-homing distance ,  it turns on its active radar seeker and searches for the target aircraft . 
this information is generally obtained using the launching aircraft's radar ,  although it could come from an infra-red search and track system ,  from a data link from another fighter aircraft ,  or from an awacs aircraft . 
amraam uses two-stage guidance when fired at long range . 
the us navy retired the phoenix in 2004 in light of availability of the aim-120 amraam on the f/a-18 hornet and the pending retirement of the f-14 tomcat from active service in late 2006.
also ,  the launching aircraft had to remain pointed in the direction of the target  -lrb-  within the azimuth and elevation of its own radar set  -rrb-  which could be difficult or dangerous in air-to-air combat . 
the third combat use of the amraam was in 1994, when a republika srpska air force j-21 jastreb aircraft was shot down by a usaf f-16c that was patrolling the un-imposed no-fly zone over bosnia . 
the amraam was used for the first time on december 27, 1992, when a usaf f-16d shot down an iraqi mig-25 that violated the southern no-fly-zone . 
once the missile closes in on the target ,  its active radar guides it to intercept . 
the b-52 was subsequently renamed `` in harm's way '' . 
during the gulf war ,  the harm was involved in a friendly fire incident when the pilot of an f-4g wild weasel escorting a b-52 bomber mistook the latter's tail gun radar for an iraqi aaa site . 
the agm-65 maverick is an air-to-ground missile  -lrb-  agm  -rrb-  designed for close air support . 
the maverick was used again in iraq during the 2003 iraq war ,  during which 918 were fired . 
the agm-65f is a hybrid maverick combining the agm-65d's iir seeker and warhead and propulsion components of the agm-65e . 
among the later were the agm-83 bulldog ,  agm-79 blue eye and agm-80 viper . 
more versions of the maverick appeared ,  among which was the laser-guided agm-65c/e . 
lau-117 maverick launchers have been used on us army ,  usn ,  usaf ,  and usmc aircraft:
the maverick's development history began in 1965, when the united states air force  -lrb-  usaf  -rrb-  began a program to develop a replacement to the agm-12 bullpup . 
 ''vittoria '' was engaged and fired upon by a usn p-3c maritime patrol aircraft with agm-65 maverick missiles . 
the aim-54 phoenix was retired from usn service on september 30, 2004.
both the f-14 tomcat and aim-54 phoenix missile continue in the service of the islamic republic of iran air force . 
the aim-54 was not adopted by any foreign nation besides iran ,  or any other us armed service ,  and was not used on any aircraft other than the f-14.
the aim-54 phoenix ,  developed for the f-111b fleet air defense fighter ,  had an airframe with four cruciform fins that was a scaled-up version of the aim-47.
most other us aircraft relied on the smaller ,  semi-active medium-range aim-7 sparrow . 
the aim-54 is credited with 62 air-to-air kills ,  all scored by iran during the long iran–iraq war . 
its weapons system ,  the aim-54 working with the awg-9 radar ,  migrated to the new u . s .  navy fighter project ,  the vfx ,  which would later become the f-14 tomcat . 
the aim-54 phoenix is a radar-guided ,  long-range air-to-air missile  -lrb-  aam  -rrb-  ,  carried in clusters of up to six missiles on the grumman f-14 tomcat ,  its only operational launch platform . 
due to its active radar tracking ,  the brevity code `` fox three '' was used when firing the aim-54.
close air support was the main mission of the ac-130 in iraq . 
by 2018, ac-130 gunships will have been providing close air support for special operators for 50 years . 
six ac-130s and 52 air crew members were lost during the war . 
ac-130s destroyed more than 10,000 trucks and participated in many crucial close air support missions in vietnam . 
the cannon was switched to gunship 571 and was used until 30 march when the aircraft was shot down . 
during the gulf war of 1990–91  -lrb-  operations desert shield and desert storm  -rrb-  ,  regular air force and air force reserve ac-130s provided close air support and force protection  -lrb-  air base defense  -rrb-  for ground forces ,  and battlefield interdiction . 
the ac-130 was later supplemented by the ac-119 shadow  -lrb-  project gunship iii  -rrb-  ,  which later proved to be underpowered . 
in 2007, air force special operations command  -lrb-  afsoc  -rrb-  initiated a program to upgrade the armament of ac-130s . 
the ac-130 gunship first arrived in south vietnam on 21 september 1967 under the gunship ii program and began combat operations over laos and south vietnam that year . 
during the intense fighting ,  the planes fired more than 1,300 40 mm and 1,200 105 mm rounds . 
the ac-130u gunship set a new record for the longest sustained flight by any c-130 on 22 and 23 october 1997, when two ac-130u gunships flew 36 hours nonstop from hurlburt field ,  florida to taegu air base  -lrb-  daegu  -rrb-  ,  south korea ,  being refueled seven times in the air by kc-135 tankers . 
the air force decided to add a 105 mm cannon to the ac-130j in addition to the 30 mm cannon and smart bombs ,  the shells being more accurate and cheaper than dropping sdbs . 
on 24 may 1969, the first spectre gunship was lost to enemy fire . 
it was at this time that the c-130a gunship was designated the ac-130a . 
the airframe is manufactured by lockheed martin ,  while boeing is responsible for the conversion into a gunship and for aircraft support . 
on 18 august 1968, an ac-130 gunship flying an armed reconnaissance mission in vietnam's iii corps was diverted to support the katum special forces camp . 
there were eight ac-130h and seventeen ac-130u aircraft in active-duty service as of july 2010.
that is ,  one must have for all `` x '' and `` y '' in the algebra . 
in abstract algebra ,  an alternative algebra is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative ,  only alternative . 
arbitrage-free price refers to the price at which no price arbitrage is possible . 
the ideas of using multiple discount rates obtained from zero-coupon bonds and discount a similar bonds cash flow to find its price is derived from the yield curve . 
in arbitrage-free pricing ,  multiple discount rates are used . 
if a bond valued with the arbitrage-free pricing approach turns out to be priced higher in the market ,  an investor could have such an opportunity:
if the market prices do not allow for profitable arbitrage ,  the prices are said to constitute an arbitrage equilibrium ,  or an arbitrage-free market . 
fiorentina has won two italian championships ,  in 1955–56 and again in 1968–69, as well as six coppa italia trophies and one supercoppa italiana . 
the red shirt has been the most worn 3rd shirt by fiorentina ,  although they also wore rare yellow shirts  -lrb-  '97–'98, '99–'00 and '10–'11 -rrb- and a sterling version ,  mostly in the coppa italia ,  in 2000–01.
fiorentina is one of the fourteen european teams that played the finals in all three major continental competitions: the champions league  -lrb-  1956–1957, the first italian team to reach the final in the top continental competition  -rrb-  ,  the uefa cup winners  -lrb-  1960–1961 and 1961–1962 -rrb- and the uefa cup  -lrb-  1989–1990 -rrb- . 
in the 1960–61 season ,  the club won the coppa italia again and was also successful in europe ,  winning the first cup winners' cup against scottish side rangers . 
the `` viola '' finished the season in tenth place . 
claudio ranieri was brought in as coach for the 1993–94 season ,  and that year ,  fiorentina dominated serie b ,  italy's second division . 
the team began the season well ,  finishing the calendar year in joint third place and eventually finishing the 2012–13 season in fourth ,  enough for a position in the 2013–14 europa league . 
in the 2009–10 season ,  fiorentina started their domestic campaign strongly before steadily losing momentum and slipped to mid-table positions at the latter half of the season . 
fiorentina's 1995–96 season was disappointing in the league ,  but they did reach the cup winners' cup semi-final by beating gloria bistrița ,  sparta prague and benfica . 
acf fiorentina s . p . a .  ,  commonly referred to as simply fiorentina  ,  is a professional italian football club from florence ,  tuscany . 
after a rough start and three seasons in lower leagues ,  fiorentina reached the serie a in 1931.
at the end of the season ,  the team finished fourth again in the league ,  and also finishing the year as coppa italia runners-up after losing 3–1 to napoli in the final . 
in 1990, fiorentina fought to avoid relegation right up until the final day of the season ,  but did reach the uefa cup final ,  where they again faced juventus . 
from that day forward ,  kuti changed his sound and the message behind his music . 
it was partially borne out of an attempt to distinguish fela kuti's music from the soul music of american artists such as james brown . 
being that kuti was interested in african american politics ,  smith would inform him on the current events . 
an example of an arithmetic function is the divisor function whose value at a positive integer `` n '' is equal to the number of divisors of `` n '' . 
in number theory ,  an arithmetic ,  arithmetical ,  or number-theoretic function is for most authors any function `` f '' -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  whose domain is the positive integers and whose range is a subset of the complex numbers . 
the first standard for c was published by ansi . 
ansi c ,  iso c and standard c refer to the successive standards for the c programming language published by the american national standards institute  -lrb-  ansi  -rrb-  and the international organization for standardization  -lrb-  iso  -rrb-  . 
the alien act and the sedition act were meant to guard against this perceived threat of anarchy . 
the alien enemies acts remained in effect at the outset of world war i . 
the revised alien enemies act remains in effect today . 
while government authorities prepared lists of aliens for deportation ,  many aliens fled the country during the debate over the alien and sedition acts ,  and adams never signed a deportation order . 
the democratic-republicans made the alien and sedition acts an important issue in the 1800 election campaign . 
in ludecke v .  watkins  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- ,  the supreme court interpreted the time of release under the alien enemies act . 
on april 10, 1946, truman issued presidential proclamation 2685, titled “removal of alien enemies” ,  citing the revised alien enemies act  -lrb-  50 u . s . c . 
they made it harder for an immigrant to become a citizen  -lrb-  naturalization act  -rrb-  ,  allowed the president to imprison and deport non-citizens who were deemed dangerous  -lrb-  alien friends act of 1798 -rrb- or who were from a hostile nation  -lrb-  alien enemy act of 1798 -rrb- ,  and criminalized making false statements that were critical of the federal government  -lrb-  sedition act of 1798 -rrb- . 
it is a term used in logic and epistemology ,  particularly in the philosophy of kant . 
empirical reason cannot here play the role of establishing rational truths because it goes beyond possible experience and is applied to the sphere of that which transcends it . 
a partially ordered set  -lrb-  poset  -rrb-  `` p '' is said to satisfy the ascending chain condition  -lrb-  acc  -rrb-  if every strictly ascending sequence of elements eventually terminates . 
his son ,  rabbi menachem  -lrb-  `` meni ''  -rrb-  even-israel ,  is the executive director of the steinsaltz center ,  rabbi steinsaltz's umbrella organization ,  located in the nachlaot neighborhood of jerusalem . 
random house halted publication of the steinsaltz talmud after less than one-third of the english translation had been published . 
the steinsaltz editions of the talmud have opened up the world of talmud study to thousands of people outside the walls of the traditional yeshiva ,  including women ,  who traditionally were not taught talmud . 
steinsaltz is also rosh yeshiva of yeshivat hesder tekoa . 
steinsaltz has taken a cautious approach to interfaith dialogues . 
housman died ,  aged 77, in cambridge . 
two of his siblings became prominent writers ,  sister clemence housman and brother laurence housman . 
housman began writing a new set of poems after the first world war . 
during his years in london ,  a .  e .  housman completed `` a shropshire lad '' ,  a cycle of 63 poems . 
housman was one of the foremost classicists of his age and has been ranked as one of the greatest scholars who ever lived . 
alfred edward housman  -lrb-  ; 26 march 1859 – 30 april 1936 -rrb- ,  usually known as a .  e .  housman ,  was an english classical scholar and poet ,  best known to the general public for his cycle of poems `` a shropshire lad '' . 
the ipcc's attribution of recent global warming to human activities is a view shared by the scientific community ,  and is also supported by 196 other scientific organizations worldwide  -lrb-  see also: scientific opinion on climate change  -rrb-  . 
human activities can also impose forcings ,  for example ,  through changing the composition of the atmosphere . 
multiple lines of evidence support attribution of recent climate change to human activities:
achiltibuie  -lrb-  ; or `` field of the yellow-haired boy ''  -rrb-  is a long linear village in ross and cromarty ,  highland ,  on the coigach coast of northwestern scotland ,  overlooking badentarbet bay to the west . 
where formula_5 is between 0 and 1.
where formula_7 equals actual inflation formula_8 years in the past . 
thus ,  current expected inflation reflects a weighted average of all past inflation ,  where the weights get smaller and smaller as we move further in the past . 
 ''a .  mexicanus '' is famous for its blind cave form ,  which is known by such names as blind cave tetra ,  blind tetra  -lrb-  leading to easy confusion with the brazilian `` stygichthys typhlops ''  -rrb-  ,  blind cave characin and blind cavefish . 
the mexican tetra or blind cave fish  -lrb-  `` astyanax mexicanus ''  -rrb-  is a freshwater fish of the family characidae of the order characiformes . 
cave fish and surface fish are able to produce fertile offspring . 
the most divergent cave population is the one in los sabinos . 
its blind cave form ,  however ,  is notable for having no eyes or pigment; it has a pinkish-white color to its body  -lrb-  resembling an albino  -rrb-  . 
the 10-cm atom probe ,  invented in 1973 by j . 
the 10-cm atom probe has been called the `` progenitor '' of later atom probes including the commercial instruments . 
the atom probe was introduced at the 14th field emission symposium in 1967 by erwin wilhelm müller and j . 
modern day atom probe tomography  -lrb-  apt  -rrb-  uses a position-sensitive detector to deduce the lateral location of atoms . 
in field ion microscopy the tip is cooled by a cryogen and its polarity is reversed . 
field ion microscopy is a modification of field emission microscopy where a stream of tunneling electrons is emitted from the apex of a sharp needle-like `` tip '' cathode when subjected to a sufficiently high electric field  -lrb-  ~3-6 v/nm  -rrb-  . 
his seven-year reign as crime boss ended when he was 33.
at about 20 years of age ,  capone left new york for chicago at the invitation of johnny torrio ,  who was imported by crime boss james `` big jim '' colosimo as an enforcer . 
ralph ran the bottling companies  -lrb-  both legal and illegal  -rrb-  early on ,  and was also the front man for the chicago outfit for some time until he was imprisoned for tax evasion in 1932.
a week after his release in march 1930, capone was listed as the number one `` public enemy '' on the unofficial chicago crime commission's widely publicized list . 
al capone was a frequent visitor to ryemabee in monteagle ,  tennessee `` when he was traveling between chicago and his florida estate in miami . `` 
during this time ,  capone was influenced by gangster johnny torrio ,  whom he came to regard as a mentor . 
torrio took over colosimo's crime empire after colosimo's murder on may 11, 1920, in which capone was suspected of being involved . 
capone was widely assumed to have been responsible for ordering the 1929 saint valentine's day massacre in an attempt to eliminate bugs moran ,  head of the north side gang . 
capone became increasingly security-minded and desirous of getting away from chicago . 
weiss had been a close friend of o'banion ,  and the north siders made it a priority to get revenge on his killers . 
torrio headed an essentially italian organized crime group that was the biggest in the city ,  with capone as his right-hand man . 
in an effort to clean up his image ,  capone sponsored a soup kitchen in chicago during the depression . 
on march 27, 1929, capone was arrested by fbi agents as he left a chicago courtroom after testifying to a grand jury that was investigating violations of federal prohibition laws . 
in the late 1950s ,  fbi agents discovered an organization led by capone's former lieutenants reigning supreme over the chicago underworld . 
drain efficiency is the ratio of output rf power to input dc power when primary input dc power has been fed to the drain of a field-effect transistor . 
the gain of an amplifier is the ratio of output to input power or amplitude ,  and is usually measured in decibels . 
for example ,  an audio amplifier with a gain given as 20 db will have a `` voltage gain '' of ten . 
the range of frequency over which the gain is equal to or greater than 70.7% of its maximum gain is termed as bandwidth . 
efficiency is a measure of how much of the power source is usefully applied to the amplifier's output . 
if two equivalent amplifiers are being compared ,  the amplifier with higher gain settings would be more sensitive as it would take less input signal to produce a given amount of power . 
in total ,  the film earned $11.5 million in the us . 
it was also nominated for best film at sitges ,  the spanish international film festival . 
the film was dedicated to irvin shapiro ,  who died during the film's production in 1989 on new year's day . 
in march 2013, shortly before the release of `` evil dead '' ,  a reboot and loose continuation of the franchise ,  raimi confirmed that the next `` evil dead '' film will be `` army of darkness 2 '' . 
plans to make a third `` evil dead '' film had been circulating for a number of years ,  even prior to the production of `` darkman '' . 
upon return ,  ash demands to be returned to his own time . 
 ''army of darkness '' won the saturn award for best horror film  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
in the film's original ending ,  ash miscounts the amount of potion needed to be able to correctly return to his own time . 
in response ,  universal turned the film over to outside film editors who cut the film to 81 minutes and another version running 87 minutes that was eventually released in theaters ,  still with an r rating . 
it is the third installment in the `` evil dead '' franchise ,  and continuing from `` evil dead ii , ``  ash williams  -lrb-  campbell  -rrb-  is trapped in the middle ages and battles the undead in his quest to return to the present . 
while dino de laurentiis gave raimi and his crew freedom to shoot the film the way they wanted ,  universal took over during post-production . 
the first asroc system using the mk-112 `` matchbox '' launcher was developed in the 1950s and installed in the 1960s . 
the 31 u . s .  navy s were all built with the mark 16 mod 7 asroc launching group and mk 4 asroc weapons handling system  -lrb-  awhs  -rrb-  reload system . 
ships with the mk 26 gmls ,  and late marks of the mk 10 gmls aboard the s ,  could accommodate asroc in these power-loaded launchers  -lrb-  the mk 13 gmls was not able to fire the weapon ,  as the launcher rail was too short  -rrb-  . 
other us ships with the mk 41 can also accommodate vl-asroc . 
born in saudi arabia ,  nami had served as a muezzin and was a college student . 
nami ,  much like abdulaziz al-omari ,  wail al-shehri ,  waleed al-shehri and mohand al-shehri ,  was born in the 'asir province in saudi arabia . 
in mid-november 2000, the 9/11 commission believes that nami ,  wail and waleed al-shehri ,  all of whom had obtained their u . s .  visas in late october ,  traveled in a group from saudi arabia to beirut and then onward to iran where they could travel through to afghanistan without getting their passports stamped . 
from november 27, 2000, through december 27, 2000, haznawi was in saudi arabia for ramadan . 
on september 11, 2001, haznawi arrived at newark international airport to board flight 93.
jarrah and haznawi both received their one-way tickets for united airlines flight 93, on september 5.
haznawi announced he was leaving his family in 1999 to fight in chechnya ,  although his father forbade him . 
on november 12, 2000, haznawi applied for and received a two-year u . s .  b-1/b-2  -lrb-  tourist/business  -rrb-  visa in jeddah ,  saudi arabia . 
it is theorized that during this trip ,  he may have initially told saeed and hamza al-ghamdi about the operation . 
on june 25, jarrah took haznawi to holy cross hospital in fort lauderdale on advice of his landlord charles lisa . 
on september 11, 2001, haznawi boarded united airlines flight 93 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane ,  which crashed into a field in shanksville ,  pennsylvania ,  after a passenger uprising . 
letters .  . 
in 362 he convened a council at alexandria ,  and presided over it with eusebius of vercelli . 
he is venerated by the oriental and eastern orthodox churches ,  the catholic church ,  the lutheran churches ,  and the anglican communion . 
athanasius of alexandria  -lrb-  ; ; ; c .  296–298 – 2 may 373 -rrb- ,  also called athanasius the great ,  athanasius the confessor or ,  primarily in the coptic orthodox church ,  athanasius the apostolic ,  was the 20th bishop of alexandria  -lrb-  as athanasius i  -rrb-  . 
perhaps his most notable letter was his festal letter ,  written to his church in alexandria when he was in exile ,  as he could not be in their presence . 
the orthodox church places his year of birth around 297.
bishop  -lrb-  or patriarch ,  the highest ecclesial rank in the centre of the church ,  in alexandria  -rrb-  alexander ordained athanasius a deacon in 319.
his life and conduct were the rule of bishops ,  and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith . `` 
his life and conduct were the rule of bishops ,  and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith . `` 
in coptic literature ,  athanasius is the first patriarch of alexandria to use coptic as well as greek in his writings . 
peter of alexandria ,  the 17th archbishop of alexandria ,  was martyred in 311 in the closing days of the persecution ,  and may have been one of those teachers . 
when emperor constantine i died ,  athanasius was allowed to return to his see of alexandria . 
during his first years as bishop ,  athanasius visited the churches of his territory ,  which at that time included all of egypt and libya . 
through the influence of the eusebian faction at constantinople ,  an arian bishop ,  george of cappadocia ,  was now appointed to rule the see of alexandria . 
in 362, the new emperor julian ,  noted for his opposition to christianity ,  ordered athanasius to leave alexandria once again . 
pope julius i called a synod in rome in 340 to address the matter ,  which proclaimed athanasius the rightful bishop of alexandria . 
the council of nicaea  -lrb-  325 -rrb- ,  `` passed twenty disciplinary canons for the better government of the church . 
hence ,  the alexandrian bishop was declared with the authority of patriarch . 
it was after this council that jerome said: ``   .  .  . the whole world groaned in astonishment to find itself arian . `` 
it was the custom of the bishops of alexandria to circulate a letter after epiphany each year establishing the date of easter ,  and therefore other moveable feasts . 
his first act was to convene a council which reaffirmed the terms of the nicene creed . 
cyril of alexandria  -lrb-  370–444 -rrb- in the first letter says: `` athanasius is one who can be trusted: he would not say anything that is not in accord with sacred scripture . `` 
the greater majority of church leaders and the emperors fell into support for arianism ,  so much so that jerome ,  340–420, wrote of the period: `` the whole world groaned and was amazed to find itself arian '' . 
because athanasius' canon is the closest canon of any of the church fathers to the one used by protestant churches today ,  many protestants point to athanasius as the father of the canon . 
pope damasus i ,  the bishop of rome in 382, promulgated a list of books which contained a new testament canon identical to that of athanasius . 
athanasius' ``  ''letter concerning the decrees of the council of nicaea '' ''  -lrb-  `` de decretis ''  -rrb-  ,  is an important historical as well as theological account of the proceedings of that council ,  and another letter from 367 is the first known listing of all those books now accepted as the new testament . 
constantius ,  renewing his previous policies favoring the arians ,  banished athanasius from alexandria once again . 
athanasius' innocence was reaffirmed at the council of serdica . 
three hundred bishops assembled in milan ,  most from the west ,  only a few from the east ,  in 355.
athanasius returned in secret to alexandria ,  where he soon received a document from the new emperor ,  jovian ,  reinstating him once more in his episcopal functions . 
alexandria was the most important trade center in the whole empire during athanasius's boyhood . 
other stories note the discovery of the first islands  -lrb-  são miguel island ,  santa maria island and terceira island  -rrb-  by sailors in the service of henry the navigator ,  although there are few documents to support the claims . 
all the islands have volcanic origins ,  although some ,  such as santa maria ,  have had no recorded activity since the islands were settled . 
the goods were sent to terceira largely because of the proximity of the island . 
in 1944, the u . s .  constructed a small and short-lived air base on the island of santa maria . 
from 1921 to 1977, about 250,000 azoreans immigrated to rhode island and massachusetts . 
a minority on the islands has non european ancestry . 
the islands of the archipelago do not have independent status in law ,  except in electoral law and are governed by 19 municipalities that subdivide the islands . 
the westernmost islands of the archipelago  -lrb-  corvo and flores  -rrb-  are located in the north american plate ,  while the remaining islands are located within the boundary that divides the eurasian and african plates . 
apart from the capelinhos volcano in 1957–58, the last recorded instance of `` island formation '' occurred off the coast of são miguel ,  when the island of sabrina was briefly formed . 
there are nine major azorean islands and an islet cluster ,  in three main groups . 
each of the nine islands has an airport ,  although the majority are airfields rather than airports . 
they range in surface area from the largest ,  são miguel ,  at to the smallest ,  corvo ,  at approximately  . 
the first reference to the island of são jorge was made in 1439 but the actual date of discovery is unknown . 
the islands were known in the fourteenth century ,  and parts of them appear in the atlas catalan . 
inhabitants of the various islands have dna of various origins . 
the islands have many examples of volcano-built geomorphology including many of the caves and subterranean lava tubes  -lrb-  such as the gruta das torres ,  algar do carvão ,  gruta do natal ,  gruta das cinco ribeiras  -rrb-  ,  the coastal lava fields  -lrb-  like the coast of feteiras ,  faial ,  the mistério of prainha or são joão on pico island  -rrb-  in addition to the currently inactive cones in central são miguel island ,  the aforementioned capelinhos on faial ,  the volcanic complexes of terceira or plinian caldeira of corvo island . 
in 1829, in praia da vitória ,  the liberals won over the absolutists ,  making terceira island the main headquarters of the new portuguese regime and also where the council of regency  -lrb-    -rrb-  of maria ii of portugal was established . 
there were no large animals on santa maria ,  so after its discovery and before settlement began ,  sheep were let loose on the island to supply future settlers with food . 
it was figueiredo and violante do canto who helped organize a resistance on terceira that influenced some of the response of the other islands ,  even as internal politics and support for philip's faction increased on the other islands  -lrb-  including specifically on são miguel ,  where the gonçalvez da câmara family supported the spanish pretender  -rrb-  . 
from 1836 to 1976, the archipelago was divided into three districts ,  equivalent  -lrb-  except in area  -rrb-  to those in the portuguese mainland . 
the outback is the vast ,  remote interior of australia . 
the total population of the outback in australia declined from 700,000 in 1996 to 690,000 in 2006.
the outback is criss-crossed by historic tracks . 
there are many popular tourist attractions in the outback . 
it is colloquially said that 'the outback' is located `` beyond the black stump '' . 
 ''the never-never '' is a term referring to remoter parts of the australian outback . 
in most outback communities ,  the number of children is too small for a conventional school to operate . 
 ''nothing says australia quite like our outback , ``  states the national tourism web site . 
in 2014,  ,  most of which is in outback australia ,  was fully certified as organic farm production ,  making australia the largest certified organic production area in the world . 
while small areas of the outback consist of clay soils the majority has exceedingly infertile palaeosols . 
visitors to the outback often drive their own or rented vehicles ,  or take organised tours . 
 ''the outback '' is more remote than those areas named `` the bush '' which is any location outside the main urban areas . 
the absolute infinite  -lrb-  `` symbol '': ω  -rrb-  is an extension of the idea of infinity proposed by mathematician georg cantor . 
it may involve chemical tests ,  physical tests ,  or performance tests . 
acceptance testing is also known as user acceptance testing  -lrb-  uat  -rrb-  ,  end-user testing ,  operational acceptance testing  -lrb-  oat  -rrb-  or field  -lrb-  acceptance  -rrb-  testing . 
a smoke test may be used as an acceptance test prior to introducing a build of software to the main testing process . 
the archbishopric of riga  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  was an archbishopric in medieval livonia ,  a subject to the holy see . 
it was established in 1186 as the bishopric of livonia at ikšķile ,  then after moving to riga it became the bishopric of riga in 1202 and was elevated to an archbishopric in 1255.
albert frederick  -lrb-  ; ; 7 may 1553 – 28 august 1618 -rrb- was the duke of prussia ,  from 1568 until his death . 
the latter became duke of prussia after albert frederick's death in 1618.
the name of the city has slightly changed throughout the centuries into onoltespah  -lrb-  837 ad  -rrb-  ,  onoldesbach  -lrb-  1141 ad  -rrb-  ,  onoldsbach  -lrb-  1230 ad  -rrb-  ,  onelspach  -lrb-  1338 ad  -rrb-  ,  onsbach  -lrb-  1508 ad  -rrb-  and finally ansbach  -lrb-  1732 ad  -rrb-  . 
ansbach  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a city in the german state of bavaria . 
with a length of  ,  it is the largest river in the region . 
the arno is a river in the tuscany region of italy . 
the flow rate of the arno is irregular . 
the river turns to the west near arezzo passing through florence ,  empoli and pisa ,  flowing into the tyrrhenian sea at marina di pisa . 
aveiro had 61,430 eligible voters in 2006.
aveiro  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a city and a municipality in portugal . 
the city of aveiro is also the capital of the district of aveiro ,  and the largest city in the baixo vouga intermunicipal community subregion . 
in 1774, by request of king josé ,  pope clement xiv instituted the diocese of aveiro . 
são jacinto is located on an eponymous peninsula ,  between the atlantic ocean and ria de aveiro . 
aveiro has a warm-summer mediterranean climate influenced by its proximity to the atlantic ocean . 
saint anthony was on a journey in the desert to find saint paul of thebes ,  who according to his dream was a better hermit than he . 
most of what is known about saint anthony comes from the `` life of anthony '' . 
when saint anthony felt that the day of his departure had approached ,  he commanded his disciples to give his staff to saint macarius ,  and to give one sheepskin cloak to saint athanasius and the other sheepskin cloak to saint serapion ,  his disciple . 
examples of purely coptic literature are the works of saint anthony and saint pachomius ,  who only spoke coptic ,  and the sermons and preachings of saint shenouda the archmandrite ,  who chose to only write in coptic . 
when the day drew near for the departure of saint paul the first hermit in the desert ,  saint anthony went to him and buried him ,  after clothing him in a tunic which was a present from st athanasius the apostolic ,  the 20th patriarch of alexandria . 
saint anthony or antony  -lrb-   `` antṓnios ''; ;   -rrb-   -lrb-  january 12, 251 – january 17, 356 -rrb- ,  was a christian monk from egypt ,  revered since his death as a saint . 
another time saint anthony was travelling in the desert and found a plate of silver coins in his path . 
the earliest original writings in coptic language were the letters by saint anthony . 
saint shenouda was a popular leader who only spoke to egyptians in the egyptian language  -lrb-  coptic  -rrb-  ,  not in greek . 
while traveling through the desert ,  saint anthony first found the centaur ,  a `` creature of mingled shape ,  half horse half man , ``  whom he asked about directions . 
according to athanasius ,  saint anthony heard a voice telling him `` go out and see . `` 
once ,  saint anthony tried hiding in a cave to escape the demons that plagued him . 
in 338, he left the desert temporarily to visit alexandria to help refute the teachings of arius . 
the most generalized type was `` coryphodon '' ,  representing the family coryphodontidae ,  from the lower eocene of europe and north america ,  in which there were 44 teeth and no horn-like excrescences on the long skull ,  while the femur had a third trochanter . 
the amblypoda were confined to the paleocene and eocene periods and occurred in north america ,  asia  -lrb-  especially mongolia  -rrb-  and europe . 
in the basal eocene of north america ,  the amblypoda were represented by extremely primitive ,  five-toed ,  small ungulates such as `` periptychus '' and `` pantolambda '' ,  each of these typifying a family . 
australia ,  france ,  germany ,  namibia ,  norway ,  and spain have also produced gem quality amblygonite . 
amblygonite  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a fluorophosphate mineral ,   -lrb-  li , na  -rrb- alpo -lrb-  f , oh  -rrb-  ,  composed of lithium ,  sodium ,  aluminium ,  phosphate ,  fluoride and hydroxide . 
neither amygdalin nor laetrile is a vitamin . 
amygdalin is hydrolyzed by intestinal β-glucosidase  -lrb-  emulsin  -rrb-  and amygdalin beta-glucosidase  -lrb-  amygdalase  -rrb-  to give gentiobiose and -mandelonitrile . 
laetrile  -lrb-  patented 1961 -rrb- is a simpler semisynthetic version of amygdalin . 
in 1845 amygdalin was used as a cancer treatment in russia ,  and in the 1920s in the united states ,  but it was considered too poisonous . 
amygdalin is a cyanogenic glycoside derived from the aromatic amino acid phenylalanine . 
thereafter ,  27 u . s .  states legalized the use of amygdalin within those states . 
a widely accepted explanation links amok with male honor  -lrb-  amok by women and children is virtually unknown  -rrb-  . 
in the philippines ,  `` amok '' also means unreasoning murderous rage by an individual . 
in 1849, amok was officially classified as a psychiatric condition based on numerous reports and case studies that showed the majority of individuals who committed amok were ,  in some sense ,  mentally ill . 
amok is also sometimes considered one of the subcategories of dissociative disorders  -lrb-  cross-cultural variant  -rrb-  . 
amok has been more closely associated with psychosis ,  personality disorders ,  bipolar disorder ,  and delusions . 
as a result of the belief ,  those in indonesian culture tolerated amok and dealt with the after-effects with no ill will towards the assailant . 
this phrase and that on the communion of saints are articles found in the apostles' creed ,  but not in the old roman symbol nor in the nicene creed . 
the song `` creed '' on petra's 1990 album `` beyond belief '' is loosely based on the apostles' creed . 
in 2014 hillsong released a version of the apostles' creed under the title `` this i believe  -lrb-  the creed  -rrb- ``  on their album `` no other name '' . 
its basis appears to be the old roman creed known also as the old roman symbol . 
the apostles' creed  -lrb-  latin: `` symbolum apostolorum '' or `` symbolum apostolicum ''  -rrb-  ,  sometimes entitled the apostolic creed or the symbol of the apostles ,  is an early statement of christian belief—a creed or `` symbol '' . 
some have suggested that the apostles' creed was spliced together with phrases from the new testament . 
it is of interest that this phrase first appeared in one of the two versions of rufinus in ad 390 and then did not appear again in any version of the creed until ad 650.
the smallest pair of amicable numbers is  -lrb-  220, 284 -rrb- . 
they are amicable because the proper divisors of 220 are 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55 and 110, of which the sum is 284; and the proper divisors of 284 are 1, 2, 4, 71 and 142, of which the sum is 220.
amicable numbers are two different numbers so related that the sum of the proper divisors of each is equal to the other number . 
they are known in spanish as `` dulce de agar ''  -lrb-  agar sweets  -rrb- 
when using agar ,  within any growth medium ,  it is important to know that the solidification of the agar is ph-dependent . 
agar is often dispensed using a sterile media dispenser . 
with its newfound use in microbiology ,  agar production quickly increased . 
 ''gracilaria lichenoides '' is specifically referred to as agal-agal or ceylon agar . 
in chemical terms ,  agar is a polymer made up of subunits of the sugar galactose . 
in burmese cuisine ,  a sweet jelly known as `` kyauk kyaw '' is made from agar . 
a 1.0% agar/0.44% ms+vitamin dho solution is suitable for growth media between normal growth temps . 
an agar plate or petri dish is used to provide a growth medium using a mix of agar and other nutrients in which microorganisms ,  including bacteria and fungi ,  can be cultured and observed under the microscope . 
in vietnamese cuisine ,  jellies made of flavored layers of agar agar ,  called `` thạch '' ,  are a popular dessert ,  and are often made in ornate molds for special occasions . 
they are converted into sulphuric acid and nitric acid . 
acid rain is a rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic ,  meaning that it has elevated levels of hydrogen ions  -lrb-  low ph  -rrb-  . 
in 1991, the us national acid precipitation assessment program  -lrb-  napap  -rrb-  provided its first assessment of acid rain in the united states . 
soils of coniferous forests are naturally very acidic due to the shedding of needles ,  and the results of this phenomenon should not be confused with acid rain . 
the problem of acid rain has not only increased with population and industrial growth ,  but has become more widespread . 
 ''clean '' or unpolluted rain has an acidic ph ,  but usually no lower than 5.7, because carbon dioxide and water in the air react together to form carbonic acid ,  a weak acid according to the following reaction:
however ,  unpolluted rain can also contain other chemicals which affect its ph  -lrb-  acidity level  -rrb-  . 
the earliest report about acid rain in the united states was from the chemical evidence from hubbard brook valley . 
in 1980, the u . s .  congress passed an acid deposition act . 
in 1981, the national academy of sciences was looking into research about the controversial issues regarding acid rain . 
liberatus of carthage wrote ,  in ' ,  that those at the council of ephesus who followed neither patriarch cyril i of alexandria nor patriarch john i of antioch were called ' . 
' were a sect of ' who followed chalcedonian patriarch paul of alexandria ,  who was deposed by a synod at gaza ,  in 541, for his uncanonical consecration by the patriarch of constantinople ,  and who ,  after his deposition ,  sided with the miaphysites . 
according to brewer ,  acephalites were also certain bishops exempt from the jurisdiction and discipline of their patriarch . 
the term applied to a 5th-century faction among the eutychians ,  who seceded from peter ,  a monophysite or more accurately a miaphysite ,  in 482, after peter signed the `` henoticon '' and was recognised by zeno as the legitimate patriarch of alexandria by which they were `` deprived of their head '' . 
during the first years of the reign of his older brother as elector ,  anton was the third in line ,  preceded only by his older brother karl . 
in florence on 8 september 1787  -lrb-  by proxy  -rrb-  and again in dresden on 18 october 1787  -lrb-  in person  -rrb-  ,  anton married a second time with the archduchess maria theresia of austria  -lrb-  maria theresia josephe charlotte johanna  -rrb-  ,  daughter of the grand duke leopold i of tuscany ,  later emperor leopold ii . 
anthony  -lrb-  27 december 1755 in dresden – 6 june 1836 in dresden  -rrb-  ,  also known by his german name anton  -lrb-  full name: `` anton clemens theodor maria joseph johann evangelista johann nepomuk franz xavier aloys januar ''  -rrb-  ,  was a king of saxony  -lrb-  1827–1836 -rrb- from the house of wettin . 
albert iii  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  27 january 144312 september 1500 -rrb- was a duke of saxony . 
he was nicknamed albert the bold or albert the courageous and founded the `` albertine line '' of the house of wettin . 
albert was born in grimma as the third and youngest son  -lrb-  but fifth child in order of birth  -rrb-  of frederick ii the gentle ,  elector of saxony ,  and margarete of austria ,  sister of frederick iii ,  holy roman emperor . 
the song lampoons the vietnam war draft . 
he also has a home in sebastian ,  florida . 
a cover of the folk song `` gypsy davy '' was a hit on the easy listening charts . 
the `` alice's restaurant '' song was one of a few very long songs to become popular just when albums began replacing hit singles as young people's main music listening . 
he is the father of four children ,  who have also had careers as musicians . 
like his father ,  woody guthrie ,  guthrie often sings songs of protest against social injustice . 
 ''alice's restaurant '' was the song that earned guthrie his first recording contract ,  after counterculture radio host bob fass began playing a tape recording of one of guthrie's live performances of the song repeatedly one night in 1967.
arlo davy guthrie  -lrb-  born july 10, 1947 -rrb- is an american folk singer-songwriter . 
guthrie also made a pilot for a tv variety show called `` the arlo guthrie show '' in february 1987.
though guthrie is best known for being a musician ,  singer ,  and composer ,  throughout the years he has also appeared as an actor in films and on television . 
a 1969 film ,  directed and co-written by arthur penn ,  was based on the true story told in the song ,  but with the addition of a large number of fictional scenes . 
one of the title characters in the comic strip `` arlo and janis '' is named after guthrie . 
the book of alma: the son of alma  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  usually referred to as the book of alma ,  is one of the books that make up the book of mormon . 
processed food contains fewer antioxidant vitamins than fresh and uncooked foods ,  as preparation exposes food to heat and oxygen . 
ascorbic acid or `` vitamin c '' is a monosaccharide oxidation-reduction  -lrb-  redox  -rrb-  catalyst found in both animals and plants . 
the use of oxygen as part of the process for generating metabolic energy produces reactive oxygen species . 
uric acid is by far the highest concentration antioxidant in human blood . 
research into how vitamin e prevents the process of lipid peroxidation led to the identification of antioxidants as reducing agents that prevent oxidative reactions ,  often by scavenging reactive oxygen species before they can damage cells . 
additionally ,  supplementation with selenium or vitamin e do not reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease . 
the functions of the other forms of vitamin e are even less well understood ,  although γ-tocopherol is a nucleophile that may react with electrophilic mutagens ,  and tocotrienols may be important in protecting neurons from damage . 
ascorbic acid is present at high levels in all parts of plants and can reach concentrations of 20 millimolar in chloroplasts . 
catalases are enzymes that catalyse the conversion of hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen ,  using either an iron or manganese cofactor . 
vitamin e is the collective name for a set of eight related tocopherols and tocotrienols ,  which are fat-soluble vitamins with antioxidant properties . 
the reactive oxygen species produced in cells include hydrogen peroxide  -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  ,  hypochlorous acid  -lrb-  hclo  -rrb-  ,  and free radicals such as the hydroxyl radical  -lrb-  ·oh  -rrb-  and the superoxide anion  -lrb-  o  -rrb-  . 
a paradox in metabolism is that ,  while the vast majority of complex life on earth requires oxygen for its existence ,  oxygen is a highly reactive molecule that damages living organisms by producing reactive oxygen species . 
for example ,  vitamin c has antioxidant activity when it reduces oxidizing substances such as hydrogen peroxide ,  however ,  it will also reduce metal ions that generate free radicals through the fenton reaction . 
however ,  the roles and importance of the various forms of vitamin e are presently unclear ,  and it has even been suggested that the most important function of α-tocopherol is as a signaling molecule ,  with this molecule having no significant role in antioxidant metabolism . 
superoxide dismutases  -lrb-  sods  -rrb-  are a class of closely related enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of the superoxide anion into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide . 
these preservatives include natural antioxidants such as ascorbic acid  -lrb-  aa ,  e300 -rrb- and tocopherols  -lrb-  e306 -rrb- ,  as well as synthetic antioxidants such as propyl gallate  -lrb-  pg ,  e310 -rrb- ,  tertiary butylhydroquinone  -lrb-  tbhq  -rrb-  ,  butylated hydroxyanisole  -lrb-  bha ,  e320 -rrb- and butylated hydroxytoluene  -lrb-  bht ,  e321 -rrb- . 
these harmful effects may also be seen in non-smokers ,  as one meta-analysis including data from approximately 230,000 patients showed that β-carotene ,  vitamin a or vitamin e supplementation is associated with increased mortality ,  but saw no significant effect from vitamin c .  no health risk was seen when all the randomized controlled studies were examined together ,  but an increase in mortality was detected when only high-quality and low-bias risk trials were examined separately . 
while antioxidant supplementation is widely used in attempts to prevent the development of cancer ,  antioxidants may interfere with cancer treatments ,  since the environment of cancer cells causes high levels of oxidative stress ,  making these cells more susceptible to the further oxidative stress induced by treatments . 
the density of brass is  . 
brass has higher malleability than bronze or zinc . 
today ,  almost 90% of all brass alloys are recycled . 
aluminium makes brass stronger and more corrosion-resistant . 
brass made during the early roman period seems to have varied between 20% to 28% wt zinc . 
the compositions of these early `` brass '' objects are highly variable and most have zinc contents of between 5% and 15% wt which is lower than in brass produced by cementation . 
triangular crucibles were then used to melt the brass for casting . 
the mouthpieces of both brass instruments and ,  less commonly ,  woodwind instruments are often made of brass among other metals as well . 
the harmonica is a free reed aerophone ,  also often made from brass . 
brass is an alloy of copper and zinc ,  in proportions which can be varied to achieve varying mechanical and electrical properties . 
small handbells and `` jingle bell '' are also commonly made of brass . 
although forms of brass have been in use since prehistory ,  its true nature as a copper-zinc alloy was not understood until the post medieval period because the zinc vapor which reacted with copper to make brass was not recognised as a metal . 
these effects can lead to significant lead leaching from brasses of comparatively low lead content . 
there are currently 86 seats in the city council of bonn . 
bonn was of little relevance in these years . 
from 1990 to 1999, bonn served as the seat of government of reunited germany . 
between the 11th and 13th centuries ,  the romanesque style bonn minster was built ,  and in 1597 bonn became the seat of the archdiocese of cologne . 
bonn is shown on the 4th century peutinger map . 
bonn's time as the capital of west germany is commonly referred to as the `` bonn republic , ``  in contrast to the `` berlin republic '' which followed reunification in 1990.
the german state of north rhine-westphalia is divided into five governmental districts  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and bonn is part of the governmental district of cologne  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the geographical centre of bonn is the bundeskanzlerplatz ``  -lrb-  chancellor square  -rrb- ``  in bonn-gronau . 
following the second world war ,  bonn was in the british zone of occupation . 
in the united states and canada ,  the american style  -lrb-  american smooth and american rhythm  -rrb-  also exists . 
the minuet dominated the ballroom from that time until the close of the 18th century . 
 ''ballroom dance '' refers most often to the ten dances of international ballroom  -lrb-  or standard  -rrb-  and international latin ,  though the term is also often used interchangeably with the five international ballroom dances . 
there is a part of the ballroom world dedicated to college students . 
rhumba is performed for both international latin and american rhythm . 
ballroom dancing competitions in the former ussr also included the soviet ballroom dances ,  or `` soviet programme '' . 
it is performed as an american rhythm dance . 
cha-cha is performed for both international latin and american rhythm . 
waltz is performed for both international standard and american smooth . 
foxtrot is performed for both international standard and american smooth . 
ballroom tango ,  rather than argentine tango ,  is performed in international competition . 
east coast swing is performed as an american rhythm dance . 
ballroom dance competitions are regulated by each country in its own way . 
viennese waltz is performed for both international standard and american smooth . 
latin/rhythm dances are commonly danced to contemporary latin american music and  -lrb-  in case of jive  -rrb-  western music . 
sequence dancing ,  in pairs or other formations ,  is still a popular style of ballroom dance . 
examples include the mit open ballroom dance competition ,  purdue ballroom classic ,  cardinal classic ,  berkeley classic ,  and harvard invitational . 
the film concludes with a double wedding as margaret cameron marries phil stoneman and elsie stoneman marries ben cameron . 
the film follows two juxtaposed families . 
the film's release is also credited as being one of the events that inspired the reformation of the ku klux klan in 1915.
the film is three hours long and was originally presented in two parts separated by an intermission; it was the first 12-reel film in the united states . 
lynch then orders a crackdown on the klan after discovering gus's murder . 
the baltic sea is connected by artificial waterways to the white sea via the white sea canal and to the german bight of the north sea via the kiel canal . 
some seas and lakes are brackish . 
brackish water is water having more salinity than freshwater ,  but not as much as seawater . 
brackish water condition commonly occurs when fresh water meets seawater . 
in fact ,  the most extensive brackish water habitats worldwide are estuaries ,  where a river meets the sea . 
the deep ,  anoxic water of the black sea originates from warm ,  salty water of the mediterranean . 
the bronx has a land area of and a population of 1,471,160 in 2017.
the bronx is referred to with the definite article as `` the bronx '' ,  both legally and colloquially . 
european colonization of the bronx began in 1639.
the bronx is divided by the bronx river into a hillier section in the west ,  and a flatter eastern section . 
the bronx is the northernmost of the five boroughs of new york city ,  in the u . s .  state of new york . 
the capitalization of the bronx's name is sometimes disputed . 
the consolidation of the bronx into new york city proceeded in two stages . 
the development of the bronx is directly connected to its strategic location between new england and new york  -lrb-  manhattan  -rrb-  . 
in 1919, the bronx was the site of 63 piano factories employing more than 5,000 workers . 
bootleggers and gangs were active in the bronx during prohibition  -lrb-  1920–33 -rrb- . 
the latest version of bearshare is version 12.0.0.3093.
three variants of the original bearshare gnutella servant were distributed by free peers: free ,  lite and pro . 
the most recent musiclab version ,  v10, was available by free download from their support website and `` pro '' features could be unlocked with a six or twelve-month subscription . 
on august 17, 2006, musiclab released a reskinned and updated version of imesh named bearsharev6 which connected to its proprietary imesh network instead of gnutella . 
though lacking musiclab's support a wide spread of bearshare versions from 4.7 to 5.2.5.6 remain the second most popular servant on gnutella ,  alongside limewire . 
both the european union and nato are headquartered in belgium . 
belgium ,  officially the kingdom of belgium ,  is a sovereign state in western europe . 
belgium has three official languages: dutch ,  french and german . 
the same survey held in 2012 found that christianity was the largest religion in belgium accounting 65% of belgians . 
belgium experiences some of the most congested traffic in europe . 
belgium hosted the 1972 european football championships ,  and co-hosted the 2000 european championships with the netherlands . 
belgium is a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system . 
 ,  the total population of belgium according to its population register was 11,376,070.
the belgians enjoy good health . 
phytogeographically ,  belgium is shared between the atlantic european and central european provinces of the circumboreal region within the boreal kingdom . 
the paris basin reaches a small fourth area at belgium's southernmost tip ,  belgian lorraine . 
belgium is a developed country ,  with an advanced high-income economy . 
belgium is one of the six founding countries of the european union and hosts the official seats of the european commission ,  the council of the european union ,  and the european council ,  as well as a seat of the european parliament in the country's capital ,  brussels . 
the separatist new flemish alliance  -lrb-  n-va  -rrb-  party for instance is the largest party in belgium . 
roman catholicism has traditionally been belgium's majority religion; being especially strong in flanders . 
the latter has now become the european union ,  for which belgium hosts major administrations and institutions ,  including the european commission ,  the council of the european union and the extraordinary and committee sessions of the european parliament . 
healthcare in belgium is financed through both social security contributions and taxation . 
belgium shares borders with france  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  germany  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  luxembourg  -lrb-    -rrb-  and the netherlands  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
belgium has compulsory voting and thus maintains one of the highest rates of voter turnout in the world . 
belgium is a constitutional ,  popular monarchy and a federal parliamentary democracy . 
the territory of belgium is divided into three regions ,  two of which ,  the flemish region and walloon region ,  are in turn subdivided into provinces; the third region ,  the brussels capital region ,  is neither a province nor a part of a province . 
belgium became one of the six founding members of the european coal and steel community in 1951 and of the european atomic energy community and european economic community ,  established in 1957.
education is compulsory from 6 to 18 years of age for belgians . 
despite an 18% decrease observed from 1970 to 1999, belgium still had in 1999 the highest rail network density within the european union with 113.8 km/1 000 km . 
the belgium national football team reached first place in the fifa world rankings for the first time in november 2015.
 ,  nearly 92% of the population had belgian citizenship ,  and other european union member citizens account for around 6% . 
belgium participated in the industrial revolution and ,  during the course of the 20th century ,  possessed a number of colonies in africa . 
belgium joined nato as a founding member and formed the benelux group of nations with the netherlands and luxembourg . 
belgian cinema has brought a number of mainly flemish novels to life on-screen . 
this was the theatre of most franco-spanish and franco-austrian wars during the 17th and 18th centuries . 
belgium is home to two main linguistic groups or `` communities '': the dutch-speaking ,  mostly flemish community ,  which constitutes about 59 percent of the population ,  and the french-speaking community ,  which comprises about 40 percent of all belgians . 
french-speaking belgians are often referred to as walloons ,  although the french speakers in brussels are not walloons . 
both belgian dutch and belgian french have minor differences in vocabulary and semantic nuances from the varieties spoken respectively in the netherlands and france . 
