a novel often read as non-fiction ,  this is an account of the great plague of london in 1665.
this was the main mouthpiece of the english government promoting the act of union 1707.
 ''memoirs of a cavalier ''  -lrb-  1720 -rrb- is set during the thirty years' war and the english civil war . 
during this period ,  the english government persecuted those who chose to worship outside the church of england . 
perhaps his greatest achievement with the novels is the magisterial `` a tour thro' the whole island of great britain ''  -lrb-  1724–27 -rrb- ,  which provided a panoramic survey of british trade on the eve of the industrial revolution . 
daniel defoe  -lrb-  ; c .  1660 – 24 april 1731 -rrb- ,  born daniel foe ,  was an english trader ,  writer ,  journalist ,  pamphleteer and spy . 
not only does defoe elevate individual british tradesmen to the level of gentleman ,  but he praises the entirety of british trade as a superior system . 
in the same year ,  he set up his periodical `` a review of the affairs of france '' which supported the harley ministry ,  chronicling the events of the war of the spanish succession  -lrb-  1702–14 -rrb- . 
defoe went to school in stoke newington ,  london ,  with a friend named caruso . 
following his release ,  he probably travelled in europe and scotland ,  and it may have been at this time that he traded wine to cadiz ,  porto and lisbon . 
in despair during his imprisonment for the seditious libel case ,  defoe wrote to william paterson ,  the london scot and founder of the bank of england and part instigator of the darien scheme ,  who was in the confidence of robert harley ,  1st earl of oxford and earl mortimer ,  leading minister and spymaster in the english government . 
when harley was ousted from the ministry in 1708, defoe continued writing the `` review '' to support godolphin ,  then again to support harley and the tories in the tory ministry of 1710–14.
the latin edition of the book was entitled `` philosophus autodidactus '' and it was an earlier novel that is also set on a deserted island . 
defoe was a presbyterian who had suffered in england for his convictions ,  and as such he was accepted as an adviser to the general assembly of the church of scotland and committees of the parliament of scotland . 
morris stayed at oxford ,  researching the reproductive behaviour of birds . 
morris lives in the same house in north oxford as the 19th-century lexicographer james murray who worked on the `` oxford english dictionary '' . 
in 1978, morris was elected vice-chairman of oxford united f . c .  . 
it is diderot's most published work . 
diderot had affairs with mlle . 
at the time diderot wrote this book he was a deist . 
denis diderot was born in langres ,  champagne . 
though his work was broad as well as rigorous ,  it did not bring diderot riches . 
in 1748, diderot needed to raise money on short notice . 
the major scale or ionian scale is one of the diatonic scales . 
all these scales meet the definition of diatonic scale . 
for each major scale ,  there is a corresponding natural minor scale ,  sometimes called its relative minor . 
with this abbreviation ,  major scale ,  for instance ,  can be represented as
the whole collection of diatonic scales as defined above can be divided into seven different scales . 
besides the natural minor scale ,  five other kinds of scales can be obtained from the notes of a major scale ,  by simply choosing a different note as the starting note . 
the diatonic scale as defined above has specific properties that make it unique among seven-note scales . 
as explained above ,  all major scales use the same interval sequence t–t–s–t–t–t–s . 
of glarean's six natural scales ,  three are major scales  -lrb-  those with a major third/triad: ionian ,  lydian ,  and mixolydian  -rrb-  ,  three are minor  -lrb-  those with a minor third/triad: dorian ,  phrygian ,  and aeolian  -rrb-  . 
the seven pitches of any diatonic scale can also be obtained by using a chain of six perfect fifths . 
the whole set of diatonic scales is commonly defined as the set composed of these seven natural-note scales ,  together with all of their possible transpositions . 
a diatonic scale can be also described as two tetrachords separated by a whole tone . 
a diatonic scale can be also described as two tetrachords separated by a whole tone . 
after german reunification in 1990, the german national anthem was redefined as the third verse of the song only . 
upon german reunification in 1990, only the third stanza was confirmed as the national anthem . 
german women ,  german loyalty ,  german wine and german song shall retain in the world their old beautiful chime and inspire us to noble deeds during all of our life . 
german grammar distinguishes between  ,  i . e . 
the `` ' ''  -lrb-  english: `` song of germany '' ,  ; officially titled `` ' '' ,  or `` the song of the germans ''  -rrb-  ,  or part of it ,  has been the national anthem of germany since 1922.
unity and justice and freedom for the german fatherland ! 
when the first verse was played as the german national anthem at the canoe sprint world championships in hungary in august 2011, german athletes were reportedly `` appalled '' . 
145, composed in 1915/16 when it was a patriotic song but not yet a national anthem . 
during the time of the german empire it became one of the most widely known patriotic songs . 
in 1840 hoffmann wrote a song about the `` zollverein '' ,  also to haydn's melody ,  in which he praised the free trade of german goods which brought germans and germany closer . 
:|</poem>
hoffmann von fallersleben also intended the text to be used as a drinking song; the second stanza's toast to german wine ,  women and song are typical of this genre . 
in the 1974 fifa world cup in their home country ,  west german football players remained silent and did not sing their anthem . 
in 2009, pete doherty was supposed to sing the german national anthem live on radio at bayerischer rundfunk in munich . 
in the 1970s and 80s ,  efforts were made by conservatives in germany to reclaim all three stanzas for the anthem . 
since world war ii and the fall of nazi germany ,  only the third stanza has been used as the national anthem . 
eurosport ,  under the headline of 'nazi anthem' ,  erroneously reported that `` the first stanza of the piece was banned in 1952 '' . 
during the nazi era ,  only the first stanza was used ,  followed by the sa song `` horst-wessel-lied '' . 
after chairman mao zedong's death in 1976, deng led china through far-reaching market-economy reforms . 
following mao's death in 1976, deng outmanoeuvred the late chairman's chosen successor hua guofeng in december 1978.
deng xiaoping  -lrb-  ; ; courtesy name xixian; 22 august 1904 – 19 february 1997 -rrb- was a chinese politician who was the paramount leader of the people's republic of china from 1978 until his retirement in 1989.
about 1,000 of the prisoners were black americans . 
on 24 january 1932, there was a major disturbance at the prison . 
the prison is owned by the duchy of cornwall ,  and is operated by her majesty's prison service . 
after originally being buried on the moor ,  due to the establishment of the prison farm in about 1852, all the prisoners' remains were exhumed and re-interred in two cemeteries behind the prison . 
one risk of sharp curettage is uterine perforation . 
d&c normally refers to a procedure involving a curette ,  also called `` sharp curettage '' . 
most d&cs are now carried out for miscarriage management and other indications such as diagnosis . 
it poses less risk because the doctor has a view inside the uterus during surgery ,  unlike with blind d&c . 
during the seventh doctor's era ,  it was hinted that the doctor was more than just an ordinary time lord . 
the episode `` the time of the doctor ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- depicted the doctor acquiring a new cycle of regenerations ,  starting from the twelfth doctor ,  due to the eleventh doctor being the product of the doctor's twelfth regeneration from his original set . 
the doctor was initially shrouded in mystery . 
on 4 august 2013, a live programme titled `` doctor who live: the next doctor '' was broadcast on bbc one ,  during which the actor who was going to play the twelfth doctor was revealed . 
thirteen actors have headlined the series as the doctor . 
 ''doctor who '' follows the adventures of the title character ,  a rogue time lord from the planet gallifrey who goes by the name `` the doctor '' . 
 ''doctor who '' finally returned with the episode `` rose '' on bbc one on 26 march 2005.
 ''doctor who '' originally ran for 26 seasons on bbc one ,  from 23 november 1963 until 6 december 1989.
the master is the doctor's archenemy ,  a renegade time lord who desires to rule the universe . 
in both `` fear her ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- and `` the doctor's daughter ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  he states that he had ,  in the past ,  been a father . 
they continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the `` doctor who '' franchise . 
the casting of a new doctor has often inspired debate and speculation . 
to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the show ,  a special 3d episode ,  `` the day of the doctor '' ,  was broadcast in 2013.
the device has allowed for the recasting of the actor various times in the show's history ,  as well as the depiction of alternative doctors either from the doctor's relative past or future . 
the programme's first serial ,  `` an unearthly child '' ,  shows that the doctor has a granddaughter ,  susan foreman . 
doctor who is a british science fiction television programme produced by the bbc since 1963.
the dalek race ,  which first appeared in the show's second serial in 1963, are `` doctor who ''s oldest villains . 
the initially irascible and slightly sinister doctor quickly mellowed into a more compassionate figure and was eventually revealed to be a time lord from the planet gallifrey ,  which the doctor fled by stealing the tardis . 
there have been instances of actors returning at later dates to reprise the role of their specific doctor . 
the 2005 version of `` doctor who '' is a direct plot continuation of the original 1963–1989 series and the 1996 telefilm . 
the doctor has gained numerous reoccurring enemies during their travels ,  including the daleks ,  the cybermen ,  and the master ,  another renegade time lord . 
in other media ,  the doctor has been played by various other actors ,  including peter cushing in two films . 
in `` the wedding of river song ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  it is implied that the doctor's true name is a secret that must never be revealed; this is explored further in `` the name of the doctor ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  when river song speaking his name allows the great intelligence to enter his tomb ,  and in `` the time of the doctor ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- where speaking his true name becomes the signal by which the time lords would know they can safely return to the universe . 
the master returned in the 1996 television movie of `` doctor who '' ,  and was played by american actor eric roberts . 
to his fellow citizens he was also known as `` the mocker '' . 
democritus was born in abdera ,  thrace ,  around 460 bc ,  although there are disagreements about the exact year . 
 ''ostanes '' ,  one of the magi accompanying xerxes ,  was also said to have taught him . 
he traveled to asia ,  and was even said to have reached india and ethiopia . 
democritus was said to be born in the city of abdera in thrace ,  an ionian colony of teos ,  although some called him a milesian . 
we can interpret the senses' data and grasp the truth only through the intellect ,  because the truth is in an abyss:
the atomistic void hypothesis was a response to the paradoxes of parmenides and zeno ,  the founders of metaphysical logic ,  who put forth difficult to answer arguments in favor of the idea that there can be no movement . 
the sport of disc golf is set up similar to a game of golf . 
disc golf was first invented in the early 1900s . 
before 1973 and the invention of the disc golf target called the disc pole hole ,  there were only a few disc golf object courses in the u . s .  and canada . 
disc golf  -lrb-  also called frisbee golf or sometimes frolf  -rrb-  is a flying disc sport in which players throw a disc at a target; it is played using rules similar to golf . 
headrick coined and trademarked the term `` disc golf '' when formalizing the sport and patented the disc pole hole ,  the first disc golf target to incorporate chains and a basket on a pole . 
there is a wide variety of discs used in disc golf and they are generally divided into three categories: putters ,  all-purpose mid-range discs ,  and drivers . 
formal competitive play is governed by the pdga official rules of disc golf and the pdga competition manual for disc golf events . 
modern disc golf started in the early 1960s ,  but there is debate over who came up with the idea first . 
disc golf courses usually have nine or 18 holes ,  and exceptions most often have holes in multiples of three . 
all discs when thrown will naturally fall to a certain direction ,  this direction is termed `` hyzer '' ,  the natural fall of the disc ,  or `` anhyzer '' ,  making the disc fall against its natural flight pattern . 
players might prefer bright colored discs to contrast most green flora and recover their disc easier . 
there are a variety of different discs ,  each with a specific plastic made with them . 
this system has been extended to represent some non-integer numbers ,  called `` decimal fractions '' or `` decimal numbers '' for forming the `` decimal numeral system '' . 
the decimal numeral system  -lrb-  also called base-ten positional numeral system ,  and occasionally called denary  -rrb-  is the standard system for denoting integer and non-integer numbers . 
the numbers that may be represented in the decimal system are the decimal fractions ,  that is the fractions of the form  ,  where is an integer ,  and is a non-negative integer . 
in greek historiography ,  the dorians are mentioned by many authors . 
the origin of the dorians is a multifaceted concept . 
dorians were distinguished by the doric greek dialect and by characteristic social and historical traditions . 
accounts vary as to the dorians' place of origin . 
other than these few brief observations thucydides names but few dorians . 
herodotus' list of dorian states is as follows . 
hall ,  therefore ,  proposes that the dorians are the people of the gift . 
other such `` dorian '' colonies ,  originally from corinth ,  megara ,  and the dorian islands ,  dotted the southern coasts of sicily from syracuse to selinus . 
additionally ,  it may have been the dorians to import his worship to rhodes . 
the dorian invasion is a modern historical concept attempting to account for:
the myths do attempt to justify some dorian operations ,  suggesting that they were in part political . 
the dorians seem to have offered the central mainland cultus for helios . 
thus ,  according to herodotus ,  the dorians did not name themselves after dorus until they had reached peloponnesus . 
herodotus was from halicarnassus ,  a dorian colony on the southwest coast of asia minor; following the literary tradition of the times he wrote in ionic greek ,  being one of the last authors to do so . 
so the lines were drawn between the dorians and the aeolians  -lrb-  here boeotians  -rrb-  with the ionians  -lrb-  former peloponnesians  -rrb-  . 
in the 5th century bc ,  dorians and ionians were the two most politically important greek `` ethne '' ,  whose ultimate clash resulted in the peloponnesian war . 
the cynurians were originally ionians but had become dorian under the influence of their argive masters . 
article i – men are born and remain free and equal in rights . 
the concept of passive citizens was created to encompass those populations that had been excluded from political rights in the declaration of the rights of man and citizen . 
the declaration of the rights of woman and the female citizen is modeled on the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen and is ironic in formulation and exposes the failure of the french revolution ,  which had been devoted to equality . 
the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  set by france's national constituent assembly in 1789, is a human civil rights document from the french revolution . 
while the french revolution provided rights to a larger portion of the population ,  there remained a distinction between those who obtained the political rights in the declaration of the rights of man and citizen and those who did not . 
article vi – the law is the expression of the general will . 
article v – the law has the right to forbid only actions harmful to society . 
in august 1789, honoré mirabeau played a central role in conceptualizing and drafting the declaration of the rights of man and of the citizen . 
the french revolution did not lead to a recognition of women's rights and this prompted olympe de gouges to publish the declaration of the rights of woman and the female citizen in september 1791.
the declaration recognized many rights as belonging to citizens  -lrb-  who could only be male  -rrb-  . 
a second and lengthier declaration ,  known as the declaration of the rights of man and citizen of 1793, was written in 1793 but never formally adopted . 
these borders can be determined only by the law . 
de gouges also draws attention to the fact that under french law women were fully punishable ,  yet denied equal rights ,  declaring `` women have the right to mount the scaffold ,  they must also have the right to mount the speaker's rostrum '' . 
in an interview from 1999, ritchie clarified that he saw linux and bsd operating systems as a continuation of the basis of the unix operating system ,  and as derivatives of unix:
in 1983, ritchie and thompson received the turing award for their development of generic operating systems theory and specifically for the implementation of the unix operating system . 
in 2011, ritchie ,  along with thompson ,  was awarded the japan prize for information and communications for his work in the development of the unix operating system . 
during the 1960s ,  ritchie and ken thompson worked on the multics operating system at bell labs . 
in 1997, both ritchie and thompson were made fellows of the computer history museum ,  `` for co-creation of the unix operating system ,  and for development of the c programming language . `` 
in 1990, both ritchie and thompson received the ieee richard w .  hamming medal from the institute of electrical and electronics engineers  -lrb-  ieee  -rrb-  ,  `` for the origination of the unix operating system and the c programming language '' . 
the lds church's version of the doctrine and covenants is described by the church as `` containing revelations given to joseph smith ,  the prophet ,  with some additions by his successors in the presidency of the church . `` 
sections 137 and 138 were added to the lds church's 1981 edition of the doctrine and covenants ,  which is the edition currently in use by the church . 
in 1844, the church added eight sections not included in the 1835 edition . 
whereas the lds church believes these sections to have been revelations to smith ,  the rlds church traditionally disputed their authenticity . 
originally published in 1835 as doctrine and covenants of the church of the latter day saints: carefully selected from the revelations of god ,  editions of the book continue to be printed mainly by the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  and the community of christ  -lrb-  formerly the reorganized church of jesus christ of latter day saints rlds church  -rrb-  . 
in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  ,  the doctrine and covenants of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints stands alongside the bible ,  the book of mormon ,  and the pearl of great price as scripture . 
the book was first introduced to the church body in a general conference on august 17, 1835.
as a result ,  the church of christ  -lrb-  temple lot  -rrb-  prefers to use reprints of the book of commandments text . 
the lds church's 1981 edition contains two `` official declarations '' at the book's conclusion . 
a resulting schism over the legitimacy of these change led to the formation of the restoration branches movement ,  the restoration church of jesus christ of latter day saints and the remnant church of jesus christ of latter day saints . 
in 1921, the lds church removed the `` lectures on faith '' portion of the book ,  with an explanation that the lectures `` were never presented to nor accepted by the church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons '' . 
the remnant church of jesus christ of latter day saints uses the older rlds church version of the doctrine and covenants up to section 144, and also continues to add new revelations from their president ,  frederick niels larsen . 
the 138 sections and two official declarations in lds church's doctrine and covenants break down as follows:
one of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life . 
physiological death is now seen as a process ,  more than an event: conditions once considered indicative of death are now reversible . 
thus ,  the definition of `` life '' simultaneously defines death . 
the concept of death is a key to human understanding of the phenomenon . 
the category of `` brain death '' is seen as problematic by some scholars . 
in science fiction scenarios where such technology is readily available ,  real death is distinguished from reversible death . 
for example ,  brain death ,  as practiced in medical science ,  defines death as a point in time at which brain activity ceases . 
aids death toll in africa may reach 90–100m by 2025.
talking about death and witnessing it is a difficult issue with most cultures . 
even by whole-brain criteria ,  the determination of brain death can be complicated . 
death is the center of many traditions and organizations; customs relating to death are a feature of every culture around the world . 
the death of a person has legal consequences that may vary between different jurisdictions . 
other definitions for death focus on the character of cessation of something . 
today ,  where a definition of the moment of death is required ,  doctors and coroners usually turn to `` brain death '' or `` biological death '' to define a person as being dead; people are considered dead when the electrical activity in their brain ceases . 
a death certificate is issued in most jurisdictions ,  either by a doctor ,  or by an administrative office upon presentation of a doctor's declaration of death . 
after death the remains of an organism become part of the biogeochemical cycle . 
death is the cessation of all biological functions that sustain a living organism . 
the leading cause of human death in developing countries is infectious disease . 
in most cases ,  bodies of living organisms begin to decompose shortly after death . 
signs of death or strong indications that a warm-blooded animal is no longer alive are:
historically ,  attempts to define the exact moment of a human's death have been subjective ,  or imprecise . 
there also exist free software fonts for the deseret alphabet . 
the deseret alphabet was purposely designed so as to not have ascenders and descenders . 
each letter in the deseret alphabet has a name ,  and when a letter is written on its own it has the value of that name . 
there have been several published versions of the alphabet . 
in the winter of 1870, just one year after their publication ,  advertisements for the deseret alphabet books were quietly removed from the `` deseret news '' . 
indeed ,  in an article about the benefits of the alphabet ,  the `` deseret news '' proudly wrote:
it seems to be an alphabet which the mormons alone are to be taught . `` 
according to beesley ,  many have written that interest in the deseret alphabet died with brigham young . 
the book says that a child who does this will be `` the first kid in 100 years to write their name in the deseret alphabet ! `` 
at least four books were published in the new alphabet ,  all transcribed by orson pratt and all using the russell's house font: `` the first deseret alphabet reader ''  -lrb-  1868 -rrb- ,  `` the second deseret alphabet reader ''  -lrb-  1868 -rrb- ,  `` the book of mormon ''  -lrb-  1869 -rrb- ,  and a `` book of mormon '' excerpt called `` first nephi–omni ''  -lrb-  1869 -rrb- . 
in 1859, with the new type in hand ,  the `` deseret news '' began printing with it . 
however ,  they ultimately decided not to and used the opportunity to re-affirm their commitment to the deseret alphabet . 
in public statements ,  young claimed the alphabet was intended to replace the traditional latin alphabet with an alternative ,  more phonetically accurate alphabet for the english language . 
despite years of heavy promotion ,  the deseret alphabet was never widely adopted . 
other writers ,  however ,  acquainted with other phonotypic and stenographic alphabets ,  ranged from neutral descriptions of the new alphabet to praise . 
as long as a freely licensed deseret alphabet font and a font of the standard orthography have similar inked surface areas ,  printing a book in the deseret alphabet using modern technology would have a similar cost as printing a book in the standard orthography . 
the first lesson in the `` deseret first book '' reads simply: in the `` deseret second book '' ,  there is a version of `` twinkle ,  twinkle ,  little star '' on page 19: there were two main handwritten forms of the deseret alphabet: a cursive version and a printed version . 
although the deseret alphabet has letter case ,  the only difference between the minuscule and majuscule forms is that the majuscule forms are larger . 
similar experiments have not been uncommon ,  the most well-known of which is the shavian alphabet . 
the first digital font for the deseret alphabet ,  called `` deseret '' ,  was designed by greg kearney as part of work he was doing for the lds church history department in 1991; the font was used in an exhibit that year . 
less than two months later ,  on 19 january 1854, the board of regents finally approved the first 38-letter deseret alphabet . 
his new alphabet closely resembled an 1853 publication of isaac pitman ,  containing only 33 letters . 
the deseret alphabet  -lrb-  ; deseret: 𐐼𐐯𐑅𐐨𐑉𐐯𐐻 or 𐐼𐐯𐑆𐐲𐑉𐐯𐐻  -rrb-  is a phonemic english-language spelling reform developed between 1847 and 1854 by the board of regents of the university of deseret under the leadership of brigham young ,  the second president of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints . 
the danish philologist johannes brøndum-nielsen divided the history of danish into a period from 800 ad to 1525 to be `` old danish '' ,  which he subdivided into `` runic danish ''  -lrb-  800-1100 -rrb- ,  early middle danish  -lrb-  1100–1350 -rrb- and late middle danish  -lrb-  1350–1525 -rrb- . 
danish itself can be divided into three main dialect areas: west danish  -lrb-  jutlandic  -rrb-  ,  insular danish  -lrb-  including the standard variety  -rrb-  ,  and east danish  -lrb-  including bornholmian and scanian  -rrb-  . 
danish is largely mutually intelligible with norwegian and swedish . 
danish is a germanic language of the north germanic branch . 
under the view that scandinavian is a dialect continuum ,  east danish can be considered intermediary between danish and swedish ,  while scanian can be considered a swedified east danish dialect ,  and bornholmsk is its closest relative . 
with the danish colonization of greenland by hans egede ,  danish became the administrative and religious language there ,  while iceland and the faroe islands had the status of danish colonies with danish as an official language until the mid-20th century . 
the more widespread of the two varieties of written norwegian ,  `` bokmål '' ,  is very close to danish ,  because standard danish was used as the `` de facto '' administrative language until 1814. ''
in the medieval period ,  danish emerged as a separate language from swedish . 
along with swedish ,  danish descends from the eastern dialects of the old norse language; danish and swedish are also classified as east scandinavian or east nordic languages . 
standard danish  -lrb-  `` rigsdansk ''  -rrb-  is the language based on dialects spoken in and around the capital ,  copenhagen . 
for many years ,  `` decade '' was the only neil young compilation album available . 
decade is a compilation album by canadian musician neil young ,  originally released in 1977 as a triple album ,  now available on two compact discs . 
in addition to her role as an agricultural goddess ,  demeter was often worshiped more generally as a goddess of the earth . 
the cult may have been connected with both the underworld and a form of agrarian magic . 
the arcadian cult links her to the god poseidon ,  who probably substituted the male companion of the great goddess ; demeter may therefore be related to a minoan great goddess  -lrb-  cybele  -rrb-  . 
demeter was often considered to be the same figure as the anatolian goddess cybele ,  and in rome she was identified as the latin goddess ceres . 
in ancient greek religion and mythology ,  demeter  -lrb-  ; attic: `` dēmḗtēr '' ,  ; doric: `` dāmā́tēr ''  -rrb-  is the goddess of the grain ,  agriculture ,  harvest ,  growth ,  and nourishment ,  who presided over grains and the fertility of the earth . 
though demeter is often described simply as the goddess of the harvest ,  she presided also over the sacred law ,  and the cycle of life and death . 
in arcadia ,  she was known as `` black demeter '' . 
swedish death metal could be considered the forerunner of `` melodic death metal '' . 
death metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music . 
industrial death metal is a genre of death metal that add elements of industrial music . 
symphonic death metal is a genre of death metal that add elements of classical music . 
death metal vocals are referred to as death growls; hoarse roars/snarls . 
building from the musical structure of thrash metal and early black metal ,  death metal emerged during the mid-1980s . 
melodic black-death  -lrb-  also known as blackened melodic death metal or melodic blackened death metal  -rrb-  is a genre of extreme metal that describes the style created when melodic death metal bands began being inspired by black metal and european romanticism . 
brutal death metal is a subgenre of death metal which privileges heaviness ,  speed ,  and complex rhythms over other aspects ,  such as melody and timbres . 
slam death metal is a microgenre that evolved from the 1990s new york death metal scene ,  incorporating elements of hardcore punk . 
with the rise in popularity of metalcore ,  some of its traits have been combined with death metal . 
since then ,  death metal has diversified ,  spawning several subgenres . 
the term might also have originated from other recordings ,  such as the demo released by death in 1984, called `` death by metal '' . 
english heavy metal band venom ,  from newcastle ,  crystallized the elements of what later became known as thrash metal ,  death metal and black metal ,  with their 1981 album `` welcome to hell '' . 
deathrash ,  also known as death-thrash ,  is a fusion genre that combines elements of death metal and thrash metal . 
shelton's translation of the novel's `` second part '' appeared in 1620.
although the two parts are now published as a single work ,  `` don quixote ,  part two '' was a sequel published ten years after the original novel . 
as `` part two '' begins ,  it is assumed that the literate classes of spain have all read the first part of the story . 
the ingenious nobleman sir quixote of la mancha  -lrb-  modern spanish: ' ,    -rrb-  ,  or just '  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  is a spanish novel by miguel de cervantes . 
the novel was an immediate success . 
he and sancho undergo one more prank by the duke and duchess before setting off . 
in `` part two '' ,  the author acknowledges the criticism of his digressions in `` part one '' and promises to concentrate the narrative on the central characters  -lrb-  although at one point he laments that his narrative muse has been constrained in this manner  -rrb-  . 
similarly ,  many of both sancho's adventures in part ii and proverbs throughout are taken from popular spanish and italian folklore . 
sancho later gets his comeuppance for this when ,  as part of one of the duke and duchess's pranks ,  the two are led to believe that the only method to release dulcinea from her spell is for sancho to give himself three thousand three hundred lashes . 
the novel's structure is episodic in form . 
the interpolated story in chapter 33 of part four of the first part is a retelling of a tale from canto 43 of `` orlando '' ,  regarding a man who tests the fidelity of his wife . 
when don quixote only sees the peasant girls ,  sancho pretends  -lrb-  reversing some incidents of `` part one ''  -rrb-  that their derelict appearance results from an enchantment . 
don quixote ,  in the first part of the book ,  does not see the world for what it is and prefers to imagine that he is living out a knightly story . 
by the 20th century ,  the novel had come to occupy a canonical space as one of the foundations of modern literature . 
sale of these publishing rights deprived cervantes of further financial profit on `` part one '' . 
while `` part one '' was mostly farcical ,  the second half is more serious and philosophical about the theme of deception . 
in 2005, the year of the novel's 400th anniversary ,  tom lathrop published a new english translation of the novel ,  based on a lifetime of specialized study of the novel and its history . 
 ''don quixote ,  part one '' contains a number of stories which do not directly involve the two main characters ,  but which are narrated by some of the picaresque figures encountered by the don and sancho during their travels . 
 ''la mancha '' is a region of spain ,  but `` mancha ''  -lrb-  spanish word  -rrb-  means spot ,  mark ,  stain . 
 ''part two '' of `` don quixote '' explores the concept of a character understanding that he is written about ,  an idea much explored in the 20th century . 
thomas shelton's english translation of the `` first part '' appeared in 1612 while cervantes was still alive ,  although there is no evidence that shelton had met the author . 
when first published ,  `` don quixote '' was usually interpreted as a comic novel . 
in july 1604, cervantes sold the rights of `` el ingenioso hidalgo don quixote de la mancha ''  -lrb-  known as `` don quixote ,  part i ''  -rrb-  to the publisher-bookseller francisco de robles for an unknown sum . 
nevertheless ,  `` part two '' contains several back narratives related by peripheral characters . 
the result was replicated in two subsequent investigations: ``  ''la determinación del lugar de la mancha como problema estadístico '' '' and `` the kinematics of the quixote and the identity of the 'place in la mancha' '' . 
sancho and don quixote fall in with a group of goat herders . 
the second part of cervantes' `` don quixote '' ,  finished as a direct result of the avellaneda book ,  has come to be regarded by some literary critics as superior to the first part ,  because of its greater depth of characterization ,  its discussions ,  mostly between quixote and sancho ,  on diverse subjects ,  and its philosophical insights . 
it is not certain when cervantes began writing `` part two '' of `` don quixote '' ,  but he had probably not proceeded much further than chapter lix by late july 1614.
the berlin group published periodicals such as `` club dada '' ,  `` der dada '' ,  `` everyman his own football '' ,  and `` dada almanach '' . 
according to hans richter dada was not art: it was `` anti-art . `` 
dada subsequently combined these approaches . 
if art was to appeal to sensibilities ,  dada was intended to offend . 
the dada movement's principles were first collected in hugo ball's in 1916.
some theorists argue that dada was actually the beginning of postmodern art . 
the roots of dada lie in pre-war avant-garde . 
dada  -lrb-    -rrb-  or dadaism was an art movement of the european avant-garde in the early 20th century ,  with early centers in zürich ,  switzerland ,  at the cabaret voltaire  -lrb-  circa 1916 -rrb-; new york dada began circa 1915, and after 1920 dada flourished in paris . 
french writer dominique noguez imagined lenin as a member of the dada group in his tongue-in-cheek `` lénine dada ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- . 
african music and jazz were common at dada gatherings . 
zürich dada ,  with tzara at the helm ,  published the art and literature review `` dada '' beginning in july 1917, with five editions from zürich and the final two from paris . 
in february 1918, while the great war was approaching its climax ,  huelsenbeck gave his first dada speech in berlin ,  and he produced a dada manifesto later in the year . 
dada in paris surged in 1920 when many of the originators converged there . 
several notable retrospectives have examined the influence of dada upon art and society . 
some sources state that dada coalesced on october 6 at the cabaret voltaire . 
dada was an informal international movement ,  with participants in europe and north america . 
the creations of duchamp ,  picabia ,  man ray ,  and others between 1915 and 1917 eluded the term dada at the time ,  and `` new york dada '' came to be seen as a post facto invention of duchamp . 
the dada movement in italy ,  based in mantua ,  was met with distaste and failed to make a significant impact in the world of art . 
the first introduction of dada artwork to the parisian public was at the `` salon des indépendants '' in 1921.
to quote dona budd's `` the language of art knowledge '' ,  dada was born out of negative reaction to the horrors of the first world war . 
for seven years he also published the dada periodical `` 391 '' in barcelona ,  new york city ,  zürich ,  and paris from 1917 through 1924.
after the cabaret closed down ,  dada activities moved on to a new gallery ,  and hugo ball left for bern . 
the debian project released the 0.9x versions in 1994 and 1995.
on december 2, the first debian constitution was ratified . 
debian was first announced on august 16, 1993, by ian murdock ,  who initially called the system `` the debian linux release '' . 
debian is one of the earliest operating systems based on the linux kernel . 
debian offers different network installation methods . 
debian 9.0  -lrb-  stretch  -rrb-  was released in june 2017.  ,  debian is still in development and new packages are uploaded to `` unstable '' every day . 
debian 0.01, released on september 15, 1993, was the first of several internal releases . 
debian  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a unix-like operating system consisting entirely of free software . 
in may 2001, hewlett-packard announced plans to base its linux development on debian . 
these `` debian live '' images allow users to boot from removable media and run debian without affecting the contents of their computer . 
the recommended standard for administering packages on a debian system is the apt toolset . 
debian supports linux officially ,  having offered kfreebsd for version 7 but not 8, and gnu hurd unofficially . 
some events disturbed the project while working on sarge ,  as debian servers were attacked by fire and hackers . 
debian 6.0  -lrb-  squeeze  -rrb-  was released in february 2011, introduced debian gnu/kfreebsd as a technology preview ,  featured a dependency-based boot system ,  and moved problematic firmware to the non-free area . 
the debian free software guidelines  -lrb-  dfsg  -rrb-  define the distinctive meaning of the word `` free '' as in `` free and open-source software '' . 
garry trudeau received the national cartoonist society newspaper comic strip award for 1994, and their reuben award for 1995 for his work on the strip . 
a daily strip through most of its existence ,  since february 2014 `` doonesbury '' has run repeat strips monday through saturday ,  and new strips on sunday . 
the walden students graduated in 1983, after which the strip began to progress in something closer to real time . 
 ''doonesbury '' proper debuted as a daily strip in twenty-eight newspapers on october 26, 1970  -lrb-  it being the first strip from universal press syndicate  -rrb-  . 
no symbol for barack obama has appeared in the strip; the may 30, 2009, strip had obama and an aide wondering what the reason for this might be  -lrb-  off panel  -rrb-  . 
prior to the hiatus ,  the strip's characters had aged only slightly . 
though `` alpha house '' was cancelled following its second season and has not been in production since 2014, trudeau has not returned to creating new daily `` doonesbury '' strips . 
the main characters are a group who attended the fictional walden college during the strip's first 12 years ,  and moved into a commune together in april 1972.
trudeau has made his use of icons something of an in joke to readers ,  where the first appearance of a new one is often a punchline in itself . 
since march 3, 2014, the strip has offered reruns starting from the very beginning of its history as opposed to the recent ones that re-run when trudeau is on vacation . 
other numbered variations include sicherman dice and nontransitive dice . 
dice can be used for divination and using dice for such a purpose is called cleromancy . 
western dice are normally right-handed ,  and chinese dice are normally left-handed . 
the egyptian game of senet was played with dice . 
dice are thrown onto a surface either from the hand or from a container designed for this  -lrb-  such as a dice cup  -rrb-  . 
transparent cellulose acetate dice are used by casinos as tampering is more apparent than with opaque dice . 
 ''uniform fair dice '' are dice where all faces have equal probability of outcome due to the symmetry of the die as it is face-transitive . 
they referred to such dice as `` the dice of the gods '' and they sought to understand the universe through an understanding of geometry in polyhedra . 
polyhedral dice are commonly used in role-playing games . 
a dice tray ,  a tray used to contain thrown dice ,  is sometimes used for gambling or board games ,  in particular to allow dice throws which do not interfere with other game pieces . 
dice may have numbers that do not form a counting sequence starting at one . 
normally ,  the faces on a die will be placed so opposite faces will add up to one more than the number of faces  -lrb-  this is not possible with 4-sided dice and dice with an odd-number of faces  -rrb-  . 
the term `` dumpster diving '' emerged in the 1980s ,  combining `` diving '' with `` dumpster '' ,  a large commercial trash bin . 
dumpster diving can be hazardous ,  due to potential exposure to biohazardous matter ,  broken glass ,  and overall unsanitary conditions that may exist in dumpsters . 
since dumpsters are usually located on private premises ,  divers may occasionally get in trouble for trespassing while dumpster diving ,  though the law is enforced with varying degrees of rigor . 
discarded billing records may be used for identity theft . 
in british english ,  the practice may be known as `` skipping '' ,  from skip ,  another term for this type of container . 
technique '' in which dumpster diving or its equivalent `` wastebasket recovery '' figures prominently . 
in 2009, a belgian dumpster diver and eco-activist nicknamed ollie was detained for a month for removing food from a garbage can ,  and was accused of theft and burglary . 
dumpster diving is practiced differently in developed countries than in developing countries . 
people dumpster dive for useful items such as clothing ,  furniture ,  food ,  and similar items in good working condition . 
the main difference is that a digital synthesizer uses digital processors and analog synthesizers use analog circuitry . 
as there was still interest in analog synthesizers ,  and with the increase of computing power ,  over the 1990s another type of synthesizer arose : the analog modeling ,  or `` virtual analog '' synthesizer . 
yamaha eventually commercialized their fm synthesis technology and released the first fm digital synthesizer in 1980, the yamaha gs-1, but at an expensive retail price of $16,000.
although not as flexible or powerful as either the fairlight cmi or the synclavier ,  its lower cost and portability made it popular . 
yamaha built the first prototype digital synthesizer in 1974.
this instrument is responsible for some of the very recognisable preset synthesizer sounds of the late 1980s ,  such as the pizzagogo sound used on enya's `` orinoco flow . `` 
 -lrb-  see `` music as social construct '' below .   -rrb- ``  '''
the problem of defining music is further complicated by the influence of culture in music cognition . 
thus ,  the musically behaving person experiences musical significance by means of ,  or through ,  the sounds ''  . 
in this framework ,  clifton finds that there are two things that separate music from non-music:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- musical meaning is presentative ,  and  -lrb-  2 -rrb- music and non-music are distinguished in the idea of personal involvement . 
there is the study of sound and vibration or acoustics ,  the cognitive study of music ,  the study of music theory and performance practice or music theory and ethnomusicology and the study of the reception and history of music ,  generally called musicology . 
while some languages in west africa have no term for music ,  some west african languages accept the general concepts of music  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
a definition of music endeavors to give an accurate and concise explanation of music's basic attributes or essential nature and it involves a process of defining what is meant by the term `` music '' . 
this approach to the definition focuses not on the `` construction '' but on the `` experience '' of music . 
powered aviation began in dayton . 
in 2010, the downtown dayton partnership ,  in cooperation with the city of dayton and community leaders ,  introduced the greater downtown dayton plan . 
dayton is within ohio's miami valley region ,  just north of greater cincinnati . 
dayton has been the home for many patents and inventions since the 1870s . 
dayton was founded on april 1, 1796, by 12 settlers known as the thompson party . 
although the first flight was in kitty hawk ,  north carolina ,  their wright flyer was built in dayton ,  and was returned to dayton for improvements and further flights at huffman field ,  a cow pasture eight miles  -lrb-  13 km  -rrb-  northeast of dayton ,  near the current wright patterson air force base . 
along with defense and aerospace ,  healthcare accounts for much of the dayton area's economy . 
a p–n junction diode is made of a crystal of semiconductor ,  usually silicon ,  but germanium and gallium arsenide are also used . 
diodes ,  both vacuum and semiconductor ,  can be used as shot-noise generators . 
when the plate voltage is negative with respect to the cathode ,  no electrons are emitted by the plate ,  so no current can pass from the plate to the cathode . 
a drop of 1 v to 1.5 v is typical at full rated current for power diodes . 
at higher currents the forward voltage drop of the diode increases . 
during the early 1950s ,  junction diodes were developed . 
another type of junction diode ,  the schottky diode ,  is formed from a metal–semiconductor junction rather than a p–n junction ,  which reduces capacitance and increases switching speed . 
the region around the p–n junction becomes depleted of charge carriers and thus behaves as an insulator . 
a semiconductor diode's behavior in a circuit is given by its current–voltage characteristic ,  or i–v graph  -lrb-  see graph below  -rrb-  . 
in a small silicon diode operating at its rated currents ,  the voltage drop is about 0.6 to 0.7 volts . 
a semiconductor diode's current–voltage characteristic can be tailored by selecting the semiconductor materials and the doping impurities introduced into the materials during manufacture . 
the school also serves as the center for biomedical research at drexel university . 
one of the oldest schools within drexel university ,  the modern school of education dates back to the 1891 founding of the school . 
drexel university was founded in 1891 as the drexel institute of art ,  science and industry ,  by philadelphia financier and philanthropist anthony j .  drexel . 
founded as drexel institute of art ,  science ,  and industry; it was renamed drexel institute of technology in 1936, before assuming the name drexel university in 1970.
the institution became known as the drexel institute of technology in 1936, and in 1970 the drexel institute of technology gained university status ,  becoming drexel university . 
the physician assistant program at drexel's college of nursing and health professions is ranked in the top 15 such programs in the united states; its anesthesia programs and physical therapy programs are ,  respectively ,  ranked as top-50 programs nationwide . 
the school's graduate and doctoral students are heavily invested in the research activities of the dornsife school of public health ,  which has helped the school attract annual funding for its four research centers . 
economics programs at the lebow college of business are housed within the school of economics . 
drexel's longstanding cooperative education ,  or `` co-op '' program is one of the largest and oldest in the united states . 
today lebow offers thirteen undergraduate majors ,  eight graduate programs ,  and two doctoral programs; 22 percent of drexel university's undergraduate students are enrolled in a lebow college of business program . 
upon its founding in 2006, the thomas r .  kline school of law ,  originally known as the earle mack school of law ,  was the first law school founded in philadelphia in more than three decades . 
 ,  more than 26,000 students are enrolled in over 70 undergraduate programs and more than 100 master's ,  doctoral ,  and professional programs at the university . 
in 2015, `` bloomberg business '' ranked the kline school of law as the second most underrated law school in the united states . 
for pasiphaë ,  as greek mythologers interpreted it ,  daedalus also built a wooden cow so she could mate with the bull ,  for the greeks imagined the minoan bull of the sun to be an actual ,  earthly bull ,  the slaying of which later required a heroic effort by theseus . 
he is the father of icarus ,  the uncle of perdix ,  and possibly also the father of iapyx ,  although this is unclear . 
daedalus had two sons: icarus and iapyx ,  along with a nephew either talos or perdix . 
some time later ,  the goddess athena visited daedalus and gave him wings ,  telling him to fly like a god . 
in greek mythology ,  daedalus  -lrb-  ; `` daidalos '' `` cunningly wrought '' ,  perhaps related to δαιδάλλω `` to work artfully ''; ; etruscan: `` taitale ''  -rrb-  was a skillful craftsman and artist . 
when both were prepared for flight ,  daedalus warned icarus not to fly too high ,  because the heat of the sun would melt the wax ,  nor too low ,  because the sea foam would soak the feathers . 
ignoring homer ,  later writers envisaged the labyrinth as an edifice rather than a single dancing path to the center and out again ,  and gave it numberless winding passages and turns that opened into one another ,  seeming to have neither beginning nor end . 
over time ,  other stories were told of daedalus . 
upon completion on july 31, 1935, the span deception pass bridge connected whidbey island to the tiny pass island ,  and pass island to fidalgo island . 
deception pass is a strait separating whidbey island from fidalgo island ,  in the northwest part of the u . s .  state of washington . 
in the waters of deception pass ,  just east of the present-day deception pass bridge ,  is a small island known as ben ure island . 
between the years 1910 and 1914, a prison rock quarry was operated on the fidalgo island side of the pass . 
play continues until one of the players has played all the dominoes in his or her hand ,  calls `` out ! 
an `` end '' stops when one of the players is out ,  i . e .  ,  has played all of their dominoes . 
dominoes is a family of tile-based games played with rectangular `` domino '' tiles . 
a popular domino game in texas is 42.
one player begins by downing  -lrb-  playing the first tile  -rrb-  one of their tiles . 
the most basic domino variant is for two players and requires a double-six set . 
if a player does not call `` domino '' before the tile is laid on the table ,  and another player says domino after the tile is laid ,  the first player must pick up an extra domino . 
if a player inadvertently picks up and sees one or more extra dominoes ,  those dominoes become part of his or her hand . 
chinese dominoes are also longer than typical european dominoes . 
a domino set is a generic gaming device ,  similar to playing cards or dice ,  in that a variety of games can be played with a set . 
the draw game is often referred to as simply `` dominoes '' . 
many different domino sets have been used for centuries in various parts of the world to play a variety of domino games . 
the number of tiles in a set has the formula formula_1 for a double- ''n '' set . 
the double-six set is the preferred deck with the lowest denomination of game pieces ,  with 28 dominoes . 
dominoes is played at a professional level ,  similar to poker . 
adaptations of both games can accommodate more than two players ,  who may play individually or in teams . 
in blocking games ,  scoring happens at the end of the game . 
the most common domino sets commercially available are double six  -lrb-  with 28 tiles  -rrb-  and double nine  -lrb-  with 55 tiles  -rrb-  . 
after the first hand ,  the winner  -lrb-  or winning team  -rrb-  of the previous hand is allowed to pick first and begins by playing any domino in his or her hand . 
players ,  in turn ,  must play a bone with an end that matches one of the open ends of the layouts . 
in the special case of salts ,  the dissociation constant can also be called an ionization constant . 
once this and the conversion factor for hours per second have been multiplied by the original fraction to cancel out the units `` mile '' and `` hour '' ,  10 miles per hour converts to 4.4704 meters per second . 
the most basic rule of dimensional analysis is that of dimensional homogeneity . 
for example ,  10 miles per hour can be converted to meters per second by using a sequence of conversion factors as shown below:
the factor-label method can also be used on any mathematical equation to check whether or not the dimensional units on the left hand side of the equation are the same as the dimensional units on the right hand side of the equation . 
after canceling out any dimensional units that appear both in the numerators and denominators of the fractions in the above equation ,  the no concentration of 10 ppm converts to mass flow rate of 24.63 grams per hour . 
each conversion factor is chosen based on the relationship between one of the original units and one of the desired units  -lrb-  or some intermediary unit  -rrb-  ,  before being re-arranged to create a factor that cancels out the original unit . 
units for volume ,  however ,  can be factored into the base units of length  -lrb-  m  -rrb-  ,  thus they are considered derived or compound units . 
for example ,  asking whether a kilogram is larger than an hour is meaningless . 
this has the implication that most mathematical functions ,  particularly the transcendental functions must have a dimensionless quantity ,  a pure number ,  as the argument and must return a dimensionless number as a result . 
prior to the conversion to digital tv ,  analog television broadcast audio for tv channels on a separate fm carrier signal from the video signal . 
hdtv cannot be transmitted over analog television channels because of channel capacity issues . 
digital and analog signals react to interference differently . 
 -lrb-  dtv radio is not the same thing .   -rrb- 
analog tv began with monophonic sound ,  and later developed multichannel television sound with two independent audio signal channels . 
digital television  -lrb-  dtv  -rrb-  is the transmission of television signals ,  including the sound channel ,  using digital encoding ,  in contrast to the earlier television technology ,  analog television ,  in which the video and audio are carried by analog signals . 
digital tv is more tolerant of interference than analog tv ,  and this is the reason a smaller range of channels can carry an all-digital set of television stations . 
digital television signals must not interfere with each other ,  and they must also coexist with analog television until it is phased out . 
changes in signal reception from factors such as degrading antenna connections or changing weather conditions may gradually reduce the quality of analog tv . 
for remote locations ,  distant channels that ,  as analog signals ,  were previously usable in a snowy and degraded state may ,  as digital signals ,  be perfectly decodable or may become completely unavailable . 
this fm audio signal could be heard using standard radios equipped with the appropriate tuning circuits . 
dtv allows up to 5 audio signal channels plus a sub-woofer bass channel ,  with broadcasts similar in quality to movie theaters and dvds . 
the adoption of a broadcast standard incompatible with existing analog receivers has created the problem of large numbers of analog receivers being discarded during digital television transition . 
although incompatible with the existing ntsc standard ,  the new dtv standard would be able to incorporate many improvements . 
the reason given in the declaration is that bruce was able to defend scotland from english aggression whereas ,  by implication ,  king john could not . 
the others were a letter from the king of scots ,  robert i ,  and a letter from four scottish bishops which all presumably made similar points . 
eight months later ,  in october 1328, the interdict on scotland ,  and the excommunication of its king ,  were removed by the pope . 
the pope had recognised edward i of england's claim to overlordship of scotland in 1305 and bruce was excommunicated by the pope for murdering john comyn before the altar in greyfriars church in dumfries in 1306.
on 1 march 1328 the new english king ,  edward iii signed a peace treaty between scotland and england ,  the treaty of edinburgh-northampton . 
the declaration made a number of points: that scotland had always been independent ,  indeed for longer than england; that edward i of england had unjustly attacked scotland and perpetrated atrocities; that robert the bruce had delivered the scottish nation from this peril; and ,  most controversially ,  that the independence of scotland was the prerogative of the scottish people ,  rather than the king of scots . 
digital data come in these three states: data at rest ,  data in transit and data in use . 
a custom encoding can be used for a specific application with no loss of data . 
all digital information possesses common properties that distinguish it from analog data with respect to communications:
but it does not scale to support more keys than the number of bits in a single byte or word . 
the word `` digital '' comes from the same source as the words digit and `` digitus ''  -lrb-  the latin word for `` finger ''  -rrb-  ,  as fingers are often used for discrete counting . 
the greek terms do not have any connotations of evil or malevolence . 
in the damascus document ,  belial also makes a prominent appearance ,  being established as a source of evil and an origin of several types of sin . 
peck came to the conclusion that possession was a rare phenomenon related to evil and that possessed people are not actually evil; rather ,  they are doing battle with the forces of evil . 
in the bahá'í faith ,  demons are not regarded as independent evil spirits as they are in some faiths . 
he also lent this power to some of his disciples  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
belial's influence is not taken lightly . 
there are no demons in hinduism as hinduism is not based on good and evil and is not constructed by the principle of duality . 
in the `` war of the sons of light against the sons of darkness '' ,  belial controls scores of demons ,  which are specifically allotted to him by god for the purpose of performing evil . 
every day is the sons of light battle evil and call upon god to help them overcome evil in ways small and large . 
 ''shedim '' ,  and koine greek δαιμόνιον `` daimonion '';  ,    -rrb-  . 
belial's purpose is to undermine the teachings of god ,  and he achieves this by imparting his nets on humans ,  or the incentive to sin . 
islam and islam-related beliefs acknowledges the concept of evil spirits known as malevolent jinn ,  afarit and shayatin . 
the term `` demon ''  -lrb-  from the greek new testament δαιμόνιον `` daimonion ''  -rrb-  appears 63 times in the new testament of the christian bible . 
the tanakh mentions two classes of demonic spirits ,  the `` se'irim '' and the `` shedim '' . 
in christianity ,  demons are corrupted spirits carrying the execution of satan's desires . 
the evolution of the christian devil and pentagram are examples of early rituals and images that showcase evil qualities ,  as seen by the christian churches . 
according to s .  n .  chiu ,  god is shown sending a demon against saul in 1 samuel 16 and 18 in order to punish him for the failure to follow god's instructions ,  showing god as having the power to use demons for his own purposes ,  putting the demon under his divine authority . 
belial ,  despite his malevolent disposition ,  is considered an angel . 
he apulieus also states that the blessed are called in greek `` eudaimones '' ,  because they are good souls ,  that is to say ,  good demons ,  confirming his opinion that the souls of men are demons . 
often deities of other religions are interpreted or identified as such `` demons ''  -lrb-  from the greek old testament δαιμόνιον `` daimonion ''  -rrb-  . 
in jubilees 1:20, belial's appearance continues to support the notion that sin is a direct product of his influence . 
the oil diffusion pump is operated with an oil of low vapor pressure . 
diffusion pumps use a high speed jet of vapor to direct gas molecules in the pump throat down into the bottom of the pump and out the exhaust . 
the oil of a diffusion pump cannot be exposed to the atmosphere when hot . 
in modern textbooks ,  the diffusion pump is categorized as a momentum transfer pump . 
alberti was born in venice and studied music with antonio lotti . 
during this period ,  day also had her own radio program ,  `` the doris day show '' . 
it was day's fourth film directed by curtiz . 
in 1978, day founded the doris day pet foundation ,  now the doris day animal foundation  -lrb-  ddaf  -rrb-  . 
day has been married four times . 
day has participated in interviews and celebrations of her birthday with an annual doris day music marathon . 
day contributed $250,000 towards the founding of the center . 
since her retirement from films ,  day has lived in carmel-by-the-sea ,  california . 
in the 1985–86 season ,  day hosted her own television talk show ,  `` doris day's best friends '' ,  on cbn . 
day also learned to her displeasure that melcher had committed her to a television series ,  which became `` the doris day show '' . 
day recorded `` someone like you '' ,  before the 1949 film `` my dream is yours '' ,  which featured the song . 
the hsus now manages world spay day ,  the annual one-day spay/neuter event that day originated . 
clint eastwood offered day a role in a film he was planning to direct in 2015.
in april 2014, day made an unexpected public appearance to attend the annual doris day animal foundation benefit . 
day's fourth marriage ,  from april 14, 1976, until april 2, 1982, was to barry comden  -lrb-  1935–2009 -rrb- . 
according to rapp ,  he had auditioned about 200 singers when day got the job . 
after her final film in 1968, she went on to star in the cbs sitcom `` the doris day show ''  -lrb-  1968–1973 -rrb- . 
in 1959, day entered her most successful phase as a film actress with a series of romantic comedies . 
in 1941, day appeared as a singer in three soundies with the les brown band . 
author david kaufman asserts that one of day's costars ,  actor louis jourdan ,  maintained that day herself disliked her husband ,  but day's public statements regarding melcher appear to contradict that assertion . 
the ddaf continues to operate independently under day's personal supervision . 
day hated the idea of performing on television ,  but felt obliged to it . 
while working for rapp in 1939, she adopted the stage surname `` day '' ,  at rapp's suggestion . 
day owns a hotel in carmel-by-the-sea ,  the cypress inn ,  which she co-owned with her son . 
in industrial chemistry ,  distillation is a unit operation of practically universal importance ,  but it is a physical separation process ,  not a chemical reaction . 
hilbert remained at the university of königsberg as a `` privatdozent ''  -lrb-  senior lecturer  -rrb-  from 1886 to 1895.
david hilbert  -lrb-  ; ; 23 january 1862 – 14 february 1943 -rrb- was a german mathematician . 
hilbert developed a lifelong friendship with the shy ,  gifted minkowski . 
hilbert ,  the first of two children of otto and maria therese  -lrb-  erdtmann  -rrb-  hilbert ,  was born in the province of prussia ,  kingdom of prussia ,  either in königsberg  -lrb-  according to hilbert's own statement  -rrb-  or in wehlau  -lrb-  known since 1946 as znamensk  -rrb-  near königsberg where his father worked at the time of his birth . 
between 1902 and 1939 hilbert was editor of the `` mathematische annalen '' ,  the leading mathematical journal of the time . 
