anime and manga fandom began in the 1970s in japan . 
furry fandom refers to the fandom for fictional anthropomorphic animal characters with human personalities and characteristics . 
a fandom can grow around any area of human interest or activity . 
fandom as a term can also be used in a broad sense to refer to the interconnected social networks of individual fandoms ,  many of which overlap . 
fort collins has a range of research institutes . 
fort collins has a council-manager form of government . 
much of fort collins's culture is centered on the students of colorado state university . 
poudre school district includes four comprehensive high schools that serve neighborhoods around fort collins ,  including fort collins high school ,  rocky mountain high school ,  poudre high school ,  fossil ridge high school . 
fort collins is a midsize college city ,  home to colorado state university . 
the fort collins museum ,  established in 1941, is a regional center focusing on the culture and history of fort collins and the surrounding area . 
the colorado brewer's festival is held in late june annually in fort collins . 
additionally ,  four public charter schools are chartered through psd ,  including ridgeview classical schools ,  and liberty common high school ,  mountain sage community school and fort collins montessori school . 
the fort collins public library was established in 1900, the sixth public library in the state . 
fort collins was founded as a military outpost of the united states army in 1864.
the fort collins lincoln center is home to the fort collins symphony orchestra and regularly attracts national touring companies of broadway plays . 
fortzed is a zero energy district encompassing the downtown area of fort collins and the main campus of colorado state university . 
the colorado marathon is a yearly event running down the poudre canyon and finishing in downtown fort collins . 
settlers began arriving in the vicinity of the fort nearly immediately . 
fort collins' economy has a mix of manufacturing and service-related businesses . 
bicycling is a popular and viable means of transportation in fort collins . 
the cache la poudre river and spring creek run through fort collins . 
the fort collins bicycle library lends bicycles to visitors ,  students ,  and residents looking to explore the city of fort collins . 
the library participates in cooperative projects with the local school district and colorado state university . 
drake was present at the rathlin island massacre in 1575.
drake's hostility towards the spanish is said to have started with this incident . 
francis drake was born in tavistock ,  devon ,  england . 
drake had thomas doughty beheaded on 2 july 1578.
the ship's master was so satisfied with the young drake's conduct that ,  being unmarried and childless at his death ,  he bequeathed the barque to drake . 
now a national historic landmark ,  the officially recognised location of drake's new albion is drakes bay ,  california . 
elizabeth i awarded drake a knighthood in 1581 which he received on the `` golden hind '' in deptford . 
drake was considered a hero in england and a pirate in spain for his raids . 
drake became a member of parliament again in 1584 for bossiney on the forming of the 5th parliament of elizabeth i . 
drake and his men ,  downhearted ,  exhausted and hungry ,  had nowhere to go and the spanish were not far behind . 
after drake's death ,  the widow elizabeth eventually married sir william courtenay of powderham . 
the most celebrated of drake's adventures along the spanish main was his capture of the spanish silver train at nombre de dios in march 1573.
after returning from his voyage of circumnavigation ,  drake became the mayor of plymouth ,  in september 1581.
drake stayed in the area for almost a year ,  raiding spanish shipping and attempting to capture a treasure shipment . 
when drake returned to plymouth after the raids ,  the government signed a temporary truce with king philip ii of spain and so was unable to acknowledge drake's accomplishment officially . 
after this major setback ,  drake set sail again on 13 december aboard `` pelican '' with four other ships and 164 men . 
with the success of the panama isthmus raid in 1577, elizabeth i of england sent drake to start an expedition against the spanish along the pacific coast of the americas . 
the best-known fft algorithms depend upon the factorization of `` n '' ,  but there are ffts with o -lrb-  `` n '' log `` n ''  -rrb-  complexity for all `` n '' ,  even for prime `` n '' . 
a fast fourier transform  -lrb-  fft  -rrb-  is an algorithm that computes the discrete fourier transform  -lrb-  dft  -rrb-  of a sequence ,  or its inverse  -lrb-  idft  -rrb-  . 
since the inverse dft is the same as the dft ,  but with the opposite sign in the exponent and a 1/ ''n '' factor ,  any fft algorithm can easily be adapted for it . 
it is the start/end of both the west highland way  -lrb-  milngavie–fort william  -rrb-  and the great glen way  -lrb-  a walk/cycle way fort william–inverness  -rrb-  . 
some of them were never `` good french '' ,  in the sense of being grammatical ,  idiomatic french usage . 
this article ,  on the other hand ,  covers french words and phrases that have entered the english lexicon without ever losing their character as gallicisms: they remain unmistakably `` french '' to an english speaker . 
investments in south africa by foreigners could only be sold for financial rand . 
the south african financial rand was the most visible part of a system of capital controls . 
the financial rand system provided for two exchange rates for the rand — one for current account transactions and one for capital account transactions for non-residents . 
the fips standard includes both the codes for independent countries  -lrb-  similar but sometimes incompatible with the iso 3166-1 alpha-2 standard  -rrb-  and the codes for top-level subdivision of the countries  -lrb-  similar to but usually incompatible with the iso 3166-2 standard  -rrb-  . 
fair isle  -lrb-  ipa: /fɛəraɪ̯l/; ;   -rrb-  is an island in shetland ,  in northern scotland . 
most of the islanders live in the crofts on the southern half of the island ,  with the northern half consisting of rocky moorland . 
the principal activity for the male islanders is crofting . 
the most remote inhabited island in the united kingdom . 
fishing has always been an important industry for the island . 
the four feathers of the title refers to four magical feathers given to tex by the indian chief kalamakooya as a reward for saving his grandson: two of the feathers allowed tex's guns to swivel and fire without being touched whenever he was in danger ,  whilst the other two conferred the power of speech on tex's horse and dog . 
as tex ,  his horse ,  and dog are very thirsty ,  kalamakooya also makes a waterfall where there had been no water before ,  and so when the town was built it was named after tex's feathers and the waterfall . 
four feather falls was the third puppet tv show produced by gerry anderson for granada television . 
the series is set in the fictitious late 19th-century western town of four feather falls ,  kansas ,  and features the adventures of its sheriff ,  tex tucker . 
in all ,  holliday recorded six songs for the series: `` four feather falls '' ,  `` the phantom rider '' ,  `` the rick-rick-a-rackety train '' ,  `` happy hearts and friendly faces '' ,  `` my home town '' ,  and `` two gun tex of texas '' . 
a newer flight control system ,  called intelligent flight control system  -lrb-  ifcs  -rrb-  ,  is an extension of modern digital fly-by-wire flight control systems . 
the controllers measure the position of the flight control surface with sensors such as lvdts . 
it can use mechanical flight control backup systems  -lrb-  boeing 777 -rrb- or use fully fly-by-wire controls . 
the kawasaki p-1 is the first production aircraft in the world to be equipped with such a flight control system . 
a digital fly-by-wire flight control system can be extended from its analog counterpart . 
aircraft and spacecraft autopilots are now part of the electronic controller . 
fly-by-wire  -lrb-  fbw  -rrb-  is a system that replaces the conventional manual flight controls of an aircraft with an electronic interface . 
a fbw aircraft can be lighter than a similar design with conventional controls . 
while traditional mechanical or hydraulic control systems usually fail gradually ,  the loss of all flight control computers immediately renders the aircraft uncontrollable . 
a pilot commands the flight control computer to make the aircraft perform a certain action ,  such as pitch the aircraft up ,  or roll to one side ,  by moving the control column or sidestick . 
mechanical and hydro-mechanical flight control systems are relatively heavy and require careful routing of flight control cables through the aircraft by systems of pulleys ,  cranks ,  tension cables and hydraulic pipes . 
in addition ,  most of the early digital fly-by-wire aircraft also had an analog electrical ,  a mechanical ,  or a hydraulic back-up flight control system . 
all `` fly-by-wire '' flight control systems eliminate the complexity ,  the fragility ,  and the weight of the mechanical circuit of the hydromechanical or electromechanical flight control systems—each being replaced with electronic circuits . 
side-sticks ,  centre sticks ,  or conventional flight control yokes can be used to fly fbw aircraft . 
fly-by-wire control systems allow aircraft computers to perform tasks without pilot input . 
the falklands war  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the falklands conflict ,  falklands crisis ,  malvinas war ,  south atlantic conflict ,  and the guerra del atlántico sur  -lrb-  spanish for `` south atlantic war ''  -rrb-  ,  was a ten-week war between argentina and the united kingdom over two british dependent territories in the south atlantic: the falkland islands ,  and its territorial dependency ,  the south georgia and the south sandwich islands . 
on 6 april ,  the british government set up a war cabinet to provide day-to-day political oversight of the campaign . 
the argentine military junta ,  suspecting that the uk would reinforce its south atlantic forces ,  ordered the invasion of the falkland islands to be brought forward to 2 april . 
the british undertook a series of military operations as a means of recapturing the falklands from argentine occupation ,  though the british had already taken action prior to the 2 april invasion . 
the french president ,  francois mitterrand ,  declared an embargo on french arms sales and assistance to argentina . 
john nott ,  when asked if he regretted his earlier praise of the french ,  said he thought the french were `` duplicitous '' ,  and `` always have been '' . 
operations lasted from 1 april 1982 to 20 june 1982.
on the fahrenheit scale ,  the freezing point of water is 32 degrees fahrenheit  -lrb-  °f  -rrb-  and the boiling point is 212 °f  -lrb-  at standard atmospheric pressure  -rrb-  . 
instead ,  that eutectic is at approximately 4 °f on the final fahrenheit scale . 
fahrenheit observed that water boils at about 212 degrees using this scale . 
the fahrenheit scale uses the symbol ° to denote a point on the temperature scale  -lrb-  as does celsius  -rrb-  and the letter f to indicate the use of the fahrenheit scale  -lrb-  `` e . g . `` 
the fahrenheit scale is a temperature scale based on one proposed in 1724 by dutch–german–polish physicist daniel gabriel fahrenheit  -lrb-  1686–1736 -rrb- . 
the fahrenheit and celsius scales intersect at −40°  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  −40 °f = −40 °c  -rrb-  . 
fahrenheit proposed his temperature scale in 1724, basing it on two reference points of temperature . 
the medici reigned as grand dukes of tuscany ,  starting with cosimo i de' medici in 1569 and ending with the death of gian gastone de' medici in 1737.
following lorenzo de' medici's death in 1492, he was succeeded by his son piero ii . 
with his exile in 1494, the first period of medici rule ended with the restoration of a republican government . 
florence was home to the medici ,  one of european history's most important noble families . 
according to the `` encyclopædia britannica '' ,  it was politically ,  economically ,  and culturally one of the most important cities in europe and the world from the 14th to 16th centuries . 
the language spoken in the city during the 14th century was ,  and still is ,  accepted as the italian language . 
in 2008, the city had the 17th highest average income in italy . 
after their suppression ,  florence came under the sway  -lrb-  1382–1434 -rrb- of the albizzi family ,  who became bitter rivals of the medici . 
during world war ii the city experienced a year-long german occupation  -lrb-  1943–1944 -rrb- . 
he was convicted as a heretic and burned at the stake on the piazza della signoria on 23 may 1498.
after doubling during the 19th century ,  florence's population was to triple in the 20th ,  resulting from growth in tourism ,  trade ,  financial services and industry . 
let `` n '' be a normal subgroup of a group `` g '' . 
a normal subgroup of `` g '' is denoted  . 
therefore ,  the set `` g ''/ ''n '' together with the operation defined above forms a group; this is known as the quotient group of `` g '' by `` n '' . 
a quotient group or factor group is a mathematical group obtained by aggregating similar elements of a larger group using an equivalence relation that preserves the group structure . 
the binary operation defined above makes this set into a group ,  known as the quotient group ,  which in this case is isomorphic to the cyclic group of order 3.
for example ,  consider the group with addition modulo 6: `` g '' = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} . 
it will have half-integer spin . 
mathematically ,  fermions come in three types: most standard model fermions are believed to be dirac fermions ,  although it is unknown at this time whether the neutrinos are dirac or majorana fermions  -lrb-  or both  -rrb-  . 
therefore ,  what is usually referred to as the spin statistics relation is in fact a spin statistics-quantum number relation . 
in addition to the spin characteristic ,  fermions have another specific property: they possess conserved baryon or lepton quantum numbers . 
savage also had a series of guest and supporting roles in the late 1990s and 2000s such as the show `` boy meets world ''  -lrb-  which starred his younger brother ben savage  -rrb-  and in the film `` austin powers in goldmember '' as the mole . 
savage's first screen performance was in the television show `` morningstar/eveningstar '' ,  at the age of 9.
 ''the grinder '' was canceled by fox on may 16, 2016.
in 2007, he made his feature film directing debut with the film `` daddy day camp '' . 
in 1988, savage appeared as kevin arnold on `` the wonder years '' ,  the role for which he is best known ,  and for which he received two golden globe nominations and two emmy nominations for outstanding lead actor in a comedy series . 
the futurians were based in new york city and were a major force in the development of science fiction writing and science fiction fandom in the years 1937–1945.
pohl said the new fandom and the futurians were `` addicted to feuds '' ,  that `` no cia nor kgb ever wrestled so valiantly for the soul of an emerging nation as new fandom and the futurians did for science fiction '' . 
frederik pohl ,  in his autobiography `` the way the future was '' ,  said that the origin of the futurians lay with the science fiction league founded by hugo gernsback in 1934, the local new york city chapter of which was called the `` brooklyn science fiction league '' or bsfl ,  headed by g .  g .  clark . 
wollheim ,  john michel ,  and robert a .  w .  lowndes were also members of the bsfl . 
thus early 1950s historian of fandom jack speer began to label successive generations of fans as first fandom ,  second fandom ,  third fandom ,  and so forth .  .  .  all the way to seventh fandom and beyond . 
first fandom annually presents its first fandom hall of fame award and sam moskowitz archive award for excellence in science fiction collecting . 
fianna fáil's success was credited by `` the irish times '' to its local structure . 
fianna fáil is seen as conservative but also as a nationalist party . 
fianna fáil is seen as a typical catch-all party . 
fianna fáil was founded by éamon de valera ,  a former leader of sinn féin . 
fianna fáil  -lrb-   ,  meaning 'soldiers of destiny' or 'warriors of fál'  -rrb-  ,  officially fianna fáil – the republican party  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a conservative political party in ireland . 
since 24 january 2019, fianna fáil has been in partnership with the social democratic and labour party . 
the fujiwara dominated the government of japan 794–1160.
the fujiwara controlled the throne until the reign of emperor go-sanjō  -lrb-  1068–73 -rrb- ,  the first emperor not born of a fujiwara mother since the ninth century . 
in time ,  fujiwara became known as a clan name . 
this defeat marked the end of the fujiwara's dominance . 
within decades of emperor daigo's death ,  the fujiwara had absolute control over the court . 
after this downfall ,  the younger branches of the fujiwara clan turned their focus from politics to the arts ,  producing literary luminaries such as fujiwara no shunzei or fujiwara no teika . 
the fujiwara clan's political influence was initiated during the asuka period . 
only forty years after michinaga's death ,  his fujiwara heirs were not able to prevent the ascension of emperor go-sanjō  -lrb-  reigned 1068–1073 -rrb- ,  the first emperor since emperor uda whose mother was not a fujiwara . 
empress shōken ,  wife of emperor meiji ,  was a descendant of the fujiwara clan and ,  through gracia hosokawa ,  of the minamoto clan . 
the `` in no chō '' filled the void left by the decline of fujiwara power . 
the government of india  -lrb-  referred to as the `` union government ''  -rrb-  was established by the constitution of india ,  and is the governing authority of a `` federal union '' of 29 states and 7 union territories . 
leading examples of the federation or federal state include india ,  the united states ,  brazil ,  mexico ,  russia ,  germany ,  canada ,  switzerland ,  argentina ,  and australia . 
also one more aspect of indian federalism is system of president's rule in which the central government  -lrb-  through its appointed governor  -rrb-  takes control of state's administration for certain months when no party can form a government in the state or there is violent disturbance in the state . 
the governments of argentina ,  australia ,  brazil ,  india ,  and mexico ,  among others ,  are also organized along federalist principles . 
the model of australian federalism adheres closely to the original model of the united states of america ,  although it does so through a parliamentary westminster system rather than a presidential system . 
the government of india is based on a 3 tiered system ,  in which the constitution of india delineates the subjects on which each tier of government has executive powers . 
in the united states ,  federalism originally referred to belief in a stronger central government . 
in contrast ,  europe has a greater history of unitary states than north america ,  thus european `` federalism '' argues for a weaker central government ,  relative to a unitary state . 
in the current arrangement ,  the seventh schedule of the indian constitution delimits the subjects of each level of governmental jurisdiction ,  dividing them into three lists:
a collection of his writings was published at geneva in 1770  -lrb-  `` œuvres de feu m .  abauzit ''  -rrb-  ,  and another at london in 1773  -lrb-  `` œuvres diverses de m .  abauzit ''  -rrb-  . 
abauzit was a man of great learning and of wonderful versatility . 
abauzit is also notable for proofreading or correcting the writings of isaac newton and other scholars . 
the french foreign legion  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  ffl;  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` l . é . ``   -rrb- 
it is the foreign legion's most precious relic . 
of these ,  1,918 were from a single regiment of the legion . 
the contemporary french foreign legion relates the most to that of spain ,  the spanish legion . 
other countries have tried to emulate the french foreign legion model . 
when it was founded ,  the french foreign legion was not unique; other foreign formations existed at the time in france . 
the french foreign legion was created by louis philippe ,  the king of the french ,  on 10 march 1831 from the foreign regiments of the kingdom of france . 
the foreign legion began the process of reorganizing and redeploying to algeria . 
the french foreign legion was primarily used to protect and expand the french colonial empire during the 19th century . 
the 1st foreign parachute regiment 1 rep was disbanded on 30 april 1961.
however ,  the 2nd foreign parachute regiment 2 rep prevailed in existence ,  while most of the personnel of the saharan companies were integrated into the 1st foreign infantry regiment ,  2nd foreign infantry regiment and 4th foreign infantry regiment respectively . 
however the legion was withdrawn with the other french forces during february–march 1867.
in world war i ,  the foreign legion fought in many critical battles on the western front . 
as part of the army of africa ,  the foreign legion contributed to the growth of the french colonial empire in sub-saharan africa . 
the foreign legion participated in the suppression of the commune ,  which was crushed with great bloodshed . 
on 9 june 1854, the french ship `` jean bart '' embarked four battalions of the foreign legion for the crimean peninsula . 
the legion played a major part in the rif war of 1920–25.
it was renamed the 1st foreign parachute regiment  -lrb-  1 rep  -rrb-  after its third reformation . 
the foreign legion has remained an important part of the french army and sea transport protected by the french navy ,  surviving three republics ,  the second french empire ,  two world wars ,  the rise and fall of mass conscript armies ,  the dismantling of the french colonial empire ,  and the loss of the foreign legion's base ,  algeria . 
like the rest of the `` army of africa '' ,  the foreign legion provided detachments in the campaign of italy . 
during the first indochina war  -lrb-  1946–54 -rrb- the foreign legion saw its numbers swell due to the incorporation of world war ii veterans . 
the foreign legion's first service in algeria came to an end after only four years ,  as it was needed elsewhere . 
this action of feeding back of the signal from output to input gave rise to the use of the term `` feedback '' as a distinct word by 1920.
feedback occurs when outputs of a system are routed back as inputs as part of a chain of cause-and-effect that forms a circuit or loop . 
in vertical text ,  `` tategaki '' ,  the furigana is placed to the right of the line of text; in horizontal text ,  `` yokogaki '' ,  it is placed above the line of text ,  as illustrated below . 
hence ,  after 1806, he reigned as francis i ,  emperor of austria . 
after the death of joseph ii in 1790, francis's father became emperor . 
emperor joseph ii himself took charge of francis's development . 
later ,  he led austria into the french revolutionary wars . 
francis was a son of emperor leopold ii  -lrb-  1747–1792 -rrb- and his wife maria luisa of spain  -lrb-  1745–1792 -rrb- ,  daughter of charles iii of spain . 
francis ,  just past his 24th birthday ,  was now emperor ,  much sooner than he had expected . 
francis ii  -lrb-  ; 12 february 1768 – 2 march 1835 -rrb- was the last holy roman emperor ,  ruling from 1792 until 6 august 1806, when he dissolved the holy roman empire of the german nation after the decisive defeat at the hands of the first french empire led by napoleon at the battle of austerlitz . 
he was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1860 and received their royal medal in 1887.
born in london as son of johann leopold abel ,  abel studied chemistry at the royal polytechnic institution and in 1845 became one of the original 26 students of a .  w .  von hofmann at the royal college of chemistry . 
sir frederick augustus abel ,  1st baronet gcvo ,  kcb ,  frs  -lrb-  17 july 18276 september 1902 -rrb- was an english chemist . 
abel married twice; first to sarah blanch ,  daughter of james blanch ,  of bristol; secondly after his first wife´s death to giulietta de la feuillade . 
fluorescence is the emission of light by a substance that has absorbed light or other electromagnetic radiation . 
in general ,  emitted fluorescence light has a longer wavelength and lower energy than the absorbed light . 
water absorbs light of long wavelengths ,  so less light from these wavelengths reflects back to reach the eye . 
another adaptive use of fluorescence is to generate red light from the ambient blue light of the photic zone to aid vision . 
theoretically ,  some fish eyes can detect light as deep as 1000 m .  at these depths of the aphotic zone ,  the only sources of light are organisms themselves ,  giving off light through chemical reactions in a process called bioluminescence . 
in his 1852 paper on the `` refrangibility ''  -lrb-  wavelength change  -rrb-  of light ,  george gabriel stokes described the ability of fluorspar and uranium glass to change invisible light beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum into blue light . 
biofluorescence is the absorption of electromagnetic wavelengths from the visible light spectrum by fluorescent proteins in a living organism ,  and the emission of light at a lower energy level . 
spiders fluoresce under uv light and possess a huge diversity of fluorophores . 
swallowtail  -lrb-  `` papilio ''  -rrb-  butterflies have complex systems for emitting fluorescent light . 
additionally ,  it is suggested that fluorescent tissues that surround an organism’s eyes are used to convert blue light from the photic zone or green bioluminescence in the aphotic zone into red light to aid vision . 
molecules that are excited through light absorption or via a different process  -lrb-  e . g . 
the specific frequencies of exciting and emitted lights are depended on the particular system . 
here formula_3 is a generic term for photon energy with h = planck's constant and = frequency of light . 
biophosphorescence is similar to biofluorescence in its requirement of light wavelengths as a provider of excitation energy . 
fluorescence anisotropy can be defined quantitatively as where formula_18 is the emitted intensity parallel to polarization of the excitation light and formula_19 is the emitted intensity perpendicular to the polarization of the excitation light . 
bioluminescence differs from biofluorescence in that it is the natural production of light by chemical reactions within an organism ,  whereas biofluorescence is the absorption and reemission of light from the environment . 
unlike with biofluorescence ,  here the electron retains stability ,  emitting light that continues to “glow-in-the-dark” even long after the stimulating light source has been removed . 
is the sum of all rates of excited state decay . 
biofluorescence is often confused with the following forms of biotic light ,  bioluminescence and biophosphorescence . 
in most cases ,  the emitted light has a longer wavelength ,  and therefore lower energy ,  than the absorbed radiation; this phenomenon is known as the stokes shift . 
but then `` n '' = `` ab '' = `` p '' ''p '' .  .  . `` p '' ''q '' ''q '' .  .  . `` q '' is a product of primes . 
 -lrb-  in modern terminology: if a prime `` p '' divides the product `` ab '' ,  then `` p '' divides either `` a '' or `` b '' or both .   -rrb- 
we need to show that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or a product of primes . 
every positive integer `` n '' > 1 can be represented in exactly one way as a product of prime powers: where `` p '' < `` p '' <  .  .  .  < `` p '' are primes and the `` n '' are positive integers . 
this theorem is one of the main reasons why 1 is not considered a prime number: if 1 were prime ,  then factorization into primes would not be unique; for example , 
 -lrb-  in modern terminology: a least common multiple of several prime numbers is not a multiple of any other prime number .   -rrb- 
the origin of flamenco is a subject of disagreement . 
there are many suggestions for the origin of the word `` flamenco '' as a musical term  -lrb-  summarized below  -rrb-  but no solid evidence for any of them . 
flamenco has been influenced by and associated with the romani people in spain; however ,  its origin and style are uniquely andalusian . 
the word `` flamenco '' may have come to be used for fiery behaviour ,  which could have come to be applied to the gitano players and performers . 
father christmas is the traditional english name for the personification of christmas . 
in the hands of royalist pamphlet writers ,  old father christmas served as the symbol and spokesman of 'the good old days' of feasting and good cheer ,  and it became popular for christmastide's defenders to present him as lamenting past times . 
english personifications of christmas were first recorded in the 15th century ,  with father christmas himself first appearing in the mid 17th century in the aftermath of the english civil war . 
as interest in christmas customs waned ,  father christmas's profile declined . 
i am old gregorie christmas still ,  and though i come out of popes-head-alley as good a protestant ,  as any i'my parish . `` 
by the late 18th century father christmas had become a stock character in the christmas folk plays later known as mummers plays . 
until victorian times ,  father christmas was concerned with adult feasting and merry-making . 
initially known as 'sir christmas' or 'lord christmas' ,  he later became increasingly referred to as 'father christmas' . 
similar opinions were expressed in `` round about our coal fire  .  .  .  with some curious memories of old father christmas; shewing what hospitality was in former times ,  and how little there remains of it at present ''  -lrb-  1734, reprinted with father christmas subtitle 1796 -rrb- . 
the american legal system includes both state courts and federal courts . 
article four of the united states constitution also states that the congress has the power to enact laws `` respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states . `` 
federal jurisdiction in this sense is important in criminal law because federal law does not supersede state criminal law . 
if a federal court has subject matter jurisdiction over one or more of the claims in a case ,  it has discretion to exercise ancillary jurisdiction over other state law claims . 
this is why fm radio is called fm  -lrb-  frequency modulation  -rrb-  . 
yamaha eventually commercialized fm synthesis technology with the yamaha gs-1, the first fm digital synthesizer ,  released in 1980.
yamaha had patented its hardware implementation of fm in the 1970s ,  allowing it to nearly monopolize the market for fm technology until the mid-1990s . 
combining sets of 8 fm operators with multi-spectral wave forms began in 1999 by yamaha in the fs1r . 
with the expiration of the stanford university fm patent in 1995, digital fm synthesis can now be implemented freely by other manufacturers . 
fm synthesis can create both harmonic and inharmonic sounds . 
 '' -lrb-  also see bessel's correction  -rrb- ``  . 
bessel had two sons and three daughters . 
bessel's work in 1840 contributed to the discovery of neptune in 1846 at berlin observatory ,  several months after bessel's death . 
a special type of mathematical functions were named bessel functions after bessel's death ,  though they had originally been discovered by daniel bernoulli and then generalised by bessel . 
bessel won the gold medal of the royal astronomical society twice in 1829 and 1841.
friedrich wilhelm bessel  -lrb-  ; 22 july 1784 – 17 march 1846 -rrb- was a german astronomer ,  mathematician ,  physicist and geodesist . 
in the second decade of the 19th century while studying the dynamics of 'many-body' gravitational systems ,  bessel developed what are now known as bessel functions . 
in 1827 bessel became member of the royal institute of the netherlands ,  predecessor of the royal netherlands academy of arts and sciences . 
it may also be that intelligent alien life develops an `` increasing disinterest '' in their outside world . 
another possibility is that human theoreticians have underestimated how much alien life might differ from that on earth . 
this is the so-called `` seti paradox '' . 
the fermi paradox can be asked in two ways . 
it may be that alien civilizations are detectable through their radio emissions for only a short time ,  reducing the likelihood of spotting them . 
the zoo hypothesis states that intelligent extraterrestrial life exists and does not contact life on earth to allow for its natural evolution and development . 
although fermi's name is most commonly associated with the paradox ,  he was not the first to ask the question . 
alien civilizations might be technically capable of contacting earth ,  but are only listening instead of transmitting . 
it is possible that even if complex life is common ,  intelligence  -lrb-  and consequently civilizations  -rrb-  is not . 
the fermi paradox is a conflict between the argument that scale and probability seem to favor intelligent life being common in the universe ,  and a total lack of evidence of intelligent life having ever arisen anywhere other than on the earth . 
signals might be sent from non-main sequence star systems that we search with lower priority; current programs assume that most alien life will be orbiting sun-like stars . 
an alien civilization might feel it is too dangerous to communicate ,  either for us or for them . 
perhaps the fermi paradox itself—or the alien equivalent of it—is the reason for any civilization to avoid contact with other civilizations ,  even if no other obstacles existed . 
the fermi paradox ,  or fermi's paradox ,  named after physicist enrico fermi ,  is the apparent contradiction between the lack of evidence and high probability estimates for the existence of extraterrestrial civilizations . 
self-annihilation may also be viewed in terms of thermodynamics: insofar as life is an ordered system that can sustain itself against the tendency to disorder ,  the `` external transmission '' or interstellar communicative phase may be the point at which the system becomes unstable and self-destructs . 
the planetarium hypothesis speculates that beings may have created this simulation so that the universe appears to be empty of other life . 
the second part of the paradox ,  that we see no evidence of extraterrestrial life ,  is also an active field of scientific research . 
there are two parts of the fermi paradox that rely on empirical evidence—that there are many potential habitable planets ,  and that we see no evidence of life . 
dyson speculated that advanced alien civilizations might be detected by examining the spectra of stars and searching for such an altered spectrum . 
that tsiolkovsky himself may not have been the first to discover the paradox is suggested by his above-mentioned reference to other people's reasons for denying the existence of extraterrestrial civilizations . 
this is the argument that technological civilizations may usually or invariably destroy themselves before or shortly after developing radio or spaceflight technology . 
the associated press' `` ap stylebook '' recommends that the term fundamentalist not be used for any group that does not apply the term to itself . 
thus was born the term `` islamic fundamentalist '' ,  which became a common use of the term in following years . 
political usage of the term `` fundamentalism '' has also been criticized . 
sociologist of religion tex sample asserts that it is a mistake to refer to a muslim ,  jewish ,  or christian fundamentalist . 
mattias gardell claims that while older us racist groups are christian and patriotic  -lrb-  christian identity  -rrb-  ,  there is a younger generation of white supremacists who have rejected both christianity and mainstream right-wing movements . 
by the late 1910s ,  theological conservatives rallying around the five fundamentals came to be known as `` fundamentalists '' . 
buddhist fundamentalism has also targeted other religious and ethnic groups ,  such as that in myanmar . 
rather ,  a fundamentalist's fundamentalism is their primary concern ,  over and above other denominational or faith considerations . 
scholars identify several politically active hindu movements as part of the `` hindu fundamentalist family . `` 
the ásatrú movement as practiced by stephen mcnallen differed from christensen's odinist fellowship in placing a greater emphasis on ritual and a lesser focus on racial ideology . 
as defined by goodrick-clarke ,  nordic racial paganism is synonymous with the odinist movement  -lrb-  including some who identify as wotansvolk  -rrb-  . 
the question of the relationship between germanic neopaganism and the neo-nazi movement is controversial among german neopagans ,  with opinions ranging across a wide spectrum . 
even before the film was completed ,  it created controversy in the town of åmål . 
the film ends with elin and agnes sitting in elin's bedroom drinking chocolate milk . 
two girls ,  agnes and elin ,  attend school in the small town of åmål in sweden . 
agnes is in love with elin but cannot find any way to express it . 
however ,  some reports outside sweden incorrectly stated that in sweden the film had even outgrossed the hollywood film `` titanic '' . 
further pressure was brought on the makers of the film ,  the film i väst studio ,  who are partly financed by swedish local authorities ,  including åmål . 
full disclosure is the policy of publishing information on vulnerabilities without restriction as early as possible ,  making the information accessible to the general public without restriction . 
non disclosure is generally favoured by commercial exploit vendors and blackhat hackers . 
there are some fundamental problems with coordinated disclosure that full disclosure can resolve . 
today ,  there are three major disclosure policies under which most others can be categorized: non disclosure ,  coordinated disclosure ,  and full disclosure . 
there is no standard way to make vulnerability information available to the public ,  researchers often use mailing lists dedicated to the topic ,  academic papers or industry conferences . 
in general ,  proponents of full disclosure believe that the benefits of freely available vulnerability research outweigh the risks ,  whereas opponents prefer to limit the distribution . 
carol p .  christ also co-edited the classic feminist religion anthologies `` weaving the visions: new patterns in feminist spirituality ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- and `` womanspirit rising ''  -lrb-  1979/1989 -rrb-; the latter included her essay `` why women need the goddess '' . 
others who practice feminist spirituality may instead adhere to a feminist re-interpretation of western monotheistic traditions . 
feminist theology is a movement found in several religions ,  including buddhism ,  christianity ,  judaism ,  and new thought ,  to reconsider the traditions ,  practices ,  scriptures ,  and theologies of those religions from a feminist perspective . 
carol p .  christ is the author of the widely reprinted essay `` why women need the goddess '' ,  which argues in favor of the concept of there having been an ancient religion of a supreme goddess . 
freeware is software ,  most often proprietary ,  that is distributed at no monetary cost to the end user . 
the flat earth model is an archaic conception of earth's shape as a plane or disk . 
belief in a flat earth continued into the 5th century bc . 
the scholar al-suyuti stated that the belief in a flat earth is a deviation . 
the quran mentions that the earth  -lrb-  `` al-arḍ ''  -rrb-  was `` spread out '' . 
scholar ibn taymiyyah stated that the earth is spherical and not flat . 
hecataeus of miletus believed the earth was flat and surrounded by water . 
the israelites also imagined the earth to be a disc floating on water; an arched firmament separated the earth from the heavens . 
in the modern era ,  pseudoscientific flat earth theories have been espoused by modern flat earth societies and ,  increasingly ,  by unaffiliated individuals using social media . 
muslim scholars of the past believed in a spherical earth . 
the universal belief in a flat earth is confirmed by a contemporary chinese encyclopedia from 1609 illustrating a flat earth extending over the horizontal diametral plane of a spherical heaven . 
thales thought the earth floated in water like a log . 
the spherical earth theory is contemptuously dismissed as `` pagan '' . 
early christian beliefs mention a number of ideas about the shape of the earth . 
the earliest indian cosmological texts picture the earth as one of a stack of flat disks . 
the idea of a spherical earth appeared in greek philosophy with pythagoras  -lrb-  6th century bc  -rrb-  ,  although most pre-socratics  -lrb-  6th–5th century bc  -rrb-  retained the flat earth model . 
members of the flath earth society claim that `` the belief that the earth is flat is the ultimate conspiracy theory ,  perpetuated by nasa and various other government agencies . `` 
in the modern era ,  the pseudoscientific belief in a flat earth has been expressed by a variety of individuals and groups:
anaxagoras  -lrb-  c .  450 bc  -rrb-  agreed that the earth was flat ,  and his pupil archelaus believed that the flat earth was depressed in the middle like a saucer ,  to allow for the fact that the sun does not rise and set at the same time for everyone . 
his primary aim was to reach children before they were convinced about a spherical earth . 
the ancient norse and germanic peoples believed in a flat earth cosmography with the earth surrounded by an ocean ,  with the axis mundi ,  a world tree  -lrb-  yggdrasil  -rrb-  ,  or pillar  -lrb-  irminsul  -rrb-  in the centre . 
herodotus in his `` histories '' ridiculed the belief that water encircled the world ,  yet most classicists agree he still believed the earth was flat because of his descriptions of literal `` ends '' or `` edges '' of the earth . 
persian is one of the western iranian languages within the indo-european family . 
persian is classified as a member of the southwestern subgroup within western iranian along with lari ,  kumzari ,  and luri . 
persian  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known by its endonym farsi  -lrb-   ``  ''   -rrb-  ,  is one of the western iranian languages within the indo-iranian branch of the indo-european language family . 
frances `` fanny '' abington  -lrb-  1737 – 4 march 1815 -rrb- was a british actress ,  known not only for her acting ,  but her sense of fashion . 
her first appearance on the stage was at haymarket in 1755 as miranda in mrs centlivre's play ,  `` busybody '' . 
the order of this field being  ,  and the divisors of being  ,  the subfields of are  ,   ,   ,  and itself . 
in a finite field of order  ,  the polynomial has all elements of the finite field as roots . 
let be a finite field . 
let be a prime power ,  and be the splitting field of the polynomial  over the prime field  . 
the number of elements of a finite field is called its `` order '' . 
as and are coprime ,  the intersection of and in is the prime field  . 
in other word ,  the roots of form a field of order  ,  which is equal to by the minimality of the splitting field . 
by fermat's little theorem ,  if is a prime number and is in the field then  . 
the elements of the prime field of order may be represented by integers in the range  . 
in a field of order  ,  adding copies of any element always results in zero; that is ,  the characteristic of the field is  . 
any finite field extension of a finite field is separable and simple . 
the simplest examples of finite fields are the fields of prime order: for each prime number  ,  the prime field  -lrb-  also denoted  ,  formula_1, or   -rrb-  of order  -lrb-  that is ,  size  -rrb-  may be constructed as the integers modulo . 
in mathematics ,  a finite field or galois field  -lrb-  so-named in honor of évariste galois  -rrb-  is a field that contains a finite number of elements . 
the uniqueness up to isomorphism of splitting fields implies thus that all fields of order are isomorphic . 
for every prime number and every positive integer  ,  there exist finite fields of order  ,  and all fields of this order are isomorphic  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
every nonzero element of a finite field is a root of unity ,  as for every nonzero element of  . 
 -lrb-  in general there will be several primitive elements for a given field .   -rrb- 
but if undertaken in the right way ,  franchising can be a vehicle of success for both the franchisor and franchisee . 
the chain's success set a pattern for other franchisors to follow . 
in return the franchisee pays certain fees and agrees to comply with certain obligations ,  typically set out in a franchise agreement . 
other companies tried franchising in one form or another after the singer experience . 
there was little growth in franchising ,  though ,  until the mid-19th century ,  when it appeared in the united states for the first time . 
one of the first successful american franchising operations was started by an enterprising druggist named john s .  pemberton . 
they are represented in feynman diagrams as follows:
in quantum field theories the feynman diagrams are obtained from lagrangian by feynman rules . 
a feynman diagram is a representation of quantum field theory processes in terms of particle interactions . 
a feynman diagram represents a perturbative contribution to the amplitude of a quantum transition from some initial quantum state to some final quantum state . 
feynman gave a prescription for calculating the amplitude  -lrb-  the feynman rules ,  below  -rrb-  for any given diagram from a field theory lagrangian . 
in a non-relativistic theory ,  there are no antiparticles and there is no doubling ,  so each feynman diagram includes only one term . 
a feynman diagram is a contribution of a particular class of particle paths ,  which join and split as described by the diagram . 
a feynman diagram consists of points ,  called vertices ,  and lines attached to the vertices . 
these integrals do ,  however ,  have a regular structure ,  and may be represented graphically as feynman diagrams . 
feynman diagrams are often confused with spacetime diagrams and bubble chamber images because they all describe particle scattering . 
food writing is a type of writing that focuses on food and includes works by food critics and food historians . 
food writers regard food as a substance and a cultural phenomenon . 
often ,  food writing is used to specify writing that takes a more literary approach to food ,  such as that of the famous american food writer m .  f .  k .  fisher ,  who describes her writing about food as follows:
the general motors pavilion at the 1964 new york world's fair included a ride that was also known as `` futurama '' ,  or `` the new futurama '' . 
futurama was an exhibit and ride at the 1939 new york world's fair designed by norman bel geddes ,  which presented a possible model of the world 20 years into the future  -lrb-  1959–1960 -rrb- . 
through this ,  the exhibition was designed to inspire greater public enthusiasm and support for the constructive work and planning of streets and highways . 
the popularity of the futurama exhibit fit closely with the fair's overall theme of `` the world of tomorrow '' in its emphasis on the future and its redesign of the american landscape . 
he was succeeded as duke by his son ,  galeazzo maria sforza . 
sforza occupied genoa and savona in 1464.
francesco i sforza  -lrb-  ; 23 july 1401 – 8 march 1466 -rrb- was an italian condottiero ,  the founder of the sforza dynasty in milan ,  italy ,  and was the fourth duke of milan from 1450 until his death . 
sforza suffered from hydropsy and gout . 
that did not come to the sforza dukes until 1494, when emperor maximilian formally invested francesco's son ,  ludovico ,  as duke of milan . 
francesco sforza was born in san miniato ,  tuscany ,  one of the seven illegitimate sons of the condottiero muzio sforza and lucia da torsano . 
the term `` folk dance '' is reserved for dances which are to a significant degree bound by tradition and originated in the times when the distinction existed between the dances of `` common folk '' and the dances of the modern ballroom dances originated from folk ones . 
a folk dance is developed by people that reflect the life of the people of a certain country or region . 
dostoevsky completed his first novel ,  `` poor folk '' ,  in may 1845.
for a time ,  he had to beg for money ,  but he eventually became one of the most widely read and highly regarded russian writers . 
he deemed russian orthodoxy to be the ideal form of christianity . 
in 1859 he was released from military service because of deteriorating health and was granted permission to return to russia ,  first to tver ,  where he met his brother for the first time in ten years ,  and then to st petersburg . 
he returned to saint petersburg in late july . 
in his youth ,  dostoevsky enjoyed reading nikolai karamzin's `` history of the russian state '' ,  which praised conservatism and russian independence ,  ideas that dostoevsky would embrace later in life . 
his 1864 novella `` notes from underground '' is considered to be one of the first works of existentialist literature . 
dostoevsky is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential novelists of the golden age of russian literature . 
the first part is a record of his thoughts about society and his character . 
the family returned to st petersburg in september . 
their first child ,  sonya ,  had been conceived in baden-baden ,  and was born in geneva on 5 march 1868.
he wrote more than 700 letters ,  a dozen of which are lost . 
the first two parts of `` crime and punishment '' were published in january and february 1866 in the periodical `` the russian messenger '' ,  attracting at least 500 new subscribers to the magazine . 
in the summer of 1873, anna returned to staraya russa with the children ,  while dostoevsky stayed in st petersburg to continue with his `` diary '' . 
in march 1874, dostoevsky left `` the citizen '' because of the stressful work and interference from the russian bureaucracy . 
in the second part he describes scenes from his life that are responsible for his failure in personal and professional life and in his love life . 
dostoevsky returned to saint petersburg in mid-september and promised his editor ,  fyodor stellovsky ,  that he would complete `` the gambler '' ,  a short novel focused on gambling addiction ,  by november ,  although he had not yet begun writing it . 
after the 1917 russian revolution ,  passages of dostoevsky books were sometimes shortened ,  although only two books were censored: `` demons '' and `` diary of a writer '' . 
dostoevsky distinguished three `` enormous world ideas '' prevalent in his time: roman catholicism ,  protestantism and russian orthodoxy . 
 ''notes from underground '' is split into two stylistically different parts ,  the first essay-like ,  the second in narrative style . 
in september 1867, dostoevsky began work on `` the idiot '' ,  and after a prolonged planning process that bore little resemblance to the published novel ,  he eventually managed to write the first 100 pages in only 23 days; the serialisation began in `` the russian messenger `` in january 1868.
he finds the novels full of contrived `` surprises and complications of plot '' ,  which are effective when first read ,  but on second reading ,  without the shock and benefit of these surprises ,  appear loaded with `` glorified cliché '' . 
the novel's protagonist ,  the 26-year-old prince myshkin ,  returns to russia after several years at a swiss sanatorium . 
dostoevsky had his first known affair with avdotya yakovlevna ,  whom he met in the panayev circle in the early 1840s . 
none were successful ,  and his financial difficulties led him to write a novel . 
in 1849, the first parts of `` netochka nezvanova '' ,  a novel dostoevsky had been planning since 1846, were published in `` annals of the fatherland '' ,  but his banishment ended the project . 
dostoevsky travelled to western europe for the first time on 7 june 1862, visiting cologne ,  berlin ,  dresden ,  wiesbaden ,  belgium ,  and paris . 
dostoevsky's works of fiction include 15 novels and novellas ,  17 short stories ,  and 5 translations . 
born in moscow in 1821, dostoevsky was introduced to literature at an early age through fairy tales and legends ,  and through books by russian and foreign authors . 
she wrote that he `` became very attracted to me '' . 
signs of dostoevsky's epilepsy may have first appeared on learning of the death of his father on 16 june 1839, although the reports of a seizure originated from accounts written by his daughter  -lrb-  later expanded by sigmund freud .   -rrb- 
 ''poor folk '' was released on 15 january 1846 in the `` st petersburg collection '' almanac and became a commercial success . 
sometimes he determines whether they had faith that he would heal them . 
even those christian writers who believe in faith healing do not all believe that one's faith presently brings about the desired healing . 
nearly all scientists dismiss faith healing as pseudoscience . 
the second level of theological disagreement with christian faith healing goes further . 
jesus told his followers to heal the sick and stated that signs such as healing are evidence of faith . 
virtually all scientists and philosophers dismiss faith healing as pseudoscience . 
a review in 1954 investigated spiritual healing ,  therapeutic touch and faith healing . 
faith healing is reported by catholics as the result of intercessory prayer to a saint or to a person with the gift of healing . 
the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds  -rrb-  has had a long history of faith healings . 
at least two other times jesus credited the sufferer's faith as the means of being healed: and  . 
tv personality derren brown produced a show on faith healing entitled `` miracles for sale '' which arguably exposed the art of faith healing as a scam . 
christian theological criticism of faith healing broadly falls into two distinct levels of disagreement . 
regarded as a christian belief that god heals people through the power of the holy spirit ,  faith healing often involves the laying on of hands . 
christian physician reginald b .  cherry views faith healing as a pathway of healing in which god uses both the natural and the supernatural to heal . 
by the 1930s ,  several faith healers drew large crowds and established worldwide followings . 
in this show ,  derren trained a scuba diver trainer picked from the general public to be a faith healer and took him to texas to successfully deliver a faith healing session to a congregation . 
a .  allen were faith healers who traveled with large tents for large open-air crusades . 
choosing faith healing while rejecting modern medicine can and does cause people to die needlessly . 
in 2000, the congregation for the doctrine of the faith issued `` instruction on prayers for healing '' with specific norms about prayer meetings for obtaining healing ,  which presents the catholic church's doctrines of sickness and healing . 
lang was born in vienna as the second son of anton lang  -lrb-  1860–1940 -rrb- ,  an architect and construction company manager ,  and his wife pauline `` paula '' lang schlesinger  -lrb-  1864–1920 -rrb- . 
lang's parents were of moravian descent and practicing roman catholics . 
friedrich christian anton `` fritz '' lang  -lrb-  december 5, 1890 – august 2, 1976 -rrb- was an austrian-german-american filmmaker ,  screenwriter ,  and occasional film producer and actor . 
