the island is called `` gwadada '' by the locals . 
the island was called `` karukera ''  -lrb-  or `` the island of beautiful waters ''  -rrb-  by the arawak people ,  who settled on there in the year 300.
tourism accounted for 8.9 percent of gdp in guadeloupe in 2000.
in 1997, the service sector in guadeloupe contributed 85 percent of gdp and provided employment for 68 percent of the labor force . 
in 1997, industry in guadeloupe constituted 9 percent of gdp and provided employment for 17 percent of the labor force . 
in guadeloupe ,  agriculture constituted 6 percent of gdp and employed 15 percent of the work-force in 1997, which equaled approximately 120,000.
the glagolitic script  -lrb-   ,  `` glagolitsa ''  -rrb-  is the oldest known slavic alphabet . 
some students of the ohrid academy went to bohemia where the alphabet was used in the 10th and 11th centuries ,  along with other scripts . 
the 1483 `` missale romanum glagolitice '' was the first printed croatian glagolitic book . 
from there ,  the students travelled to other places and spread the use of their alphabet . 
after the deaths of cyril and methodius ,  the glagolitic alphabet ceased to be used in moravia ,  but their students continued to propagate it in the first bulgarian empire ,  where it was subsequently also displaced by the cyrillic alphabet . 
the number of letters in the original glagolitic alphabet is not known ,  but it may have been close to its presumed greek model . 
in missals ,  the glagolitic script was eventually replaced with the latin alphabet ,  but the use of the slavic language in the mass continued ,  until replaced by modern vernacular languages . 
the kiev missal ,  found in the 19th century in jerusalem ,  was dated to the 10th century . 
the glagolitic alphabet was preserved only by the clergy of croatia to write church slavonic until the early 19th century . 
the tradition that the alphabet was designed by saint cyril and saint methodius has not been universally accepted . 
some other ,  rarer ,  names for this alphabet are bukvitsa  -lrb-  from common slavic word `` bukva '' meaning `` letter '' ,  and a suffix `` -itsa ''  -rrb-  and illyrian . 
the greatest common divisor is also known as the greatest common factor  -lrb-  gcf  -rrb-  ,  highest common factor  -lrb-  hcf  -rrb-  ,  greatest common measure  -lrb-  gcm  -rrb-  ,  or highest common divisor . 
in this article we will denote the greatest common divisor of two integers `` a '' and `` b '' as gcd -lrb-  `` a '' , `` b ''  -rrb-  . 
there are other recipes called `` gazpacho '' ,  such as `` gazpacho manchego '' ,  which is very different from andalusian gazpacho . 
gazpacho has ancient roots . 
the english word is attested from the early 18th century . 
other uses of the term `` gnome '' remain obscure until the early 19th century ,  when it is taken up by authors of romanticist collections of fairy tales and becomes mostly synonymous with the older word `` goblin '' . 
as a figure of 19th-century fairy tales ,  the term gnome became largely synonymous with other terms for `` little people '' by the 20th century ,  such as `` goblin '' ,  `` brownie '' ,  `` kobold '' ,  `` leprechaun '' ,  `` heinzelmännchen '' and other instances of the `` domestic spirit '' type ,  losing its strict association with earth or the underground world . 
a googolplex is the number 10, or equivalently ,  10.
writing the number would take an extreme amount of time: if a person can write two digits per second ,  then writing a googolplex would take about 1.51 years ,  which is about 1.1 times the accepted age of the universe . 
in a separate article ,  page shows that the number of states in a black hole with a mass roughly equivalent to the andromeda galaxy is in the range of a googolplex . 
graphite  -lrb-  carbon  -rrb-  fiber and carbon nanotubes are also used in carbon fiber reinforced plastics ,  and in heat-resistant composites such as reinforced carbon-carbon  -lrb-  rcc  -rrb-  . 
electrolytic aluminium smelting also uses graphitic carbon electrodes . 
natural graphite in steelmaking mostly goes into raising the carbon content in molten steel ,  and can also be used to lubricate the dies used to extrude hot steel . 
the conductive properties of powdered graphite allow its use as pressure sensor in carbon microphones . 
in 1893, charles street of le carbone discovered a process for making artificial graphite . 
in this context ,  the term ``  -lrb-  100%  -rrb-  graphite '' is often loosely used to refer to a pure mixture of carbon reinforcement and resin ,  while the term `` composite '' is used for composite materials with additional ingredients . 
pyrolytic graphite and pyrolytic carbon are often confused but are very different materials . 
almost all of the above refractories are used to make steel and account for 75% of refractory consumption; the rest is used by a variety of industries ,  such as cement . 
the alpha form can be converted to the beta form through mechanical treatment and the beta form reverts to the alpha form when it is heated above 1300 °c . 
the lithium-ion battery utilizes roughly twice the amount of graphite as lithium carbonate . 
its high conductivity makes it useful in electronic products such as electrodes ,  batteries ,  and solar panels . 
the powder is made by heating powdered petroleum coke above the temperature of graphitization ,  sometimes with minor modifications . 
graphite  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  archaically referred to as plumbago ,  is a crystalline form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a hexagonal structure . 
it was also used in tiles on early f-117 nighthawk stealth strike fighters . 
the term `` black lead '' usually refers to a powdered or processed graphite ,  matte black in color . 
graphite used for nuclear reactors is often referred to as nuclear graphite . 
while crucibles have a high graphite content ,  the volume of crucibles used and then recycled is very small . 
the use of graphite as a refractory material began before 1900 with the graphite crucible used to hold molten metal; this is now a minor part of refractories . 
the acheson graphite co .  was formed in 1899.
trudeau was born in new york city ,  the son of jean douglas  -lrb-  née moore  -rrb-  and francis berger trudeau jr . 
there were several types of guilds ,  including the two main categories of merchant guilds and craft guilds but also the frith guild and religious guild . 
a type of guild was known in roman times . 
guilds are sometimes said to be the precursors of modern trade unions . 
not all city economies were controlled by guilds; some cities were `` free . `` 
guild members found guilty of cheating on the public would be fined or banned from the guild . 
in florence ,  italy ,  there were seven to twelve `` greater guilds '' and fourteen `` lesser guilds '' the most important of the greater guilds was that for judges and notaries ,  who handled the legal business of all the other guilds and often served as an arbitrator of disputes . 
the guild was made up by experienced and confirmed experts in their field of handicraft . 
in catalan towns ,  specially at barcelona ,  guilds or `` gremis '' were a basic agent in the society: a shoemakers' guild is recorded in 1208.
in the german city of augsburg craft guilds are being mentioned in the towncharter of 1156.
the guild system survived the emergence of early capitalists ,  which began to divide guild members into `` haves '' and dependent `` have-nots '' . 
in france ,  guilds were called `` corps de métiers '' . 
the roman guilds failed to survive the collapse of the roman empire . 
the guild system became a target of much criticism towards the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th century . 
 ''ign '' has given the game a rating 7 out of 10 for its re-release on the wii virtual console and has hailed it as one of the greatest classic side-scrolling shooter games . 
when the desired power-up is highlighted ,  the player can obtain it by pressing the power-up button ,  returning the menu to its initial state in which no power-up is highlighted . 
the original arcade game and some of the home versions has also been included in various compilation releases and are available for download in services such as the virtual console and playstation network . 
the western cover art for the nes version claimed that it had sold one million copies in japan . 
gms may choose to run a game based on a published game world ,  with the maps and history already in place; such game worlds often have pre-written adventures . 
a gamemaster  -lrb-  gm; also known as game master ,  game manager ,  game moderator or referee  -rrb-  is a person who acts as an organizer ,  officiant for regarding rules ,  arbitrator ,  and moderator for a multiplayer role-playing game . 
the role of a gamemaster in an online game is to enforce the game's rules and provide general customer service . 
note that a few games ,  notably `` neverwinter nights '' and ``  '' ,  are video game adaptations of tabletop role-playing games that are played online with one player acting as a traditional gamemaster . 
 ''battleground europe '' ,  a medium-sized mmofps has a team of `` game moderators '' ,  anonymous volunteers who moderate the game . 
also ,  unlike gamemasters in traditional role-playing games ,  gamemasters for online games in some cases are paid employees . 
gamemastering ,  sometimes referred to as orchestration is used in pervasive games to guide players along a trajectory desired by the game author . 
in a role-playing game context ,  it was first used by dave arneson while developing his game `` blackmoor '' in 1971, although the first usage in print may have been `` chivalry & sorcery '' . 
in addition to enhancing gene targeting ,  engineered nucleases can be used to introduce mutations at endogenous genes that generate a gene knockout . 
gene therapy is the genetic engineering of humans ,  generally by replacing defective genes with effective ones . 
this is much faster ,  can be used to insert any genes from any organism  -lrb-  even ones from different domains  -rrb-  and prevents other undesirable genes from also being added . 
the next step is to isolate the candidate gene . 
there are three main concerns over the safety of genetically modified food: whether they may provoke an allergic reaction; whether the genes could transfer from the food into human cells; and whether the genes not approved for human consumption could outcross to other crops . 
the first commercialised gm food was a tomato that had delayed ripening ,  increasing its shelf life . 
further testing using pcr ,  southern hybridization ,  and dna sequencing is conducted to confirm that an organism contains the new gene . 
in canada and the us labeling of gm food is voluntary ,  while in europe all food  -lrb-  including processed food  -rrb-  or feed which contains greater than 0.9% of approved gmos must be labelled . 
there are a number of techniques available for inserting the gene into the host genome . 
organisms can have their cells transformed with a gene coding for a useful protein ,  such as an enzyme ,  so that they will overexpress the desired protein . 
genetic engineering is also used to create animal models of human diseases . 
in 1972, paul berg created the first recombinant dna molecules by combining dna from the monkey virus sv40 with that of the lambda virus . 
the plasmid is replicated when the bacteria divide ,  ensuring unlimited copies of the gene are available . 
before the gene is inserted into the target organism it must be combined with other genetic elements . 
genetic engineering could potentially fix severe genetic disorders in humans by replacing the defective gene with a functioning one . 
gene flow between gm crops and compatible plants ,  along with increased use of selective herbicides ,  can increase the risk of `` superweeds '' developing . 
the dna can be introduced directly into the host organism or into a cell that is then fused or hybridised with the host . 
the insulin produced by bacteria was approved for release by the food and drug administration  -lrb-  fda  -rrb-  in 1982.
it thus seems highly likely that lincoln was in the prodromal period of smallpox when he delivered the gettysburg address . 
the gettysburg address is a speech that u . s .  president abraham lincoln delivered during the american civil war at the dedication of the soldiers' national cemetery in gettysburg ,  pennsylvania ,  on the afternoon of thursday ,  november 19, 1863, four and a half months after the union armies defeated those of the confederacy at the battle of gettysburg . 
they thereby deduced that the codon uuu specified the amino acid phenylalanine . 
the code defines how sequences of nucleotide triplets ,  called `` codons '' ,  specify which amino acid will be added next during protein synthesis . 
while the `` genetic code '' determines a protein's amino acid sequence ,  other genomic regions determine when and where these proteins are produced according to various `` gene regulatory codes '' . 
protein-coding frames are defined by a start codon ,  usually the first aug  -lrb-  atg  -rrb-  codon in the rna  -lrb-  dna  -rrb-  sequence . 
in a broad academic audience ,  the concept of the evolution of the genetic code from the original and ambiguous genetic code to a well-defined  -lrb-  `` frozen ''  -rrb-  code with the repertoire of 20  -lrb-  +2 -rrb- canonical amino acids is widely accepted . 
extending this work ,  nirenberg and philip leder revealed the code's triplet nature and deciphered its codons . 
the golden ratio is also called the golden mean or golden section  -lrb-  latin: `` sectio aurea ''  -rrb-  . 
in mathematics ,  two quantities are in the golden ratio if their ratio is the same as the ratio of their sum to the larger of the two quantities . 
most dna virus genomes are composed of a single ,  linear molecule of dna ,  but some are made up of a circular dna molecule . 
prokaryotes and eukaryotes have dna genomes . 
viral genomes can be composed of either rna or dna . 
eukaryotic genomes are composed of one or more linear dna chromosomes . 
simple eukaryotes such as `` c .  elegans '' and fruit fly ,  have more non-repetitive dna than repetitive dna ,  while the genomes of more complex eukaryotes tend to be composed largely of repetitive dna . 
dna transposons are found in bacteria and make up 3% of the human genome and 12% of the genome of the roundworm `` c .  elegans '' . 
genome size is the total number of dna base pairs in one copy of a haploid genome . 
in addition to the chromosomes in the nucleus ,  organelles such as the chloroplasts and mitochondria have their own dna . 
in mammals and plants ,  the majority of the genome is composed of repetitive dna . 
there are two categories of repetitive dna in the genome: tandem repeats and interspersed repeats . 
dna sequences that carry the instructions to make proteins are coding sequences . 
dna transposons encode a transposase enzyme between inverted terminal repeats . 
this phenomenon also indicates the mighty influence coming from repetitive dna on the genomes . 
 ''serratia symbiotica ''  -rrb-  have reduced genomes and a high fraction of pseudogenes: only ~40% of their dna encodes proteins . 
a major step toward that goal was the completion in 2007 of the full genome of james d .  watson ,  one of the co-discoverers of the structure of dna . 
while there were a number of precursors to gaia theory ,  the first scientific form of this idea was proposed as the gaia hypothesis by james lovelock ,  a uk chemist ,  in 1970.
the gaia hypothesis is sometimes viewed from significantly different philosophical perspectives . 
the dymaxion map of the earth he created ,  others began to ask if there was a way to make the gaia theory scientifically sound . 
buckminster fuller has been credited as the first to incorporate scientific ideas into a gaia theory ,  which he did with his dymaxion map of the earth . 
some radical political environmentalists who accept some form of the gaia theory call themselves gaians . 
gaia philosophy  -lrb-  named after gaia ,  greek goddess of the earth  -rrb-  is a broadly inclusive term for related concepts that living organisms on a planet will affect the nature of their environment in order to make the environment more suitable for life . 
this suggests that our understanding of gaia can be used to create a better society and to design a better political system . 
many new age authors have written books which mix new age teachings with gaia philosophy . 
the first scientifically rigorous theory was the gaia hypothesis by james lovelock ,  a uk chemist . 
lewis thomas believed that earth should be viewed as a single cell; he derived this view from johannes kepler's view of earth as a single round organism . 
 ''see arcology for more on this 'active' view . `` 
a social science view of gaia theory is the role of humans as a keystone species who may be able to accomplish global homeostasis . 
such an effect has been cited about titan
strengthening of the greenhouse effect through human activities is known as the enhanced  -lrb-  or anthropogenic  -rrb-  greenhouse effect . 
the term `` greenhouse effect '' arose from a faulty analogy with the effect of sunlight passing through glass and warming a greenhouse . 
the existence of the greenhouse effect was argued for by joseph fourier in 1824.
earth’s natural greenhouse effect is critical to supporting life . 
by their percentage contribution to the greenhouse effect on earth the four major gases are:
 ''greenhouse effect '' is actually a misnomer since heating in the usual greenhouse is due to the reduction of convection ,  while the `` greenhouse effect '' works by preventing absorbed heat from leaving the structure through radiative transfer . 
the anti-greenhouse effect is a mechanism similar and symmetrical to the greenhouse effect: greenhouse effect is about atmosphere letting radiation in ,  while not letting thermal radiation out ,  which warms the body surface; anti-greenhouse effect is about atmosphere not letting radiation in ,  while letting thermal radiation out ,  which lowers the equilibrium surface temperature . 
in mathematics ,  given two groups ,   -lrb-  `` g '' ,  ∗  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  `` h '' ,  ·  -rrb-  ,  a group homomorphism from  -lrb-  `` g '' ,  ∗  -rrb-  to  -lrb-  `` h '' ,  ·  -rrb-  is a function `` h '' : `` g '' → `` h '' such that for all `` u '' and `` v '' in `` g '' it holds that
conversely ,  given a group  -lrb-  g ,  ∗  -rrb-  ,  a set h ,  and a bijection formula_3, we can make h a group  -lrb-  h ,  formula_1 -rrb- by defining
given two groups  -lrb-  g ,  ∗  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  h ,  formula_1 -rrb- ,  a `` group isomorphism '' from  -lrb-  g ,  ∗  -rrb-  to  -lrb-  h ,  formula_1 -rrb- is a bijective group homomorphism from g to h .  spelled out ,  this means that a group isomorphism is a bijective function formula_3 such that for all u and v in g it holds that
a geographic information system  -lrb-  gis  -rrb-  is a system designed to capture ,  store ,  manipulate ,  analyze ,  manage ,  and present spatial or geographic data . 
the first known use of the term `` geographic information system '' was by roger tomlinson in the year 1968 in his paper `` a geographic information system for regional planning '' . 
in 1986, mapping display and analysis system  -lrb-  midas  -rrb-  ,  the first desktop gis product was released for the dos operating system . 
as a result of this ,  tomlinson has become known as the `` father of gis '' ,  particularly for his use of overlays in promoting the spatial analysis of convergent geographic data . 
by the late 1970s two public domain gis systems  -lrb-  moss and grass gis  -rrb-  were in development ,  and by the early 1980s ,  m&s computing  -lrb-  later intergraph  -rrb-  along with bentley systems incorporated for the cad platform ,  environmental systems research institute  -lrb-  esri  -rrb-  ,  caris  -lrb-  computer aided resource information system  -rrb-  ,  mapinfo corporation and erdas  -lrb-  earth resource data analysis system  -rrb-  emerged as commercial vendors of gis software ,  successfully incorporating many of the cgis features ,  combining the first generation approach to separation of spatial and attribute information with a second generation approach to organizing attribute data into database structures . 
refer to the glossary of graph theory for basic definitions in graph theory . 
definitions in graph theory vary . 
gumby is an american clay animation franchise ,  centered on a green clay humanoid character created and modeled by art clokey . 
on august 4, 2006, the center for puppetry arts in atlanta opened `` art clokey's gumby: the first fifty years '' . 
on october 12, 2011, google paid tribute to art clokey’s 90th birthday with a doodle featuring clay balls transforming into characters from the show . 
the show also included new characters ,  such as gumby's little sister minga ,  a mastodon named denali and a chicken named tilly . 
gumby was created by art clokey in the early 1950s after he finished film school at the university of southern california  -lrb-  usc  -rrb-  . 
clokey's first animated film was a 1953 three-minute student film called `` gumbasia '' ,  a surreal montage of moving and expanding lumps of clay set to music in a parody of disney's `` fantasia '' . 
the show remained part of the channel's programming until the end of the year . 
in addition to the new episodes ,  the 1950s and 1960s shorts were included in the series ,  but with new audio . 
clokey's pilot episode was seen by nbc executive thomas warren sarnoff ,  who asked clokey to make another one . 
all of rossini's operas have been recorded . 
rossini began composing again . 
in 1828 rossini wrote `` le comte ory '' ,  his only french-language comic opera . 
ironically ,  this was an era in which rossini was not to participate . 
of greater consequence for the history of opera was rossini's ability to forward this technique in the genre of opera seria . 
since 1980 the `` fondazione '' has supported the annual rossini opera festival in pesaro . 
the reasons for rossini's withdrawal from opera have been continually discussed during and since his lifetime . 
rossini's operas for the teatro san carlo were substantial ,  mainly serious pieces . 
stendhal ,  who published a colourful biography of rossini in 1824, wrote:
the first of the four operas rossini wrote to french librettos were `` le siège de corinthe ''  -lrb-  1826 -rrb- and `` moïse et pharaon ''  -lrb-  1827 -rrb- . 
by the early 1820s rossini was beginning to tire of naples . 
not until rossini returned to paris in 1855 were there signs of a revival of his musical spirits . 
rossini's contract required him to provide five new works for the opéra over 10 years . 
rossini's work in naples contributed to this stylistic development . 
gossett claims that it is `` from the time of `` tancredi '' that the caballetta  .  .  .  becomes the obligatory closing section of each musical unit in the operas of rossini and his contemporaries . `` 
add to that what verdi called the opera's `` abundance of true musical ideas '' ,  and the reasons for the work's longer-term emergence as rossini's most popular `` opera buffa '' are not hard to find . 
rossini's first opera to be staged was `` la cambiale di matrimonio '' ,  a one-act comedy ,  given at the small teatro san moisè in november 1810.
rossini maintained his links with bologna ,  where in 1811 he had a success directing haydn's `` the seasons '' ,  and a failure with his first full-length opera ,  `` l'equivoco stravagante '' . 
if rossini's principal legacy to italian opera was in vocal forms and dramatic structure for serious opera ,  his legacy to french opera was to provide a bridge from opera buffa to the development of `` opéra comique ''  -lrb-  and thence ,  via jacques offenbach's `` opéras bouffes '' to the genre of operetta  -rrb-  . 
in november 1823 rossini and colbran set off for london ,  where a lucrative contract had been offered . 
the new opera was received with tremendous enthusiasm ,  as was the neapolitan premiere of `` l'italiana in algeri '' ,  and rossini's position in naples was assured . 
he recalled that although conversation was hampered by beethoven's deafness and rossini's ignorance of german ,  beethoven made it plain that he thought rossini's talents were not for serious opera ,  and that above all he should write more `` barbers '' . 
gossett observes that although an account of rossini's life between 1830 and 1855 makes depressing reading ,  it is `` no exaggeration to say that ,  in paris ,  rossini returned to life '' . 
rossini's status amongst his contemporary italian composers is indicated by the `` messa per rossini '' ,  a project initiated by verdi within a few days of rossini's death ,  which he and a dozen other composers created in collaboration . 
gossett notes that rossini `` was from the outset a consummate composer of overtures . `` 
the term `` gobbledygook '' has a long history of usage in politics . 
gibberish ,  alternatively jibberish ,  jibber-jabber ,  or gobbledygook ,  is language that is  -lrb-  or appears to be  -rrb-  nonsense . 
the terms `` geab '' and `` geabaire '' are certainly irish words ,  but the phrase `` geab ar ais '' does not exist ,  and the word gibberish exists as a loan-word in irish as `` gibiris '' . 
the term `` gibberish '' was first seen in english in the early 16th century . 
the term `` gobbledygook '' was coined by maury maverick ,  a former congressman from texas and former mayor of san antonio . 
agricola was recalled from britain in 85, after an unusually long tenure as governor . 
agricola also expanded roman rule north into caledonia  -lrb-  modern scotland  -rrb-  . 
in 81, agricola `` crossed in the first ship '' and defeated peoples unknown to the romans until then . 
another son was born to agricola this year ,  but died before his first birthday . 
agricola began his military career in britain ,  serving under governor gaius suetonius paulinus . 
gnaeus julius agricola  -lrb-  ; 13 june 40 – 23 august 93 -rrb- was a gallo-roman general responsible for much of the roman conquest of britain . 
when his command ended in 73, agricola was enrolled as a patrician and appointed to govern gallia aquitania . 
satisfied with his victory ,  agricola extracted hostages from the caledonian tribes . 
guanosine was also used to make regadenoson . 
gödel's ontological proof is a formal argument by the mathematician kurt gödel  -lrb-  1906–1978 -rrb- for god's existence . 
gödel proceeds to prove that a godlike object exists in `` every '' possible world . 
to this end ,  he defines `` essences '': if `` x '' is an object in some world ,  then a property `` φ '' is said to be an essence of `` x '' if `` φ '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  is true in that world and if `` φ '' necessarily entails all other properties that `` x '' has in that world  -lrb-  definition 2 -rrb- . 
the first version of the ontological proof in gödel's papers is dated `` around 1941 '' . 
gp has won many awards in this competition over the years . 
today there are nineteen gp books including several for students . 
the fitness criterion applied to the meta gp would simply be one of efficiency . 
in 1996 koza started the annual genetic programming conference which was followed in 1998 by the annual eurogp conference ,  and the first book in a gp series edited by koza . 
gp evolves computer programs ,  traditionally represented in memory as tree structures . 
koza followed this with 205 publications on “genetic programming”  -lrb-  gp  -rrb-  ,  name coined by david goldberg ,  also a phd student of john holland . 
klimt's younger brothers were ernst klimt and georg klimt . 
among the artists of the vienna secession ,  klimt was the most influenced by japanese art and its methods . 
groucho marx was ,  and remains ,  the most recognizable and well-known of the marx brothers . 
hope started by saying `` why ,  groucho marx ! 
groucho marx made 26 movies ,  13 of them with his brothers chico and harpo . 
groucho responded ,  `` nor a director out of wood . `` 
groucho was allowed to join the symphonietta . 
in 1965, groucho starred in a weekly show for british tv titled `` groucho '' ,  broadcast on itv . 
actor frank ferrante has performed as groucho marx on stage for more than two decades . 
 ''marx & lennon: the parallel sayings '' was published in 2005; the book records similar sayings between groucho marx and john lennon . 
marx also worked as a radio comedian and show host . 
in 1982, gabe kaplan filmed a version of the same show ,  entitled `` groucho '' . 
groucho's three marriages ended in divorce . 
irving berlin quipped ,  `` the world would not be in such a snarl ,  had marx been groucho instead of karl '' . 
groucho played the tubes for me ,  which brings me to tears . `` 
in 1964, marx starred in the `` time for elizabeth '' episode of `` bob hope presents the chrysler theatre '' ,  a truncated version of a play that groucho marx and norman krasna wrote in 1948.
he made 13 feature films with his siblings the marx brothers ,  of whom he was the third-born . 
groucho made serious efforts to learn to play the guitar . 
for the desoto ads ,  marx would sometimes say: `` tell 'em groucho sent you '' ,  or `` try a desoto before you decide '' . 
julius henry `` groucho '' marx  -lrb-  ; october 2, 1890 – august 19, 1977 -rrb- was an american comedian ,  writer ,  stage ,  film ,  radio ,  and television star . 
as the marx brothers ,  he and his brothers starred in a series of popular stage shows and movies . 
the game boy advance  -lrb-  gba  -rrb-  is a 32-bit handheld video game console developed ,  manufactured and marketed by nintendo as the successor to the game boy color . 
an accessory for the gamecube ,  known as the game boy player ,  was released in 2003 as the successor to the super game boy peripheral for the super nintendo entertainment system . 
it featured a warning message that was refuse to play on classic game boy . 
game boy advance games are compatible with the nintendo ds and nintendo ds lite handheld consoles ,  which feature a cartridge slot at the bottom . 
the technical specifications of the original game boy advance are ,  as provided by nintendo: backward compatibility for game boy and game boy color games is provided by a custom 4.194/8.388 mhz z80-based coprocessor  -lrb-  game boy advance software can use the audio tone generators to supplement the primary sound system  -rrb-  ,  while a link port at the top of the unit allows it to be connected to other devices using a game link cable or gamecube link cable . 
a search may leave traces both on a computer used to make the search ,  and in records kept by the search provider . 
various search engines provide encrypted web search facilities . 
searches made by search engines ,  including google ,  leave traces . 
until may 2013, google search had offered a feature to translate search queries into other languages . 
google search ,  also referred to as google web search or simply google ,  is a web search engine developed by google llc . 
in 2008, google started to give users autocompleted search suggestions in a list below the search bar while typing . 
some search engines ,  located in jurisdictions where it is not illegal ,  make a feature of not storing user search information . 
in 2013, google significantly upgraded its search algorithm with `` hummingbird '' . 
 ''universal search '' was launched by google on may 16, 2007 as an idea that merged the results from different kinds of search types into one . 
in may 2016, 20% of search queries on mobile devices were done through voice . 
google search consists of a series of localized websites . 
it is the most used search engine on the world wide web across all platforms ,  with 92.74% market share as of october 2018, handling more than 3.5 billion searches each day . 
in addition to its tool for searching webpages ,  google also provides services for searching images ,  usenet newsgroups ,  news websites ,  videos ,  searching by locality ,  maps ,  and items for sale online . 
marissa mayer ,  then-vice president of search products and user experience ,  described the goal of universal search as `` we're attempting to break down the walls that traditionally separated our various search properties and integrate the vast amounts of information available into one simple set of search results . 
in may 2012 google introduced a knowledge graph semantic search feature in the u . s . 
in september 2017, the google search app on ios was updated to feature the same functionality . 
google search accepts queries as normal text ,  as well as individual keywords . 
in june 2017, google expanded its search results to cover available job listings . 
analysis of the frequency of search terms may indicate economic ,  social and health trends . 
google offers a `` google search '' mobile app for android and ios devices . 
in 2012, google changed its search indexing tools to demote sites that had been accused of piracy . 
in july 2017, google removed instant results ,  due to a growing number of searches on mobile devices ,  where interaction with search ,  as well as screen sizes ,  differ significantly from a computer . 
google search console helps to check for websites that use duplicate or copyright content . 
some high iq individuals join a high iq society . 
despite the presence of scholars in many subjects throughout history ,  many geniuses have shown high achievements in only a single kind of activity . 
a number of people commonly regarded as geniuses have been or were diagnosed with mental disorders ,  for example vincent van gogh ,  virginia woolf ,  john forbes nash jr .  ,  and ernest hemingway . 
galton went on to develop the field of eugenics . 
galton was a pioneer in investigating both eminent human achievement and mental testing . 
galton is regarded as the founder of psychometry . 
the terman longitudinal study in california eventually provided historical evidence regarding how genius is related to iq scores . 
a `` raisin '' is any dried grape . 
commercially cultivated grapes can usually be classified as either table or wine grapes ,  based on their intended method of consumption: eaten raw  -lrb-  table grapes  -rrb-  or used to make wine  -lrb-  wine grapes  -rrb-  . 
grapes can be eaten fresh as table grapes or they can be used for making wine ,  jam ,  juice ,  jelly ,  grape seed extract ,  raisins ,  vinegar ,  and grape seed oil . 
grape juice is obtained from crushing and blending grapes into a liquid . 
red wine may offer health benefits more so than white because potentially beneficial compounds are present in grape skin ,  and only red wine is fermented with skins . 
thus it has been proposed that syrah red wine is named after shiraz ,  a city in persia where the grape was used to make shirazi wine . 
wines produced from muscadine grapes may contain more than 40 mg/l ,  an exceptional phenolic content . 
in christian art ,  grapes often represent the blood of christ ,  such as the grape leaves in caravaggio's `` john the baptist '' . 
by comparison ,  commercially produced `` 100% grape juice '' ,  made from table grapes ,  is usually around 15% sugar by weight . 
a `` sultana '' was originally a raisin made from sultana grapes of turkish origin  -lrb-  known as thompson seedless in the united states  -rrb-  ,  but the word is now applied to raisins made from either white grapes or red grapes that are bleached to resemble the traditional sultana . 
the flavonols syringetin ,  syringetin 3-o-galactoside ,  laricitrin and laricitrin 3-o-galactoside are also found in purple grape but absent in white grape . 
fresh grape skin contains about 50 to 100 micrograms of resveratrol per gram . 
a `` currant '' is a dried zante black corinth grape ,  the name being a corruption of the french `` raisin de corinthe ''  -lrb-  corinth grape  -rrb-  . 
some types of recessive gene disorders confer an advantage in certain environments when only one copy of the gene is present . 
gene therapy refers to a form of treatment where a healthy gene is introduced to a patient . 
this type of inheritance ,  also known as maternal inheritance ,  applies to genes encoded by mitochondrial dna . 
only one mutated copy of the gene will be necessary for a person to be affected by an autosomal dominant disorder . 
genetic disorders may be hereditary ,  meaning that they are passed down from the parents' genes . 
x-linked recessive conditions are also caused by mutations in genes on the x chromosome . 
a single-gene  -lrb-  or monogenic  -rrb-  disorder is the result of a single mutated gene . 
two copies of the gene must be mutated for a person to be affected by an autosomal recessive disorder . 
guanine ,  along with adenine and cytosine ,  is present in both dna and rna ,  whereas thymine is usually seen only in dna ,  and uracil only in rna . 
guanine  -lrb-  ; or g ,  gua  -rrb-  is one of the four main nucleobases found in the nucleic acids dna and rna ,  the others being adenine ,  cytosine ,  and thymine  -lrb-  uracil in rna  -rrb-  . 
it binds to cytosine through three hydrogen bonds . 
guanine has two tautomeric forms ,  the major keto form  -lrb-  see figures  -rrb-  and rare enol form . 
a fischer-tropsch synthesis can also be used to form guanine ,  along with adenine ,  uracil ,  and thymine . 
the icc's prosecutors claimed that al-bashir `` masterminded and implemented a plan to destroy in substantial part '' three tribal groups in darfur because of their ethnicity . 
genocide is intentional action to destroy a people  -lrb-  usually defined as an ethnic ,  national ,  racial ,  or religious group  -rrb-  in whole or in part . 
if a specific part of the group is emblematic of the overall group ,  or is essential to its survival ,  that may support a finding that the part qualifies as substantial within the meaning of article 4 of the tribunal's statute . `` 
the echr also noted that at the time of its judgement ,  apart from courts in germany  -lrb-  which had taken a broad view  -rrb-  ,  that there had been few cases of genocide under other convention states' municipal laws ,  and that `` there are no reported cases in which the courts of these states have defined the type of group destruction the perpetrator must have intended in order to be found guilty of genocide . `` 
the definition upholds the centrality of intent ,  the multidimensional understanding of destroy ,  broadens the definition of group identity beyond that of the 1948 definition yet argues that a substantial part of a group has to be destroyed before it can be classified as genocide . 
the exclusion of social and political groups as targets of genocide in the cppcg legal definition has been criticized by some historians and sociologists ,  for example m .  hassan kakar in his book `` the soviet invasion and the afghan response ,  1979–1982 '' argues that the international definition of genocide is too restricted ,  and that it should include political groups or any group so defined by the perpetrator and quotes chalk and jonassohn: `` genocide is a form of one-sided mass killing in which a state or other authority intends to destroy a group ,  as that group and membership in it are defined by the perpetrator . `` 
the united nations genocide convention ,  which was established in 1948, defines genocide as `` acts committed with intent to destroy ,  in whole or in part ,  a national ,  ethnic ,  racial or religious group '' . 
the nazi leaders who were prosecuted shortly after world war ii for taking part in the holocaust ,  and other mass murders ,  were charged under existing international laws ,  such as crimes against humanity ,  as the crime of `` genocide' was not formally defined until the 1948 `` convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide ''  -lrb-  cppcg  -rrb-  . 
international offences such as the crimes against humanity and war crimes that have been committed in darfur may be no less serious and heinous than genocide . `` 
in 2007, the european court of human rights  -lrb-  echr  -rrb-  noted in its judgement on `` jorgic v .  germany '' case that ,  in 1992, the majority of legal scholars took the narrow view that `` intent to destroy '' in the cppcg meant the intended physical-biological destruction of the protected group ,  and that this was still the majority opinion . 
but the echr also noted that a minority took a broader view ,  and did not consider biological-physical destruction to be necessary ,  as the intent to destroy a national ,  racial ,  religious or ethnic group was enough to qualify as genocide . 
on 14 july 2008, prosecutors at the international criminal court  -lrb-  icc  -rrb-  ,  filed ten charges of war crimes against sudan's president omar al-bashir: three counts of genocide ,  five of crimes against humanity and two of murder . 
a further eight men ,  former members of the bosnian serb security forces were found guilty of genocide by the state court of bosnia and herzegovina  -lrb-  see list of bosnian genocide prosecutions  -rrb-  . 
as of his fourth report to the security council ,  the prosecutor has found `` reasonable grounds to believe that the individuals identified in the un security council resolution 1593 have committed crimes against humanity and war crimes , ``  but did not find sufficient evidence to prosecute for genocide . 
in turn some states such as ethiopia ,  france ,  and spain include political groups as legitimate genocide victims in their anti-genocide laws . 
in april 2007, the judges of the icc issued arrest warrants against the former minister of state for the interior ,  ahmad harun ,  and a militia janjaweed leader ,  ali kushayb ,  for crimes against humanity and war crimes . 
the term `` bosnian genocide '' is used to refer either to the killings committed by serb forces in srebrenica in 1995, or to ethnic cleansing that took place elsewhere during the 1992–1995 bosnian war . 
barbara harff and ted gurr defined genocide as `` the promotion and execution of policies by a state or its agents which result in the deaths of a substantial portion of a group  .  .  .  when the victimized groups are defined primarily in terms of their communal characteristics ,  i . e .  ,  ethnicity ,  religion or nationality '' . 
in 2008 the un security council adopted resolution 1820, which noted that `` rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute war crimes ,  crimes against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide '' . 
un security council resolution 1674, adopted by the united nations security council on 28 april 2006, `` reaffirms the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 world summit outcome document regarding the responsibility to protect populations from genocide ,  war crimes ,  ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity '' . 
in 1948, the un general assembly adopted the `` convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide ''  -lrb-  cppcg  -rrb-  which defined the crime of genocide for the first time . 
roman expansion along the rhine and danube rivers resulted in the incorporation of many indigenous celtic societies into the roman empire . 
the germanic peoples of the roman era are often lumped with the other agents of the barbarian invasions ,  the alans and the huns ,  as opposed to the civilized `` roman '' identity of the holy roman empire . 
for an analysis of germanic tactics versus the roman empire see: roman infantry versus gallic and the germanic tribes
essentially - roman civilization was overrun by these variants of germanic peoples during the 5th century . 
during the 4th and 5th centuries ce ,  visigoths and vandals militarily organized themselves to sufficiently challenge and sack rome in ce 410 and again in ce 455.
by the middle of the 5th century ,  the picts ,  scots and anglo-saxons began to dominate the once roman britannia . 
by 29 bce ,  they were subdued by the romans and those that remained began merging with various tribes of goths into the second century ce . 
the westward expansion of the huns into europe in the late 4th century ce pushed many germanic tribes into the western roman empire . 
during the fourth and fifth centuries ce roman emperors did their best to stave off the advance of the germanic tribes . 
some of the germanic tribes are frequently credited in popular depictions of the decline of the roman empire in the late 5th century . 
three roman legions were ambushed and destroyed by an alliance of germanic tribes headed by arminius at the battle of the teutoburg forest in 9 ce ,  the roman empire made no further concentrated attempts at conquering germania beyond the rhine . 
around ce 238, the goths make their first clear impact on roman history ,  having moved from the baltic sea to the area of the modern ukraine . 
roman britannia was contemporaneously under constant threat during the 3rd and 4th centuries ce by northern picts as well as the germanic saxons who sailed from north of gaul to the eastern coast of the british isles . 
sometime during the 4th or 5th century ce ,  the bastarnae were defeated by the huns ,  ending their regional domination . 
the 4th century gothic tervingi are most famous among scholars of classical rome and pre-modern europe because the majority of them sought asylum inside the heart of the roman empire in 376 ce . 
from caesar's perspective ,  `` germania '' was a geographical area of land on the east bank of the rhine opposite gaul ,  which caesar left outside direct roman control . 
in great britain ,  germanic people coalesced into the anglo-saxon  -lrb-  or english  -rrb-  people between the 8th and 10th centuries . 
though often defeated by the romans ,  the germanic tribes were remembered in roman records as fierce combatants ,  whose main downfall was that they failed to join together into a collective fighting force under a unified command ,  which allowed the roman empire to employ a `` divide and conquer '' strategy against them . 
strabo however describes the suebi as going through a period where they were pushed back east by the romans ,  in the direction from which they had come:
these earlier invasions were written up by caesar and others as presaging of a northern danger for the roman republic ,  a danger that should be controlled . 
late in the 2nd century bce ,  roman sources recount the migrating germanic people of gaul ,  italy and hispania who invaded areas considered part of imperial rome . 
the initial purpose of the roman military campaigns was to protect trans-alpine gaul from further incursions of the germanic tribes by controlling the area between the rhine and the elbe . 
common elements of germanic society can be deduced both from roman historiography and comparative evidence from the early medieval period . 
in the augustean period there was—as a result of roman activity as far as the elbe river—a first definition of the `` germania magna '' from the rhine and danube rivers in the west and south to the vistula and the baltic sea in the east and north . 
by the middle to late second century ce ,  migrating germanic tribes like the marcomanni and quadi pushed their way to the roman frontier along the danube corridor ,  movements of people which resulted in conflicts known as the marcomannic wars; these conflicts ended in approximately ce 180.
for germanic kings ,  warrior chieftains ,  senators and roman nobility ,  a certain degree of intermarriage was undertaken to strengthen their ties to one another and to the empire ,  making marriage or `` connubium '' as the romans connoted the bond ,  an instrument of politics . 
by ce 500 west germanic speakers had apparently developed a distinct language continuum with extensive loaning from latin  -lrb-  due to their ongoing contact with the romans  -rrb-  ,  whereas the east germanic languages were dying out . 
not only was alaric able to bleed rome ,  he also established a gothic confederation consisting of theruingian and greuthungic peoples ,  and he played the eastern and western roman empires off against one another for his benefit . 
an early germanic people known as the bastarnae were identified by roman authors and were allegedly the first to reach the graeco-roman world ,  living in the area north of the danube's mouth in the black sea . 
climatic change between 850 bce to 760 bce in scandinavia and `` a later and more rapid one around 650 bce might have triggered migrations to the coast of eastern germany and further toward the vistula . 
an intense roman militarization ,  greater than ever before ,  was begun under caesar to deal with the barbarian tribes along the frontier — particularly since he feared that the celtic gauls between rome and the germanic people would not be able to defend themselves . 
use of the modern term german or germanic is the result of 18th and 19th century classical philology which `` envisioned the germanic language group as occupying a central branch of the indo-european language tree . `` 
historical records of the germanic tribes in germania east of the rhine and west of the danube do not begin until quite late in the ancient period ,  so only the period after 100 bce can be examined . 
generally speaking ,  roman legal codes eventually provided the model for many germanic laws and they were fixed in writing along with germanic legal customs . 
defeat on the battlefield at the hands of the romans or other barbarians often meant the end of a ruler and in some cases ,  being absorbed by `` another ,  victorious confederation . `` 
elites within the germanic tribes who learned the roman system and emulated the way they established dominion were able to gain advantages and exploit them accordingly . 
while germanic tribes overran the once western roman provinces ,  they also continued to strive for regional ascendancy closer to rome's center; meanwhile the threat along the periphery from the huns created additional difficulties for the empire . 
according to historian thomas burns ,  major hostilities between the external germanic peoples of the north and rome did not commence in `` earnest '' until the reign of trajan  -lrb-  ce 98—117 -rrb- ,  who used the `` full weight of roman might '' to attack the dacians . 
a version of the norse language was spoken there from the viking invasions until replaced by scots in the 18th and 19th centuries . 
caesar used the term `` germani '' for a very specific tribal grouping in northeastern belgic gaul ,  west of the rhine ,  the largest part of whom were the eburones . 
it is not clear if the first occurrence of the term `` germani '' in roman ethnography is either a reference to germanic or celtic according to modern linguists ,  but it is probable that the clear geographic demarcation appearing between the two peoples may have been made for the sake of political convenience by caesar . 
the territory of modern germany was divided between germanic- and celtic-speaking groups in the last centuries bce . 
the `` germania '' by gaius cornelius tacitus ,  an ethnographic work on the diverse group of germanic tribes outside of the roman empire ,  is our most important source on the germanic peoples of the 1st century . 
these accounts and others from the period often emphasise that the suebi and their hermione kin formed an especially large and mobile nation ,  which at the time were living mainly near the elbe ,  both east and west of it ,  but they were also moving westwards into the lands near the roman frontier . 
this river is the longest in india . 
major left-bank tributaries include gomti river ,  ghaghara river ,  gandaki river ,  and kosi river; major right-bank tributaries include yamuna river ,  son river ,  punpun and damodar . 
the ganges is one of the most sacred rivers to hindus . 
the ganges  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  or ganga  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a trans-boundary river of the indian subcontinent which flows through the nations of india and bangladesh . 
<br> good people should not think this triple-pathed river to be like the thousand other earthly rivers ,  filled with water . 
the name `` ganges '' is used for the river between the confluence of the bhagirathi and alaknanda rivers ,  in the himalayas ,  and the india-bangladesh border ,  near the farakka barrage and the first bifurcation of the river . 
in greco-roman mythology ganges was a river god . 
in november 2008, the ganges ,  alone among india's rivers ,  was declared a `` national river '' ,  facilitating the formation of a national ganga river basin authority that would have greater powers to plan ,  implement and monitor measures aimed at protecting the river . 
around varanasi ,  the river once had an average depth of  ,  but in some places ,  it is now only  . 
only the amazon and congo rivers have a greater average discharge than the combined flow of the ganges ,  the brahmaputra ,  and the surma-meghna river system . 
the other ,  the padma ,  also flows into and through bangladesh ,  and joins the meghna river which ultimately empties into the bay of bengal . 
now flowing east ,  the river meets the tamsa river  -lrb-  also called `` tons ''  -rrb-  ,  which flows north from the kaimur range and contributes an average flow of about  . 
apart from that ,  many ngos have came forward to rejuvenate river ganga . 
for similar reasons ,  sources differ over the size of the river's drainage basin . 
the ganges is a sacred river to hindus along every fragment of its length . 
furthermore ,  the river goddesses ganga and saraswati were both born from brahma's pot ,  containing the celestial waters . 
the major event of the festival is ritual bathing at the banks of the river . 
tehri dam was constructed on bhagirathi river ,  tributary of the ganges . 
the river's most famed fauna is the freshwater ganges river dolphin  -lrb-  `` platanista gangetica gangetica ''  -rrb-  ,  which has been declared india's national aquatic animal . 
70 billion ,  approximately us$1.5 billion  -rrb-  is needed to clean up the river . 
the ganges river dolphin is one of only five true freshwater dolphins in the world . 
there are distinct differences between the different sections of the river basin ,  but cyprinidae is the most diverse throughout . 
kumbh mela is a mass hindu pilgrimage in which hindus gather at the ganges river . 
there is lav khush barrage across the river ganges in kanpur . 
one result is different ways to determine the river's length ,  its discharge ,  and the size of its drainage basin . 
a similar situation is found in the lower gangetic plain ,  which includes the lower brahmaputra river . 
in the vaishnava version of the myth ,  the heavenly waters are now a river called `` vishnupadi ''  -lrb-  `` padi '': skt . 
a recent survey by the world wildlife fund found only 3,000 left in the water catchment of both river systems . 
on the journey back home from the ganges ,  they carry small quantities of river water with them for use in rituals  -lrb-  ganga jal ,  literally water of the ganges  -rrb-  . 
the ganges delta ,  formed mainly by the large ,  sediment-laden flows of the ganges and brahmaputra rivers ,  is the world's largest delta ,  at about  . 
in some cases ,  the length of the ganges is given for its hooghly river distributary ,  which is longer than its main outlet via the meghna river ,  resulting in a total length of about  ,  from the source of the bhagirathi ,  or  ,  from haridwar to the hooghly's mouth . 
in march 2017 the high court of uttarakhand declared the ganges river a legal `` person '' ,  in a move that according to one newspaper ,  `` could help in efforts to clean the pollution-choked rivers . `` 
ganges flood waters along with brahmaputra waters can be supplied to most of its right side basin area along with central and south india by constructing a coastal reservoir to store water on the bay of bengal sea area . 
there ,  the divine waters break up ,  with one stream ,  the alaknanda ,  flowing down one petal into bharatvarsha  -lrb-  india  -rrb-  as the ganges . 
hankin was able to secure corpses of cholera victims in the river and isolated samples of ganga water with a large concentration of the bacillus e coli . 
in december 2009 the world bank agreed to loan india us$1 billion over the next five years to help save the river . 
the main stream of the ganges begins at the confluence of the bhagirathi and alaknanda rivers in the town of devprayag in the garhwal division of the indian state of uttarakhand . 
in early 2010, `` gundam ace '' magazine announced they would serialize a `` new `` gundam wing '' project '' . 
the making of `` gundam wing '' was influenced by `` mobile fighter g gundam '' with the idea of having five main characters . 
several sequel manga ,  occurring between `` gundam wing '' and `` endless waltz '' ,  have also been written: `` blind target '' ,  `` ground zero '' and `` battlefield of pacifists '' . 
 ''gundam wing '' was not the first series in the `` gundam '' franchise to be dubbed and distributed in the u . s .   -lrb-  the compilation movie version of the original `` mobile suit gundam '' ,  as well as the ovas ``  '' and ``  '' ,  preceded it by about two years  -rrb-  ,  but it is well known as the first `` gundam '' series to be aired on american television . 
 ''gundam wing '' characters and mecha have also appeared in several other video game series including `` super robot wars '' ,  `` gundam battle assault '' ,  `` another century's episode '' ,  ``  '' and ``  '' . 
mobile suit gundam wing ,  also known in japan as  ,  is a 1995 japanese mecha anime series directed by masashi ikeda and written by katsuyuki sumizawa . 
vertical began publishing english editions of the manga volumes ,  under the title `` mobile suit gundam wing endless waltz: glory of the losers '' ,  in july 2017.
in september 2010, `` gundam ace '' magazine began serializing a manga titled `` new mobile report gundam wing endless waltz: the glory of losers '' that retells the events of the anime while incorporating facts from `` episode zero '' and the novel `` frozen teardrop '' . 
the completeness theorem says that if a formula is logically valid then there is a finite deduction  -lrb-  a formal proof  -rrb-  of the formula . 
gödel's original proof assumed the hilbert-ackermann proof system . 
there are numerous deductive systems for first-order logic ,  including systems of natural deduction and hilbert-style systems . 
a converse to completeness is soundness ,  the fact that only logically valid formulas are provable in the deductive system . 
if some specific deductive system of first-order logic is sound and complete ,  then it is `` perfect ''  -lrb-  a formula is provable if and only if it is logically valid  -rrb-  ,  thus equivalent to any other deductive system with the same quality  -lrb-  any proof in one system can be converted into the other  -rrb-  . 
the precambrian-cambrian boundary gssp at fortune head ,  newfoundland is a typical gssp . 
as of 2012, 64 of the 101 stages that need a gssp have been formally defined . 
whitlam supported evatt throughout this period . 
gough whitlam died on the morning of 21 october 2014.
whitlam joined the alp minority in the house of representatives . 
whitlam stepped down after losing again at the 1977 election ,  and retired from parliament in 1978.
he had not wanted whitlam as deputy leader ,  and believed labor would have won if ward had been in the position . 
whitlam remains well remembered for the circumstances of his dismissal . 
whitlam trebled lazzarini's majority in a 12 per cent swing to labor . 
by the time of the 1969 party conference ,  whitlam had gained considerable control over the alp . 
more books have been written about whitlam ,  including his own writings ,  than about any other australian prime minister . 
whitlam supported fixed four-year terms for both houses of parliament . 
whitlam trained as a navigator and bomb aimer ,  before serving with no . 
whitlam remains the only australian prime minister to have his commission terminated in that manner . 
fred whitlam was promoted again in 1927, this time to assistant crown solicitor . 
in early 1977 whitlam faced a leadership challenge from bill hayden ,  the final treasurer in the whitlam government ,  and won by a two-vote margin . 
these federal victories ,  in which both whitlam and holt campaigned ,  helped give whitlam the leverage he needed to carry out party reforms . 
with the crisis unresolved ,  kerr decided to dismiss whitlam as prime minister . 
he also said that shackleton was `` culpable '' if he had not passed on whitlam's warning . 
gough whitlam park in earlwood ,  new south wales ,  is named after him . 
whitlam supported latham when he opposed the invasion and occupation of iraq . 
he conferred  -lrb-  against whitlam's advice  -rrb-  with high court chief justice sir garfield barwick ,  who agreed that he had the power to dismiss whitlam . 
in 2003, whitlam's former research assistant mark latham became the leader of the alp . 
by the late 1950s whitlam was seen as a leadership contender once the existing labor leaders exited the scene . 
whitlam was appointed to the parliamentary joint committee on constitutional review in 1956.
the whitlam government abolished the death penalty for federal crimes . 
whitlam told the house of representatives on 21 october ,  whitlam and his ministers repeatedly claimed that the opposition was damaging not only the constitution ,  but the economy as well . 
in honour of whitlam ,  the australian electoral commission created the division of whitlam in the house of representatives in place of the division of throsby ,  with effect from the 2016 election . 
whitlam immediately moved a no confidence motion against the new prime minister in the house ,  which instructed the speaker ,  gordon scholes ,  to advise kerr to reinstate whitlam . 
whitlam enrolled at st paul's college at the university of sydney at the age of 18.
edward gough whitlam  -lrb-  ; 11 july 191621 october 2014 -rrb- was the 21st prime minister of australia ,  serving from 1972 to 1975.
in 1918, fred whitlam was promoted to deputy crown solicitor and transferred to sydney . 
agnarr is told that odin feeds geri and freki while the god himself consumes only wine:
 ''freki '' is also used in a kenning for `` carrion ''  -lrb-  `` freki's meal ''  -rrb-  in a work by þórðr sjáreksson in chapter 58 of `` skáldskaparmál '' . 
in chapter 75 of the `` prose edda '' book `` skáldskaparmál '' a list of names for wargs and wolves is provided that includes both geri and freki . 
the names `` geri '' and `` freki '' have been interpreted as meaning either `` the greedy one '' or `` the ravenous one '' . 
 ''freki '' is also a name applied to the monstrous wolf fenrir in the `` poetic edda '' poem `` völuspá '' . 
ginnungagap appears as the primordial void in the norse creation account . 
in the northern part of ginnungagap lay the intense cold of niflheim ,  and in the southern part lay the equally intense heat of muspelheim . 
the cosmogonic process began when the effulgence of the two met in the middle of ginnungagap . 
 ''leaf green ''  -rrb-  . 
it was also known as guignet green . 
they used green earth colors for backgrounds . 
green is the color between blue and yellow on the visible spectrum . 
it was sometimes called green of verona . 
it also symbolized the sea ,  which was called the `` very green . `` 
cobalt green ,  sometimes known as rinman's green or zinc green ,  is a translucent green pigment made by heating a mixture of cobalt  -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  oxide and zinc oxide . 
a unique green  -lrb-  green appearing neither yellowish nor bluish  -rrb-  is produced on such a device by mixing light from the green primary with some light from the blue primary . 
in the 1980s green became a political symbol ,  the color of the green party in germany and in many other european countries . 
for the ancient egyptians ,  green had very positive associations . 
in thailand ,  the color green is considered auspicious for those born on a wednesday day  -lrb-  light green for those born at night  -rrb-  . 
the turkic languages also have `` jašɨl '' `` green '' or `` yellowish green '' ,  compared to a mongolian word for `` meadow '' . 
green is often associated with jealousy and envy . 
green is also the traditional color of safety and permission; a green light means go ahead ,  a green card permits permanent residence in the united states . 
blue and green together symbolize harmony and balance . 
green the color most commonly associated in europe and the u . s .  with youth . 
on a traditional color wheel ,  based on subtractive color ,  the complementary color to green is considered to be red . 
green can communicate safety to proceed ,  as in traffic lights . 
everywhere it is a battle and antithesis of the most different reds and greens . `` 
however ,  for the troubadours ,  green was the color of growing love ,  and light green clothing was reserved for young women who were not yet married . 
for example ,  the gradient of the function is
the steepness of the slope at that point is given by the magnitude of the gradient vector . 
the gradient  -lrb-  or gradient vector field  -rrb-  of a scalar function is denoted or where  -lrb-  the nabla symbol  -rrb-  denotes the vector differential operator ,  del . 
like the derivative ,  the gradient represents the slope of the tangent of the graph of the function . 
in cylindrical coordinates with a euclidean metric ,  the gradient is given by:
the blue of glacier ice is sometimes misattributed to rayleigh scattering due to bubbles in the ice . 
glaciers form where the accumulation of snow and ice exceeds ablation . 
glacial bodies larger than are called `` ice sheets '' or `` continental glaciers '' . 
glaciers form only on land and are distinct from the much thinner sea ice and lake ice that form on the surface of bodies of water . 
glacial ice is the largest reservoir of fresh water on earth . 
ice caps have an area less than by definition . 
gangleri then is taken to the king of the palace and comes upon three men; high ,  just-as-high ,  and third . 
the second part of the prose edda is called the `` skáldskaparmál '' and the third `` háttatal '' . 
