clusters are larger than groups ,  although there is no sharp dividing line between the two . 
groups have a mass range between those of the very large elliptical galaxies and clusters of galaxies . 
the total mass of the gas is greater than that of the galaxies by roughly a factor of two . 
six star systems are thought to have planetary systems . 
it has been calculated as being around 26 light-years distant from earth . 
grus has several bright stars . 
the constellation's brightest star ,  alpha gruis ,  is also known as alnair and appears as a 1.7-magnitude blue-white star . 
a massive star of spectral type f ,  a or b is thought to be the surviving binary companion to sn 2001ig ,  which was believed to have been a wolf–rayet star . 
keyser and de houtman assigned twelve stars to the constellation . 
there are several naked-eye double stars in grus . 
galba 4; dio 57.19.4 -rrb- . 
as pharaoh of egypt ,  galba adopted the titulary `` autokrator servios galbas ''  -lrb-  “emperor servius galba”  -rrb-  . 
galba minor was never married and had no children . 
she later adopted galba ,  so he took her names ,  remaining lucius livius ocella sulpicius galba until becoming emperor . 
he was the first emperor of the year of the four emperors ,  and the last to be born in the first century bc . 
galba  -lrb-  ; ; 24 december 3 bc – 15 january 69 ad  -rrb-  was roman emperor for seven months from 68 to 69.
galba was the oldest emperor to date when he became emperor and his physical weakness and general apathy led to his being dominated by favorites . 
unable to gain popularity with the people or maintain the support of the praetorian guard ,  galba was killed by otho ,  who rebelled when galba passed him over as his successor . 
all this made the new emperor gravely unpopular . 
it has the symbol g . 
in english ,  the initial `` g '' of `` giga '' can be pronounced  -lrb-  a hard `` g '' as in `` giggle ''  -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-  a soft `` g '' as in `` giant '' ,  like a `` j '' sound ,  which shares its greek root  -rrb-  . 
 ''giga '' is derived from the greek word  ,  meaning `` giant '' . 
this line used a gauge of which stephenson had used before at the killingworth wagonway . 
in his book `` george and robert stephenson '' ,  the author l . t . c . 
stephenson was hired to build the 8-mile  -lrb-  13-km  -rrb-  hetton colliery railway in 1820.
there is a theory that it was stephenson who indirectly gave the name of geordies to the people of the north east of england . 
his rail gauge of  ,  sometimes called `` stephenson gauge '' ,  is the standard gauge by name and by convention for most of the world's railways . 
george stephenson was born on 9 june 1781 in wylam ,  northumberland ,  which is 9 miles  -lrb-  15 km  -rrb-  west of newcastle upon tyne . 
the experience gave stephenson a lifelong distrust of london-based ,  theoretical ,  scientific experts . 
for more examples ,  see  . 
for example ,  in written english  -lrb-  or other languages using the latin alphabet  -rrb-  ,  there are many different physical representations of the lowercase letter `` a '' ,  such as a ,  ɑ ,  etc . 
the concept of graphemes is an abstract one and similar to the notion in computing of a character . 
non-stylistic ligatures ,  however ,  such as  ,  are distinct graphemes ,  as are various letters with distinctive diacritics ,  such as  . 
for example ,  the grapheme corresponding to the abstract concept of `` the arabic numeral one '' has two distinct glyphs  -lrb-  allographs  -rrb-  in the fonts times new roman and helvetica . 
soda-lime glasses account for about 90% of manufactured glass . 
another common glass ingredient is crushed alkali glass or 'cullet' ready for recycled glass . 
for many applications ,  like glass bottles or eyewear ,  polymer glasses  -lrb-  acrylic glass ,  polycarbonate or polyethylene terephthalate  -rrb-  are a lighter alternative than traditional glass . 
glass is also a fairly inert substance . 
glass is in widespread use largely due to the production of glass compositions that are transparent to visible light . 
the types of gel most typically used are agarose and polyacrylamide gels . 
photographs can be taken of gels ,  often using a gel doc system . 
typically resolving gels are made in 6% ,  8% ,  10% ,  12% or 15% . 
gel electrophoresis of large dna or rna is usually done by agarose gel electrophoresis . 
1% gels are common for many applications . `` 
typical starch gel concentrations are 5% to 10% . 
the different sized molecules form distinct bands on the gel . 
denaturing gel electrophoresis is used in the dna and rna banding pattern-based methods temperature gradient gel electrophoresis  -lrb-  tgge  -rrb-  and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  -lrb-  dgge  -rrb-  . 
gel electrophoresis can also be used for separation of nanoparticles . 
changes on the buffer system of the gel can help to further resolve proteins of very small sizes . 
proteins are usually analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  -lrb-  sds-page  -rrb-  ,  by native gel electrophoresis ,  by preparative gel electrophoresis  -lrb-  qpnc-page  -rrb-  ,  or by 2-d electrophoresis . 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  -lrb-  page  -rrb-  is used for separating proteins ranging in size from 5 to 2,000 kda due to the uniform pore size provided by the polyacrylamide gel . 
gel electrophoresis is a method for separation and analysis of macromolecules  -lrb-  dna ,  rna and proteins  -rrb-  and their fragments ,  based on their size and charge . 
agarose gels do not have a uniform pore size ,  but are optimal for electrophoresis of proteins that are larger than 200 kda . 
gel electrophoresis uses a gel as an anticonvective medium or sieving medium during electrophoresis ,  the movement of a charged particle in an electrical field . 
over three seasons ,  he scored 67 goals in 105 league games and won the fa cup while playing for the club . 
he is also the only player to have been the top scorer in england with three clubs  -lrb-  leicester city ,  everton and tottenham hotspur  -rrb-  . 
he finished as top scorer in the first division in the 1989–90 season ,  scoring 24 goals as spurs finished third . 
he finally collected an english trophy when he won the 1991 fa cup final with spurs ,  who beat nottingham forest 2–1.
it was an extensive history of the world cup focusing on the 'golden boots'  -lrb-  top scorers  -rrb-  . 
after winning the golden boot at the 1986 world cup in mexico ,  lineker was signed by barcelona for £2.8 million . 
lineker was capped once by the england b national team ,  playing in a 2–0 home win over new zealand's b team on 13 november 1984.
lineker scored three hat-tricks for everton; at home to birmingham city in a 4–1 league win on 31 august 1985, at home to manchester city in a 4–0 home win on 11 february 1986, and then in the penultimate league game of the season on 3 may 1986, when they kept their title hopes alive with a 6–1 home win over southampton . 
however ,  he became a regular player in 1981–82, scoring 19 goals in all competitions that season . 
in the 1985 close season ,  defending league champions everton signed lineker for £800,000; he scored 40 goals in 57 games for his new team in the 1985–86 season . 
he was the top division's second-highest goalscorer in 1991–92 with 28 goals from 35 games ,  behind ian wright ,  who scored 29 times in 42 games . 
the golgi apparatus ,  also known as the golgi complex ,  golgi body ,  or simply the golgi ,  is an organelle found in most eukaryotic cells . 
the term `` golgi apparatus '' was used in 1910 and first appeared in the scientific literature in 1913, while `` golgi complex '' was introduced in 1956.
it was identified in 1897 by the italian scientist camillo golgi and named after him in 1898.
the structure and function of the golgi apparatus are intimately linked . 
the subcellular localization of the golgi apparatus varies among eukaryotes . 
hopper was born in new york city . 
hopper had tried to enlist in the navy early in world war ii . 
hopper began teaching mathematics at vassar in 1931, and was promoted to associate professor in 1941.
hopper was a goodwill ambassador in her primary activity in this capacity . 
she was married to new york university professor vincent foster hopper  -lrb-  1906–1976 -rrb- from 1930 until their divorce in 1945.
on new year's day 1992, hopper died in her sleep of natural causes at her home in arlington ,  virginia; she was 85 years of age . 
by 1952, hopper had finished her program linker  -lrb-  originally called a compiler  -rrb-  ,  which was written for the a-0 system . 
in 1949, hopper became an employee of the eckert–mauchly computer corporation as a senior mathematician and joined the team developing the univac i .  hopper also served as univac director of automatic programming development for remington rand . 
following a career that spanned more than 42 years ,  admiral hopper took retirement from the navy on august 14, 1986.
when hopper recommended the development of a new programming language that would use entirely english words ,  she `` was told very quickly that she couldn't do this because computers didn't understand english . `` 
the `` gnu manifesto '' begins by outlining the goal of the project gnu ,  which stands for gnu's not unix . 
total gdp can also be broken down into the contribution of each industry or sector of the economy . 
gdp can be determined in three ways ,  all of which should ,  in principle ,  give the same result . 
the history of the concept of gdp should be distinguished from the history of changes in ways of estimating it . 
for hegel ,  reason is but `` speculative '' ,  not `` dialectical '' . 
according to hegel himself ,  his philosophy was consistent with christianity . 
it was written in hegel's hand ,  but thought to have been authored by either hegel ,  schelling ,  hölderlin ,  or an unknown fourth person . 
criticism of hegel has been widespread in the 19th and the 20th centuries . 
critiques of hegel offered from the left hegelians radically diverted hegel's thinking into new directions and eventually came to form a disproportionately large part of the literature on and about hegel . 
hegel's influence was immense both within philosophy and in the other sciences . 
in march 1807, hegel moved to bamberg ,  where niethammer had declined and passed on to hegel an offer to become editor of a newspaper ,  the ``  '' . 
 ''mind '' and `` spirit '' are the common english translations of hegel's use of the german `` geist '' . 
kaufmann and shlomo avineri have criticized popper's theories about hegel . 
the mystical writings of jakob böhme had a strong effect on hegel . 
voegelin argued that hegel should be understood not as a philosopher ,  but as a `` sorcerer '' ,  i . e . 
this concept of hegel as a hermetic thinker was elaborated by glenn alexander magee ,  who argued that interpreting hegel's body of work as an expression of mysticism and hermetic ideas leads to a more accurate understanding of hegel . 
beginning in the 1960s ,  anglo-american hegel scholarship has attempted to challenge the traditional interpretation of hegel as offering a metaphysical system: this has also been the approach of z . 
hegel made the distinction between civil society and state in his `` elements of the philosophy of right '' . 
hegel seemed to have an ambivalent relationship with magic ,  myth and paganism . 
kaufmann has argued that as unlikely as it may sound ,  it is not the case that hegel was unable to write clearly ,  but that hegel felt that `` he must and should not write in the way in which he was gifted '' . 
hegel's contemporary schopenhauer was particularly critical and wrote of hegel's philosophy as `` a pseudo-philosophy paralyzing all mental powers ,  stifling all real thinking '' . 
some historians have spoken of hegel's influence as represented by two opposing camps . 
hegel's state is the final culmination of the embodiment of freedom or right  -lrb-  `` rechte ''  -rrb-  in the `` elements of the philosophy of right . `` 
hegel asserted that in heraclitus he had an antecedent for his logic: ``  .  .  .  there is no proposition of heraclitus which i have not adopted in my logic '' . 
hegel cites a number of fragments of heraclitus in his `` lectures on the history of philosophy '' . 
in the last half of the 20th century ,  hegel's philosophy underwent a major renaissance . 
in fact ,  hegel himself argues in his `` science of logic '' that the german language was particularly conducive to philosophical thought . 
in hegel's early philosophy of nature  -lrb-  draft manuscripts written during his time at the university of jena  -rrb-  ,  hegel's notion of `` geist '' was tightly bound to the notion of `` aether '' ,  from which hegel also derived the concepts of space and time ,  but in his later works  -lrb-  after jena  -rrb-  he did not explicitly use his old notion of `` aether '' anymore . 
in november 1808, hegel was again through niethammer ,  appointed headmaster of a `` gymnasium '' in nuremberg ,  a post he held until 1816.
the swiss theologian hans küng has also advanced contemporary scholarship in hegel studies . 
for hegel ,  the inner movement of reality is the process of god thinking as manifested in the evolution of the universe of nature and thought; that is ,  hegel argued that when fully and properly understood ,  reality is being thought by god as manifested in a person's comprehension of this process in and through philosophy . 
a grid network is a computer network consisting of a number of  -lrb-  computer  -rrb-  systems connected in a grid topology . 
the governor-general of the commonwealth of australia is the representative of the australian monarch ,  currently queen elizabeth ii . 
more recent governors-general in this category include lord casey ,  sir paul hasluck ,  sir john kerr ,  sir ninian stephen ,  bill hayden and sir william deane . 
lord casey was governor of bengal in between his periods of service to the australian parliament . 
all the governors-general until 1965 were british born ,  except for australian-born sir isaac isaacs  -lrb-  1931–1936 -rrb- and sir william mckell  -lrb-  1947–1953 -rrb- . 
various governor-general had previously served as governors of an australian state or colony: lord hopetoun  -lrb-  victoria 1889–1895 -rrb-; lord tennyson  -lrb-  south australia 1899–1902 -rrb-; lord gowrie  -lrb-  south australia 1928–34; and new south wales 1935–1936 -rrb-; major general michael jeffery  -lrb-  western australia 1993–2000 -rrb-; dame quentin bryce  -lrb-  queensland 2003–2008 -rrb- . 
now ,  the queen of australia is generally bound by constitutional convention to accept the advice of the australian prime minister and state premiers about australian and state constitutional matters ,  respectively . 
examples of this have been the flags act  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- ,  the royal styles and titles acts  -lrb-  1953 and 1973 -rrb- ,  and the australia act  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- . 
the prime minister then advises the monarch to appoint their nominee . 
the oaths are usually taken in a ceremony on the floor of the senate and are administered by the chief justice of australia in the presence of the prime minister of australia ,  the speaker of the australian house of representatives ,  and the president of the australian senate . 
the selection of a governor-general is a responsibility for the prime minister of australia ,  who may consult privately with staff or colleagues ,  or with the monarch . 
of the ten australians appointed governor-general since 1965, lord casey ,  sir paul hasluck and bill hayden were former federal parliamentarians; sir john kerr was the chief justice of the supreme court of new south wales; sir ninian stephen and sir william deane were appointed from the bench of the high court; sir zelman cowen was a vice-chancellor of the university of queensland and constitutional lawyer; peter hollingworth was the anglican archbishop of brisbane; and major-general michael jeffery was a retired military officer and former governor of western australia . 
the most important power is found in section 58: `` when a proposed law passed by both houses of parliament is presented to the governor-general for the queen's assent ,  he shall declare  .  .  .  that he assents in the queen's name . `` 
sections 58 to 60 allow the governor-general to withhold assent ,  suggest changes ,  refer to the queen or proclaim that the queen has annulled the legislation . 
in the russian language the word glasnost  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  has several general and specific meanings . 
there were also periodic concerns about the extent of glasnost in court proceedings ,  as restrictions were placed on access to certain cases for the media and for the public
glasnost was taken to mean increased openness and transparency in government institutions and activities in the soviet union  -lrb-  ussr  -rrb-  . 
alexei simonov ,  president of the glasnost defence foundation ,  would define the term as follows: `` glasnost is a tortoise crawling towards freedom of speech '' . 
gorbachev's interpretation of `` glasnost '' can best be summarized ,  translated ,  and explained in english as `` openness '' . 
the ambiguity of `` glasnost '' defines the distinctive five-year period  -lrb-  1986–1991 -rrb- at the end of the ussr's existence . 
it is also the science of measuring and understanding the earth's geometric shape ,  orientation in space ,  and gravity field . 
geodesy  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is the earth science of accurately measuring and understanding the earth's geometric shape ,  orientation in space ,  and gravitational field . 
the geoid is essentially the figure of the earth abstracted from its topographical features . 
in surveying and mapping ,  important fields of application of geodesy ,  two general types of coordinate systems are used in the plane:
for this reason ,  the study of the earth's gravity field is called physical geodesy . 
it varies globally between ±110 m ,  when referred to the grs 80 ellipsoid . 
shorter ,  lighter games in this class are known as gateway games ,  whereas longer ,  heavier games are known as gamers' games . 
a eurogame ,  also called a german-style board game ,  german game ,  or euro-style game ,  is a class of tabletop games that generally have indirect player interaction and abstract physical components . 
they tend to have economic themes rather than military and usually keep all the players in the game until it ends . 
eurogames are sometimes contrasted with american-style board games ,  which generally involve more luck ,  conflict ,  and drama . 
is the simplest gut . 
some guts ,  such as the pati-salam model ,  predict the existence of magnetic monopoles . 
the smallest simple lie group which contains the standard model ,  and upon which the first grand unified theory was based ,  is
due to this difficulty ,  and due to the lack of any observed effect of grand unification so far ,  there is no generally accepted gut model . 
a grand unified theory  -lrb-  gut  -rrb-  is a model in particle physics in which ,  at high energy ,  the three gauge interactions of the standard model that define the electromagnetic ,  weak ,  and strong interactions ,  or forces ,  are merged into a single force . 
by 1969, gt&e was serving ten million telephones . 
that same year ,  gte and contel corporation announced merger plans that would strengthen gte's telecommunications and telephone sectors . 
the following year gte sold the majority of its interest in us sprint to united telecommunications and its interest in fujitsu gte business systems to fujitsu . 
that same year ,  automatic electric and lenkurt were combined as gte network systems . 
gte telenet was later included in the us telecom joint venture . 
bell atlantic acquired gte on june 30, 2000, and named the new entity verizon communications . 
prior to gte's merger with bell atlantic ,  gte also maintained an interactive television service joint-venture called gte mainstreet  -lrb-  sometimes also called mainstreet usa  -rrb-  as well as an interactive entertainment and video game publishing operation ,  gte interactive media . 
in 1982, the company adopted the name gte corporation and formed gte mobilnet incorporated to handle the company's entrance into the new cellular telephone business . 
beginning in 1986, gte spun off several operations to form joint ventures . 
in 1989, gte and at&t formed the joint venture company ag communication systems corporation ,  designed to bring advanced digital technology to gte's switching systems . 
the following year ,  gte transferred its business systems operations in the united states to a new joint venture ,  fujitsu gte business systems ,  inc .  ,  formed with fujitsu limited ,  which retained 80 percent ownership . 
prior to the acquisition with bell atlantic ,  gte owned the following operating companies in the us:
following action or review by more than 20 governmental bodies ,  in march 1991 the merger of gte and contel was approved . 
in the late 1960s ,  gt&e joined in the search for a railroad car automatic car identification system . 
gte retained 51 percent control over the joint venture ,  with at&t pledging to take complete control of the new firm in 15 years . 
of the 21,000 civil aircraft registered in the uk ,  96 percent are engaged in ga operations ,  and annually the ga fleet accounts for between 1.25 and 1.35 million hours flown . 
general aviation  -lrb-  ga  -rrb-  is all civil aviation operations other than scheduled air services and non-scheduled air transport operations for remuneration or hire . 
examples include the federal aviation administration  -lrb-  faa  -rrb-  in the united states ,  the civil aviation authority  -lrb-  caa  -rrb-  in the united kingdom ,  civil aviation authority of zimbabwe  -lrb-  caaz  -rrb-  in zimbabwe ,  the luftfahrt-bundesamt  -lrb-  lba  -rrb-  in germany ,  the bundesamt für zivilluftfahrt in switzerland ,  transport canada in canada ,  the civil aviation safety authority  -lrb-  casa  -rrb-  in australia ,  the directorate general of civil aviation  -lrb-  dgca  -rrb-  in india and iran civil aviation organization in iran . 
the gracchi brothers ,  tiberius and gaius ,  were romans who both served as tribunes in the late 2nd century bc . 
tiberius's land reform commission continued distributing lands ,  albeit much more slowly than tiberius had envisaged ,  as senators were able to eliminate more of the commission's supporters by legal means . 
central to the gracchi reforms was an attempt to address economic distress and its military consequences . 
even liberal senators were agitated by the proposed changes ,  fearing their own lands would be confiscated . 
this meant tiberius had to stand for a second term . 
he also sought support from the second estate ,  those equestrians who had not ascended to become senators . 
the verb `` to gossip '' ,  meaning `` to be a gossip '' ,  first appears in shakespeare . 
over time ,  gossip came to mean talk of others . 
a guitarist  -lrb-  or a guitar player  -rrb-  is a person who plays the guitar . 
some guitarists accompany themselves on the guitar by singing or playing the harmonica . 
these works were often more horrific and violent than the english gothic novel . 
20th-century rock music also had its gothic side . 
the themes of the literary gothic have been translated into other media . 
german gothic fiction is usually described by the term `` schauerroman ''  -lrb-  `` shudder novel ''  -rrb-  . 
however ,  since the mid-1980s ,  russian gothic fiction was discussed in books like `` the gothic-fantastic in nineteenth-century russian literature '' ,  `` european gothic: a spirited exchange 1760–1960 '' ,  `` the russian gothic novel and its british antecedents '' and `` goticheskiy roman v rossii  -lrb-  gothic novel in russia  -rrb- ``  . 
while the term `` schauerroman '' is sometimes equated with the term `` gothic novel '' ,  this is only partially true . 
the english gothic novel also led to new novel types such as the german `` schauerroman '' and the french `` roman noir '' . 
gothic literature is often described with words such as `` wonder '' and `` terror . `` 
gothic fiction ,  which is largely known by the subgenre of gothic horror ,  is a genre or mode of literature and film that combines fiction and horror ,  death ,  and at times romance . 
further contributions to the gothic genre were seen in the work of the romantic poets . 
the gothic often uses scenery of decay ,  death ,  and morbidity to achieve its effects  -lrb-  especially in the italian horror school of gothic  -rrb-  . 
russian gothic was not ,  until recently ,  viewed as a critical label by russian critics . 
others ,  such as ghosts'n goblins feature a campier parody of gothic fiction . 
the birth of the gothic was thought to be influenced by political upheaval beginning . 
the novel usually regarded as the first gothic novel is `` the castle of otranto '' by english author horace walpole ,  which was first published in 1764.
some parts of mikhail yuryevich lermontov's `` a hero of our time ''  -lrb-  1840 -rrb- are also considered to belong in the gothic genre ,  but they lack the supernatural elements of the other russian gothic stories . 
various video games feature gothic horror themes and plots . 
all of the aspects of pre-gothic literature mentioned above occur to some degree in the gothic ,  but even taken together ,  they still fall short of true gothic . 
byron features ,  under the codename of `` lord ruthven '' ,  in lady caroline's own gothic novel: `` glenarvon ''  -lrb-  1816 -rrb- . 
the most famous gothic villain ever ,  count dracula ,  was created by bram stoker in his novel `` dracula ''  -lrb-  1897 -rrb- . 
romantic literary movements developed in continental europe concurrent with the development of the gothic novel . 
by the victorian era ,  gothic had ceased to be the dominant genre ,  and was dismissed by most critics . 
an important and innovative reinterpreter of the gothic in this period was edgar allan poe . 
the first russian author whose work can be described as gothic fiction is considered to be nikolay mikhailovich karamzin . 
the gospel of barnabas was a gospel which is claimed to be written by barnabas ,  one of the apostles . 
the gospel of mark probably dates from c .  ad 66–70, matthew and luke around ad 85–90, and john ad 90–110.
the gospel of peter was likely written in the first half of the 2nd century . 
the gospel of mary was originally written in greek during the 2nd century . 
mark ,  the first gospel to be written ,  uses a variety of sources ,  including conflict stories  -lrb-  mark 2:1–3:6 -rrb- ,  apocalyptic discourse  -lrb-  4:1–35 -rrb- ,  and collections of sayings ,  although not the sayings gospel known as the gospel of thomas and probably not the q source used by matthew and luke . 
the creation of a christian canon was probably a response to the career of the heretic marcion  -lrb-  c .  85–160 -rrb- ,  who established a canon of his own with just one gospel ,  the gospel of luke ,  which he edited to fit his own theology . 
many non-canonical gospels were also written ,  all later than the four ,  and all ,  like them ,  advocating the particular theological views of their authors . 
the gospel of thomas is mostly wisdom without narrating jesus's life . 
gimp itself is released as source code . 
a gui toolkit called gtk  -lrb-  gimp tool kit  -rrb-  was developed to facilitate the development of gimp . 
second public development 2.9-version was 2.9.4 with many deep improvements after initial public version 2.9.2 third public 2.9-development version is version 2.9.6.
each year gimp applies for several positions in the google summer of code  -lrb-  gsoc  -rrb- ; to date gimp has participated in all years except 2007.
the development of gtk+ has been attributed to peter mattis becoming disenchanted with the motif toolkit gimp originally used; motif was used up until gimp 0.60.
the following approaches can be distinguished here: in light path notation global lighting the paths of the type l  -lrb-  d | s  -rrb-  corresponds * e . 
more and more specialized algorithms are used in 3d programs that can effectively simulate the global illumination . 
global illumination  -lrb-  shortened as gi  -rrb-  ,  or indirect illumination ,  is a general name for a group of algorithms used in 3d computer graphics that are meant to add more realistic lighting to 3d scenes . 
the terms of a geometric series form a geometric progression ,  meaning that the ratio of successive terms in the series is constant . 
is geometric ,  because each successive term can be obtained by multiplying the previous term by 1/2.
the largest greek island by area is crete ,  located at the southern edge of the aegean sea . 
the following are the largest greek islands listed by surface area . 
bernini did not entirely lose patronage ,  not even of the pope . 
under urban viii ,  bernini had been appointed chief architect for the basilica of st .  peter's . 
bernini was born in naples in 1598 to angelica galante and mannerist sculptor pietro bernini ,  originally from florence . 
francesco mochi can also be included among bernini's significant rivals ,  though he was not as accomplished in his art as bernini ,  algardi or duquesnoy . 
in the late twentieth century ,  bernini was commemorated on the front of the
from then on ,  bernini's work and artistic vision would be placed at the symbolic heart of rome . 
bernini’s creations during this period include the piazza leading to st peter's . 
it was in this world of 17th-century rome and religious power that bernini created his greatest works . 
also ,  there is a short biographical narrative ,  `` the vita brevis of gian lorenzo bernini '' ,  written by his eldest son ,  monsignor pietro filippo bernini ,  in the mid-1670s . 
bernini and other artists fell from favor in later neoclassical criticism of the baroque . 
if there had been doubts over bernini's position as rome's preeminent artist ,  the success of the four rivers fountain removed them . 
bernini was also the artist of the statue of the moor in `` la fontana del moro '' in piazza navona  -lrb-  1653 -rrb- . 
gian lorenzo bernini  -lrb-  ; also gianlorenzo or giovanni lorenzo; 7 december 1598 – 28 november 1680 -rrb- was an italian sculptor and architect . 
it is also indisputable that there was an interpersonal conflict between bernini and the young french king ,  each one feeling insufficiently respected by the other . 
bernini's popularity was such that on his walks in paris the streets were lined with admiring crowds . 
in 2000 best-selling novelist ,  dan brown ,  made bernini and several of his roman works ,  the centerpiece of his political thriller ,  `` angels & demons '' ,  while british novelist iain pears made a missing bernini bust the centerpiece of his best-selling murder mystery ,  `` the bernini bust ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- . 
nonetheless ,  bernini's opponents in rome succeeded in seriously damaging the reputation of urban's artist and in persuading the pope to order  -lrb-  in february 1646 -rrb- the complete demolition of both towers ,  to bernini's great humiliation and indeed financial detriment . 
bernini also designed churches in castelgandolfo  -lrb-  san tommaso da villanova ,  1658–61 -rrb- and ariccia  -lrb-  santa maria assunta ,  1662–64 -rrb- . 
bernini's architectural works include sacred and secular buildings and sometimes their urban settings and interiors . 
german literature comprises those literary texts written in the german language . 
the baroque period  -lrb-  1600 to 1720 -rrb- was one of the most fertile times in german literature . 
german romanticism was the dominant movement of the late 18th and early 19th centuries . 
german romanticism was the dominant movement of the late 18th and early 19th centuries . 
the middle high german period is conventionally taken to end in 1350, while the early new high german is taken to begin with the german renaissance ,  after the invention of movable type in the mid-15th century . 
the old high german period is reckoned to run until about the mid-11th century ,  though the boundary to early middle high german  -lrb-  second half of the 11th century  -rrb-  is not clear-cut . 
historically ,  the part of southern lebanon south of the east-west section of the litani river also belonged to the region of galilee ,  but the present article mainly deals with the israeli part of the region . 
after the arab caliphate took control of the region in 638, it became part of jund al-urdunn  -lrb-  district of jordan  -rrb-  . 
in the modern common usage ,  galilee refers to all of the area that is beyond mount carmel to the northeast ,  extending from dan to the north ,  at the base of mount hermon ,  along mount lebanon to the ridges of mount carmel and mount gilboa north of jenin to the south ,  and from the jordan rift valley to the east across the plains of the jezreel valley and acre to the shores of the mediterranean sea and the coastal plain in the west ,  including beth shean's valley ,  sea of galilee's valley ,  and hula valley ,  although it usually does not include haifa's immediate northern suburbs . 
the north-central portion of the galilee is also known as central galilee ,  stretching from the border with lebanon to the northern edge of the jezreel valley ,  including the cities of nazareth and sakhnin ,  has an arab majority of 75% with most of the jewish population living in hilltop cities like upper nazareth . 
the jewish agency has attempted to increase the jewish population in this area ,  but the non-jewish population also has a high growth rate ,   ,  there were 1.2 million residents in galilee ,  of which 47% were jewish . 
in the mid-17th century galilee and mount lebanon became the scene of the druze power struggle ,  which came in parallel with much destruction in the region and decline of major cities . 
in 1831, the galilee ,  a part of ottoman syria ,  switched hands from ottomans to ibrahim pasha of egypt until 1840.
the region in turn gave rise to the english name for the `` sea of galilee '' referred to as such in many languages including ancient arabic . 
shortly after ,  in 1920, the region was included in the british mandate territory ,  officially a part of mandatory palestine from 1923.
the port city of haifa serves as a commercial center for the whole region . 
during early ottoman era ,  the galilee was governed as the safad sanjak ,  initially part of the larger administrative unit of damascus eyalet  -lrb-  1549–1660 -rrb- and later as part of sidon eyalet  -lrb-  1660–1864 -rrb- . 
most of galilee consists of rocky terrain ,  at heights of between 500 and 700 m .  several high mountains are in the region ,  including mount tabor and mount meron ,  which have relatively low temperatures and high rainfall . 
zahir ruled galilee for 25 years until ottoman loyalist jezzar pasha conquered the region in 1775.
the shia fatimids conquered the region in the 10th century; a breakaway sect ,  venerating the fatimid caliph al-hakim ,  formed the druze religion ,  centered in mount lebanon and partially galilee . 
in the early 20th century ,  galilee remained part of acre sanjak of ottoman syria . 
as late as the 16th century a small number of people in the crimea may still have spoken crimean gothic . 
both the greuthungi and thervingi became heavily romanized during the 4th century . 
it was last spoken in crimea in the 17th century by the crimean goths . 
the spanish and swedish claims of gothic origins led to a clash at the council of basel in 1434.
in the late 18th century ,  gothic tribes who remained in the lands around the black sea ,  especially in crimea - then known as crimean goths - were still mentioned as existing in the region and speaking a crimean gothic dialect ,  making them the last true goths . 
initially practising gothic paganism ,  the goths were gradually converted to arian christianity in the course of the 4th century as a result of the missionary activity by the gothic bishop wulfila ,  who devised a gothic alphabet to translate the wulfila bible . 
the visigothic kingdom in hispania converted to catholicism in the 7th century . 
it is possible that the hunnic attack came as a response to the gothic eastwards expansion . 
the goths spoke the gothic language ,  one of the extinct east germanic languages . 
in the late 6th century goths settled as `` foederati '' in parts of asia minor . 
the language survived as a domestic language in the iberian peninsula  -lrb-  modern spain and portugal  -rrb-  as late as the 8th century ,  and frankish author walafrid strabo wrote that it was still spoken in the lower danube area and that crimean gothic was spoken in isolated mountain regions in crimea in the early 9th century . 
following a famine the gothic war of 376–382 ensued ,  where the goths and some of the local thracians rebelled . 
in eastern europe the goths formed part of the chernyakhov culture of the 2nd to 5th centuries ad . 
while they were largely assimilated ,  their gothic origin was still well-known: the chronicler theophanes the confessor calls them `` gothograeci '' . 
the goths remained divided – as visigoths and ostrogoths – during the 5th century . 
in the 4th century ,  the greuthungian king ermanaric became the most powerful gothic ruler ,  coming to dominate a vast area of the pontic steppe which possibly stretched from the baltic sea to the black sea as far eastwards as the ural mountains . 
glycolysis is an oxygen-independent metabolic pathway . 
however ,  the discussion here will be limited to the embden–meyerhof–parnas pathway . 
north is the founder of the institute for christian economics  -lrb-  i . c . e . 
he also provides `` gary north's reality check '' ,  a free e-newsletter . 
north has written: `` i certainly believe in biblical theocracy . `` 
another north website ,  `` free christian curriculum '' ,  seeks to provide a free christian homeschooling curriculum for children from age 3 through grade 12.
north grew up in southern california ,  the son of fbi special agent samuel w .  north ,  jr .  ,  and his wife ,  peggy . 
north has authored or coauthored more than fifty books ,  many of which are available for free download . 
in addition ,  north offers the `` ron paul curriculum '' ,  a home school online curriculum associated with former u . s . 
it inspired the painting `` guernica '' by pablo picasso . 
in biscay ,  each administrative district  -lrb-  known as a merindad  -rrb-  had its appointed tree ,  but over the centuries ,  the tree of guernica acquired particular importance . 
people would flock to guernica not just from the immediate vicinity ,  but from all over the province ,  so that the town was packed . 
guernica  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  official and basque name gernika  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a town in the province of biscay ,  in the autonomous community of the basque country ,  spain . 
the town of guernica was founded by count tello on april 28, 1366, at the intersection of the road from bermeo to durango with the road from bilbao to elantxobe and lekeitio . 
on april 26, 1937, during the spanish civil war ,  guernica was the scene of the bombing of guernica by the condor legion of nazi germany's `` luftwaffe '' and the italian aviazione legionaria . 
on a small hillock in the town ,  stands the meeting house and the famous tree of gernika . 
celebrations were staged in 1966 to mark the 600th anniversary of the founding of the town . 
the monday market day has for decades been considered as a holiday in the town . 
when the domain of biscay was incorporated into the kingdom of castile ,  the king of castile visited guernica and swore an oath under the tree promising to uphold the fueros or local laws of biscay . 
rietveld was born in utrecht in 1888 as the son of a joiner . 
two software tools ,  both for code review ,  have been named after gerrit rietveld: gerrit and rietveld . 
gerrit rietveld's son wim rietveld also became a renowned industrial designer . 
in 1951 rietveld designed a retrospective exhibition about `` de stijl '' which was held in amsterdam ,  venice and new york . 
downtown west is located in north-central gary on the west side of broadway just south of interstate 90.
midtown is located south of downtown gary ,  along broadway . 
the areas known as emerson and downtown west combine to form downtown gary . 
miller beach ,  also known as miller station or simply as miller ,  is on gary's far east side . 
the area is south of the gary chicago international airport . 
ambridge mann is a neighborhood located on gary's near west side along 5th avenue . 
u . s .  steel continues to be a major steel producer ,  but with only a fraction of its former level of employment . 
the west side of gary ,  or west of broadway ,  the principal commercial street ,  had streets named after the presidents of the united states in order of their election . 
glen park includes the 37th avenue corridor at broadway . 
emerson is located in north-central gary on the east side of broadway . 
glen park is located on gary's far south side and is made up mostly of mid-twentieth-century houses . 
aetna is located on gary's far east side along the dunes highway . 
department stores and architecturally significant movie houses were built in the downtown area and the glen park neighborhood . 
interstate 90 was constructed between downtown gary and the united states steel plant . 
all fronted broadway as the main street that divided gary . 
gary was the site of civil unrest in the steel strike of 1919.
the city is located at the southern end of the former lake bed of the prehistoric lake chicago ,  and the current lake michigan . 
the median age in the city was 36.7 years . 
in the city ,  the population was spread out with 29.9% under the age of 18, 10.1% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 22.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% who were 65 years of age or older . 
armenia thus became the first nation to adopt christianity as its official religion . 
in 318, gregory appointed his second son aristaces as the next catholicos in line of armenia's holy apostolic church to stabilize and continue strengthening christianity not only in armenia ,  but also in the caucasus . 
gregory left cappadocia and went to armenia in the hope of atoning for his father's crime by evangelizing his homeland . 
gregory was the son of the armenian parthian nobles anak the parthian and okohe . 
sepuh  -rrb-  in the daranali province  -lrb-  manyats ayr ,  upper armenia  -rrb-  with a small convent of monks ,  where he remained until his death . 
leto ii atreides ,  the god emperor ,  has ruled the universe as a tyrant for 3,500 years after becoming a hybrid of human and giant sandworm in `` children of dune '' . 
after revealing the location of his secret spice hoard ,  leto dies ,  leaving duncan and siona to face the task of managing the empire . 
stylistically ,  the novel is permeated by quotations from ,  and speeches by its main character ,  leto ,  to a degree unseen in any of the other `` dune '' novels . 
the earth station is powered by the national grid . 
goonhilly earth station limited took ownership of the site in january 2014.
there were also tours around the main bt site and into the heart of arthur . 
the site also links into undersea cable lines . 
its first dish ,  antenna one  -lrb-  dubbed `` arthur ''  -rrb-  ,  was built in 1962 to link with telstar . 
this principle is itself frequently referred to as godwin's law . 
godwin has stated that he introduced godwin's law in 1990 as an experiment in memetics . 
there are many corollaries to godwin's law ,  some considered more canonical  -lrb-  by being adopted by godwin himself  -rrb-  than others . 
the green bay packers began the 2017 regular season with a 4–2 record . 
the packers stormed back in the 1962 season ,  jumping out to a 10–0 start ,  on their way to a 13–1 season . 
the packers' first regular season game under lombardi was on september 27, 1959, a 9–6 victory over the chicago bears in green bay . 
the team won its first six nfl world championships there . 
after a 4–6 start to the season ,  the packers went on a six-game winning streak to finish the regular season with a 10–6 record . 
green bay then finished the season 10–6 and 2nd in the nfc north behind the minnesota vikings . 
after finishing the regular season 10–6 the packers clinched the no . 
on january 20, 2008, green bay appeared in their first nfc championship game in 10 years facing the new york giants in green bay . 
the packers finished the season at 7–9, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2008.
the green bay packers are a professional american football team based in green bay ,  wisconsin . 
the green bay packers have played in their original city longer than any other team in the nfl . 
the packers returned to the nfl championship game the following season and faced the new york giants in the first league title game to be played in green bay . 
however ,  the packers fell to arizona 26–20, ending their season . 
by 1950, green bay had changed its colors to hunter green and gold . 
in 2011, coming off their victory in super bowl xlv ,  the packers won their first 13 games ,  eventually finishing the season 15–1.
curly lambeau departed after the 1949 season . 
following a dismal 4–12 season ,  thompson fired sherman . 
the 1967 season was the last for lombardi as the packers' head coach . 
the team created the green bay packers foundation in december 1986.
the following season the packers recorded another 13–3 record and won their second consecutive nfc championship . 
the 7–5 record represented the packers' first winning season since 1947, enough to earn rookie head coach lombardi the nfl coach of the year . 
it was in 1961 that green bay became known as `` titletown . `` 
the packers defeated the giants in new york ,  16–7.
the team crowned its season by rolling over the afl champion kansas city chiefs 35–10 in super bowl i . 
home games have been played at lambeau field since 1957.
despite receiving home-field advantage ,  green bay lost their first game to eventual super bowl xlvi champion new york giants ,  37–20.
by the end of the 2004 season ,  the packers team depth appeared to be diminishing . 
following the season ,  aaron rodgers would be named the nfl's mvp ,  his first such award . 
acme continued to support the team ,  which played its first nfl season with `` acme packers '' emblazoned on its jerseys . 
for the full season-by-season franchise results ,  see list of green bay packers seasons . 
they routed the fifth-seeded new york giants ,  38–13, in the wild-card round of the playoffs and upset the top-seeded dallas cowboys ,  34–31, in the divisional round of the playoffs ,  but their season came to an end when they were beaten by the second-seeded atlanta falcons in the nfc championship game ,  44–21.
mike mccarthy coached the nfc team during the 2008 pro bowl in hawaii . 
after a home playoff 37–20 win against favre's former team ,  the atlanta falcons ,  the packers defeated the defending super bowl champion san francisco 49ers 27–17 in san francisco on the road to advance to the nfc championship game ,  where they lost again to the dallas cowboys 38–27.
during world war ii ,  the mg 34 was superseded by a new gpmg ,  the mg 42, although it remained in combat use . 
a general-purpose machine gun  -lrb-  gpmg  -rrb-  is an air-cooled ,  fully automatic weapon that can be adapted to light machine gun and medium machine gun roles . 
gdynia hosts the gdynia film festival ,  the main polish film festival . 
gdynia is a relatively modern city . 
in the polish 1970 protests ,  worker demonstrations took place at gdynia shipyard . 
gdynia hosts the gdynia film festival ,  the main polish film festival ,  and was the venue for the international random film festival in 2014.
in the years 1931–1939 gdynia harbour was further extended to become a universal seaport . 
on march 28, 1945, gotenhafen was captured by the soviets and assigned to polish gdańsk voivodeship ,  who again renamed it gdynia . 
in 1938 the gdynia shipyard started to build its first full-sea ship ,  the `` olza '' . 
at this time gdynia was the only transit and special seaport designed for coal exports . 
gdynia  -lrb-   ,  1939-1945 `` gotenhafen '';   -rrb-  is a city in the pomeranian voivodeship of poland and a seaport of gdańsk bay on the south coast of the baltic sea . 
the decision to build a major seaport at gdynia village was made by the polish government in winter 1920, in the midst of the polish–soviet war  -lrb-  1919–1920 -rrb- . 
the rapid development of gdynia was interrupted by the outbreak of world war ii . 
these are not the `` actual '' color states of observed gluons ,  but rather `` effective '' states . 
such states allow interaction with other color singlets ,  but not with other color states; because long-range gluon interactions do not exist ,  this illustrates that gluons in the singlet state do not exist either . 
a relevant illustration in the case at hand would be a gluon with a color state described by:
the gluon is a vector boson; like the photon ,  it has a spin of 1.
god tests abraham by demanding that he sacrifice isaac . 
one solution is to see the patriarchal stories as resulting from god's decision not to remain alienated from mankind: god creates the world and mankind ,  mankind rebels ,  and god `` elects ''  -lrb-  chooses  -rrb-  abraham . 
through hagar ,  abraham fathers ishmael . 
god instructs abram to travel from his home in mesopotamia to the land of canaan . 
each covenant is mediated by a great leader  -lrb-  noah ,  abraham ,  moses  -rrb-  ,  and at each stage god progressively reveals himself by his name  -lrb-  elohim with noah ,  el shaddai with abraham ,  yahweh with moses  -rrb-  . 
god creates the world in six days and consecrates the seventh as a day of rest . 
god resolves to destroy the cities of sodom and gomorrah for the sins of their people . 
the patriarchs ,  or ancestors ,  are abraham ,  isaac and jacob ,  with their wives  -lrb-  joseph is normally excluded  -rrb-  . 
joseph lives to an old age and exhorts his brethren ,  if god should lead them out of the country ,  to take his bones with them . 
this group is sometimes denoted by  . 
the notation indicates the field extension obtained by adjoining an element to the field  . 
in the following examples is a field ,  and  ,   ,  are the fields of complex ,  real ,  and rational numbers ,  respectively . 
during the war about 750,000 german civilians died from malnutrition . 
it was founded in 1871 when the south german states ,  except for austria ,  joined the north german confederation . 
by the start of world war i  -lrb-  1914–1918 -rrb- ,  german industry switched to war production . 
about 92% of the population spoke german as their first language . 
germans had dreamed of colonial imperialism since 1848.
as these events occurred ,  the prussian-led north german confederation and its southern german allies were still engaged in the franco-prussian war . 
on 10 december 1870, the north german confederation reichstag renamed the confederation the `` german empire '' and gave the title of german emperor to william i ,  the king of prussia ,  as `` bundespräsidium '' of the confederation . 
the german empire  -lrb-   ,  officially '  -rrb-  ,  also known as imperial germany ''' ,  was the german nation state that existed from the unification of germany in 1871 until the abdication of kaiser wilhelm ii in 1918.
the second german constitution ,  adopted by the reichstag on 14 april 1871 and proclaimed by the emperor on 16 april ,  was substantially based upon bismarck's north german constitution . 
in the first world war ,  german plans to capture paris quickly in the autumn of 1914 failed . 
the german empire consisted of 26 states ,  most of them ruled by royal families . 
three wars led to military successes and helped to persuade german people to do this: the second schleswig war against denmark in 1864, the austro-prussian war in 1866, and the franco-prussian war against france in 1870–71.
by 1900, the german chemical industry dominated the world market for synthetic dyes . 
aside from the very unofficial septemberprogramm ,  the germans never stated a clear list of goals that they wanted out of the war . 
the german declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare in early 1917, contributed to bringing the united states into the war . 
before unification ,  german territory  -lrb-  excluding austria and switzerland  -rrb-  was made up of 27 constituent states . 
in the summer of 1918, with the americans arriving at the rate of 10,000 a day and the german reserves spent ,  it was only a matter of time before multiple allied offensives destroyed the german army . 
in practice ,  however ,  the forces that were needed to garrison and secure the new territories were a drain on the german war effort . 
the end of october 1918, in kiel ,  in northern germany ,  saw the beginning of the german revolution of 1918–1919.
while the western front was a stalemate for the german army ,  the eastern front eventually proved to be a great success . 
as a result ,  by the time of the great expansion of german cities in the 1890s and 1900s ,  rural areas were grossly over-represented . 
attacking the exposed german right flank ,  the french army and the british army put up a strong resistance to the defense of paris at the first battle of the marne ,  resulting in the german army retreating . 
the german confederation had been created by an act of the congress of vienna on 8 june 1815 as a result of the napoleonic wars ,  after being alluded to in of the 1814 treaty of paris . 
the concept of `` total war '' meant that supplies had to be redirected towards the armed forces and ,  with german commerce being stopped by the allied naval blockade ,  german civilians were forced to live in increasingly meagre conditions . 
bismarck secured a number of german colonial possessions during the 1880s in africa and the pacific ,  but he never considered an overseas colonial empire valuable due to fierce resistance to german colonial rule from the natives . 
but of these german colonies only togoland and german samoa  -lrb-  after 1908 -rrb- became self-sufficient and profitable; all the others required subsidies from the berlin treasury for building infrastructure ,  school systems ,  hospitals and other institutions . 
bismarck's efforts also initiated the levelling of the enormous differences between the german states ,  which had been independent in their evolution for centuries ,  especially with legislation . 
the german confederation ended as a result of the austro-prussian war of 1866 between the constituent confederation entities of the austrian empire and its allies on one side and the kingdom of prussia and its allies on the other . 
he created the modern welfare state in germany in the 1880s and enacted universal male suffrage in the new german empire in 1871.
germany did acquire a second ally that same year when the ottoman empire entered the war on its side ,  but in the long run supporting the ottoman war effort only drained away german resources from the main fronts . 
his son wilhelm ii became emperor . 
the rising militarism under wilhelm ii caused many germans to emigrate to the u . s .  and the british colonies to escape mandatory military service . 
upon acquiring southwest africa ,  german settlers were encouraged to cultivate land held by the herero and nama . 
his force was still active at war's end . 
many germans wanted an end to the war and increasing numbers began to associate with the political left ,  such as the social democratic party and the more radical independent social democratic party ,  which demanded an end to the war . 
in the east ,  valerian was confronted with serious troubles . 
the roman army was defeated at the battle of edessa ,  and valerian was taken prisoner . 
gallienus  -lrb-  ; ; c .  218 – september 268 -rrb- ,  also known as gallien ,  was roman emperor with his father valerian from 22 october 253 to spring 260 and alone from spring 260 to september 268.
around the same time ,  regalianus ,  who held some command in the balkans ,  was proclaimed emperor . 
born into a wealthy and traditional senatorial family ,  gallienus was the son of valerian and mariniana . 
the defeat and capture of valerian at edessa in 260 by the sasanian empire threw the roman empire into the chaos of civil war . 
when valerian was proclaimed emperor on 22 october 253, he asked the senate to ratify the elevation of gallienus to caesar and augustus . 
sometime between 258 and 260  -lrb-  the exact date is unclear  -rrb-  ,  while valerian was distracted with the ongoing invasion of shapur i in the east ,  and gallienus was preoccupied with his problems in the west ,  ingenuus ,  governor of at least one of the pannonian provinces ,  took advantage and declared himself emperor . 
in the aftermath ,  gallienus became consul three more times in 262, 264, and 266.
during his danube sojourn  -lrb-  drinkwater suggests in 255 or 256 -rrb- ,  he proclaimed his elder son valerian ii caesar and thus official heir to himself and valerian i; the boy probably joined gallienus on campaign at that time ,  and when gallienus moved west to the rhine provinces in 257, he remained behind on the danube as the personification of imperial authority . 
at first they met no opposition . 
in europe ,  its use became widespread in the 13th century ,  and peaked in the 14th and 15th centuries . 
there are two distinctive designs of gambeson; those designed to be worn beneath another armour ,  and those designed to be worn as independent armour . 
a gambeson  -lrb-  also aketon ,  padded jack or arming doublet  -rrb-  is a padded defensive jacket ,  worn as armour separately ,  or combined with mail or plate armour . 
the gambeson was used both as a complete armour unto itself and underneath mail and plate in order to cushion the body and prevent chafing . 
the border connects kandahar and spin boldak in afghanistan with quetta in pakistan , 
the amu darya on the northern border ,  the country's other major river ,  has the next largest drainage area . 
the kabul river ,  long ,  is a vital source of water in the baba mountains and for kabul itself ,  which it flows through . 
the kabul and its tributaries are among the few in afghanistan that eventually reach the sea ,  as it flows east into the indus river in pakistan . 
important passes include the unai pass across the safed koh ,  the kushan and salang passes through the hindu kush ,  and the khyber pass that connects afghanistan with pakistan . 
the hindu kush mountain range reaches a height of at noshaq ,  afghanistan's highest peak . 
the greater part of the northern border and a small section of the border with pakistan are marked by rivers; the remaining boundary lines are political rather than natural . 
the helmand river is the principal river in the southwest ,  bisecting the entire region . 
the safed koh range ,  which includes the tora bora area ,  dominates the border area southeast of kabul . 
its southern section crosses the helmand river . 
grand juries were once common across canada . 
a grand jury is separate from the courts ,  which do not preside over its functioning . 
traditionally ,  a grand jury numbers 23 members . 
prince edward island maintained a grand jury as recently as 1871.
in western australia ,  by the grand jury abolition act amendment act 1883  -lrb-  wa  -rrb-  ,  grand juries were abolished  -lrb-  section 4: a grand jury shall not be summoned for the supreme court of western australia ,  nor for any general quarter sessions for the said colony  -rrb-  . 
the grand jury served to screen out incompetent or malicious prosecutions . 
a grand jury in the united states is usually composed of 16 to 23 citizens ,  though in virginia it has fewer members for regular or special grand juries . 
after the formation of irish free state in 1922, grand juries were not required ,  but they persisted in northern ireland until abolished by the grand jury  -lrb-  abolition  -rrb-  act of the parliament of northern ireland in 1969.
the grand jury existed in new south wales for a short period in the 1820s . 
the charge having been delivered ,  the grand jury withdrew to their own room ,  having received the bills of indictment . 
in south australia and western australia ,  grand juries existed for longer periods of time . 
after the court was opened by the crier making proclamation ,  the names of those summoned to the grand jury were called and they were sworn . 
despite evading impeachment ,  nixon was still required to testify before a grand jury . 
the first instance of a grand jury can be traced back to the assize of clarendon in 1166, an act of henry ii of england . 
the legislation which restricts small arms may also restrict other weapons ,  such as explosives ,  crossbows ,  swords ,  electroshock weapons ,  air guns ,  and pepper spray . 
gun laws are considered strict when it is difficult or impossible for an ordinary citizen to obtain a firearm through legal means . 
some shock sites have also gained their own subcultures and have become internet memes on their own . 
a shock site is a website that is intended to be offensive or disturbing to its viewers . 
steven jones distinguishes these sites from those that collect galleries of shocking content ,  such as rotten . com ,  as the gallery sites must be searched for content . 
plains and plateaus extend in the west along the albanian adriatic and ionian sea coast . 
albania is a small country in southern and southeastern europe strategically positioned on the adriatic and ionian sea inside the mediterranean sea ,  with a coastline of about  . 
the ceraunian mountains ,  a coastal mountain range in southwestern albania ,  stretches about one the ionian sea from sarandë in south-east-northwest direction along the albanian riviera orikum . 
likely ,  the lagoons of karavasta and narta ,  in the immediate proximity to the sea ,  are among the most important ones in the mediterranean sea . 
the karaburun peninsula is situated at the eastern side of strait of otranto ,  where the adriatic sea meets the ionian sea . 
a total surface area of  ,  the country is located in the southeastern part of the adriatic and the northeastern part of the ionian sea ,  both located within the mediterranean sea . 
the border is located at the tripoint border between albania ,  macedonia ,  and greece running across the large and small lake prespa until it reaches the ionian sea at the strait of corfu . 
the albanian adriatic sea coast stretches from the mouth of the river of buna nearby the lake of shkodër in the north ,  across the gulf of drin ,  to the bay of vlorë in the south . 
much of the mountains lie to the north ,  east and south of the western lowlands in the northern ,  eastern and southern mountain ranges . 
in the southern lowlands ,  specifically the areas on the ionian sea ,  temperatures average about in the winter and during the summer . 
one drin tributary is the valbona river ,  which drains into the adriatic sea ,  and its eastern tributary the gashi river . 
most of albania rises into mountains and hills ,  tending to run the length of the country from north to south ,  as for instance the albanian alps in the north ,  the sharr mountains in the northeast ,  the skanderbeg mountains in the center ,  the korab mountains in the east ,  the pindus mountains in the southeast ,  and the ceraunian mountains in the southwest . 
thousand meter high mountains fall vertically into the mediterranean sea forming at least the first barrier to communication between the sea and the country's southern inland . 
a representation of a group `` g '' on a vector space `` v '' over a field `` k '' is a group homomorphism from `` g '' to gl -lrb-  `` v ''  -rrb-  ,  the general linear group on `` v '' . 
the term `` representation of a group '' is also used in a more general sense to mean any `` description '' of a group as a group of transformations of some mathematical object . 
in the mathematical field of representation theory ,  group representations describe abstract groups in terms of linear transformations of vector spaces; in particular ,  they can be used to represent group elements as matrices so that the group operation can be represented by matrix multiplication . 
the gre physics test is an examination administered by the educational testing service  -lrb-  ets  -rrb-  . 
