anglican use . 
as a noun ,  an anglican is a member of a church in the anglican communion . 
adherents of anglicanism are called `` anglicans '' . 
some churches that are not part of the anglican communion or recognized by the anglican communion also call themselves anglican ,  including those that are part of the continuing anglican movement and anglican realignment . 
anglican worship ,  however ,  is as diverse as anglican theology . 
in anglican churches ,  only a priest or a bishop may be the celebrant at the eucharist . 
the `` book of common prayer ''  -lrb-  bcp  -rrb-  is the foundational prayer book of anglicanism . 
unique to anglicanism is the `` book of common prayer ''  -lrb-  bcp  -rrb-  ,  the collection of services that worshippers in most anglican churches have used for centuries . 
continuing churches have generally been formed by people who have left the anglican communion . 
the first anglican church in the americas was built at jamestown ,  virginia ,  in 1607.
the discipline of fasting before communion is practised by some anglicans . 
the anglican communion has no international juridical organisation . 
anglicanism represents the third largest christian communion in the world ,  after the roman catholic church and the eastern orthodox churches . 
the term `` continuing anglicanism '' refers to a number of church bodies which have formed outside of the anglican communion in the belief that traditional forms of anglican faith ,  worship and order have been unacceptably revised or abandoned within some anglican communion churches in recent decades . 
churches which call themselves anglican will have identified themselves so because they use some form or variant of the `` book of common prayer '' in the shaping of their worship . 
outside the anglican communion ,  anglican ordinations  -lrb-  at least of male priests  -rrb-  are recognised by the old catholic church porvoo communion lutherans and various independent catholic churches . 
anglican worship services are open to all visitors . 
some liberal and moderate anglicans see this opposition as representing a new fundamentalism within anglicanism . 
the prayer offices have an important place in anglican history . 
the 2007–08 `` directory of traditional anglican and episcopal parishes '' ,  published by the fellowship of concerned churchmen ,  contained information on over 900 parishes affiliated with either the continuing anglican churches or the anglican realignment movement ,  a more recent wave of anglicans withdrawing from the anglican communion's north american provinces . 
he acts as president of the secretariat of the anglican communion office and its deliberative body ,  the anglican consultative council . 
the word `` anglican '' originates in  ,  a phrase from the magna carta dated 15 june 1215, meaning `` the anglican church shall be free '' . 
whilst never actively endorsed by anglican churches ,  many anglicans unofficially have adopted the augustinian `` just war '' doctrine . 
the distinction between reformed and catholic ,  and the coherence of the two ,  is routinely a matter of debate both within specific anglican churches and throughout the anglican communion by members themselves . 
all anglican prayer books contain offices for morning prayer  -lrb-  matins  -rrb-  and evening prayer  -lrb-  evensong  -rrb-  . 
such anglicans stress that anglicanism is the ``  ''via media '' ''  -lrb-  middle way  -rrb-  between the two major strains of western christianity and that anglicanism is like a `` bridge '' between the two strains . 
more conservative elements within and outside of anglicanism  -lrb-  primarily african churches and factions within north american anglicanism  -rrb-  have opposed these proposals . 
elsewhere ,  however ,  the term `` anglican church '' came to be preferred as it distinguished these churches from others that maintain an episcopal polity . 
all provinces of the anglican communion consist of dioceses ,  each under the jurisdiction of a bishop . 
like the roman catholic church and the orthodox churches ,  the anglican communion maintains the threefold ministry of deacons ,  presbyters  -lrb-  usually called `` priests ''  -rrb-  and bishops . 
the term was kept when the church became international because all anglicans used to share in its use around the world . 
as an adjective ,  `` anglican '' is used to describe the people ,  institutions and churches ,  as well as the liturgical traditions and theological concepts developed by the church of england . 
they therefore claim that they are `` continuing '' traditional anglicanism . 
in high and anglo-catholic churches there are generally prayers for the dead . 
the corpus produced by anglican divines is diverse . 
a characteristic of anglicanism is that it has no international juridical authority . 
in addition ,  anglo-catholic bodies may use the anglican missal ,  anglican service book ,  or english missal in celebrating the eucharist . 
many anglican churches will also have daily morning and evening prayer and some have midweek or even daily celebration of the eucharist . 
the church of england has been a church of missionaries since the 17th century when the church first left english shores with colonists who founded what would become the united states ,  australia ,  canada ,  new zealand and south africa and established anglican churches . 
many continuing anglicans believe that the faith of some churches in communion with the archbishop of canterbury has become unorthodox and therefore have not sought to also be in communion with him . 
in the church in wales ,  however ,  most cathedrals are parish churches and their deans are now also vicars of their parishes . 
with british colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards ,  anglican churches were planted around the globe . 
due to their association with royalty ,  these churches are generally host to staunch anglicans who are strongly opposed to catholicism . 
many provinces of the anglican communion ordain both men and women as deacons . 
anglicans base their christian faith on the bible ,  traditions of the apostolic church ,  apostolic succession  -lrb-  `` historic episcopate ''  -rrb-  and the writings of the church fathers . 
anglicans look for authority in their `` standard divines ''  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
in anglican churches ,  deacons often work directly in ministry to the marginalised inside and outside the church: the poor ,  the sick ,  the hungry ,  the imprisoned . 
in anglicanism there is a distinction between liturgy ,  which is the formal public and communal worship of the church ,  and personal prayer and devotion which may be public or private . 
the anglican communion recognises roman catholic and eastern orthodox ordinations as valid . 
in recent decades there has been a growth of charismatic worship among anglicans . 
while it has since undergone many revisions and anglican churches in different countries have developed other service books ,  the prayer book is still acknowledged as one of the ties that bind anglicans together . 
high anglicans may genuflect or cross themselves in the same way as roman catholics . 
the monarch has no constitutional role in anglican churches in other parts of the world ,  although the prayer books of several countries where she is head of state maintain prayers for her as sovereign . 
some anglicans who pray the office on daily basis use the present divine office of the catholic church . 
the athens metropolitan area ,  with an area of and inhabited by 3,753,783 people in 2011, consists of the athens urban area with the addition of the towns and villages of east and west attica ,  which surround the dense urban area of the greek capital . 
the densely built up urban area of the greek capital sprawls across throughout the `` attica basin '' and has a total population of 3,074,160  -lrb-  in 2011 -rrb- . 
the municipality  -lrb-  city  -rrb-  of athens is the most populous in greece ,  with a population of 664,046 people  -lrb-  in 2011 -rrb- and an area of  ,  forming the core of the athens urban area within the `` attica basin '' . 
the athens urban area is considered to form the city of athens as a whole ,  despite its administrative divisions ,  which is the largest in greece and one of the most populated urban areas in europe . 
measures taken by the greek authorities throughout the 1990s have improved the quality of air over the attica basin . 
athens sprawls across the central plain of attica that is often referred to as the `` athens or attica basin ''  -lrb-  greek: λεκανοπέδιο αττικής  -rrb-  . 
in ancient greek ,  the name of the city was  -lrb-  `` athênai '' ,  in classical attic  -rrb-  a plural . 
greater athens and greater piraeus combined make up the continuous built up athens urban area  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the urban area of the capital  -lrb-    -rrb-  or simply athens  -lrb-  the most common use of the term  -rrb-  ,  spanning over  ,  with a population of 3,090,508 people as of 2011.
piraeus also forms a significant city centre on its own ,  within the athens urban area and being the second largest in population size within it ,  with peristeri and kallithea following . 
the athens metropolitan area spans within the attica region and includes a total of 58 municipalities ,  which are organized in 7 regional units  -lrb-  those outlined above ,  along with east attica and west attica  -rrb-  ,  having reached a population of 3,737,550 based on the preliminary results of the 2011 census . 
by the mid-4th century bc ,  the northern greek kingdom of macedon was becoming dominant in athenian affairs . 
following the greek war of independence and the establishment of the greek kingdom ,  athens was chosen as the capital of the newly independent greek state in 1834, largely because of historical and sentimental reasons . 
the term `` athens '' can refer either to the municipality of athens ,  to greater athens ,  or to the entire athens urban area . 
it actually sprawls over the whole peninsula of attica ,  which is the best part of the region of attica ,  excluding the islands . 
the oldest known human presence in athens is the cave of schist ,  which has been dated to between the 11th and 7th millennia bc . 
athens dominates the attica region and is one of the world's oldest cities ,  with its recorded history spanning over 3,400 years and its earliest human presence starting somewhere between the 11th and 7th millennium bc . 
however the numbers would include attica and not just athens the city . 
athens is built around a number of hills . 
the athens urban area today consists of 40 municipalities ,  35 of which make up what is referred to as the greater athens municipalities ,  located within 4 regional units  -lrb-  north athens ,  west athens ,  central athens ,  south athens  -rrb- ; and a further 5, which make up the greater piraeus municipalities ,  located within the regional unit of piraeus as mentioned above . 
anguilla also has a 0.75% property tax . 
anguilla  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a british overseas territory in the caribbean . 
today most people in anguilla speak a british-influenced variety of standard english . 
traditional accounts state that anguilla was first colonized by english settlers from saint kitts beginning in 1650.
the name anguilla is an anglicised or latinate form of earlier spanish ``  '' meaning `` eel '' in reference to the island's shape . 
during the early colonial period ,  anguilla was administered by the british through antigua; in 1825, it was placed under the administrative control of nearby saint kitts . 
for similar reasons ,  it was also known as `` snake '' or `` snake island '' . 
anguilla is an internally self-governing overseas territory of the united kingdom . 
cartier island has a reported land area of 0.4 ha . 
after the islands became a first point of contact with the australian migration zone ,  in september 2001, the australian government excised the ashmore and cartier islands from the australian migration zone . 
the territory comprises ashmore reef ,  which includes west ,  middle ,  and east islands ,  and two lagoons ,  and cartier reef ,  which includes cartier island . 
defence of ashmore and cartier islands is the responsibility of australia ,  with periodic visits by the royal australian navy ,  royal australian air force and australian customs and border protection service . 
australia also claims a 12 nautical mile territorial sea generated by the islands . 
the australian government argued that as australia was not the country of first asylum for these `` boat people '' ,  australia did not have a responsibility to accept them . 
if formula_22 is the cauchy stress ,  then where formula_24 is the rank-2 identity tensor . 
the value of formula_66 is 1.4 if the acoustic medium is air . 
at this stage we assume that the medium is at rest ,  i . e .  ,  formula_47.
the equations for the conservation of linear momentum for a fluid medium are where formula_19 is the body force per unit mass ,  formula_20 is the pressure ,  and formula_21 is the deviatoric stress . 
the equation for the conservation of mass in a fluid volume  -lrb-  without any mass sources or sinks  -rrb-  is given by where formula_52 is the mass density of the fluid and formula_53 is the flow velocity . 
therefore ,  the divergence of formula_21 is given by using the identity formula_30, we have the equations for the conservation of momentum may then be written as
 -lrb-  buckingham and ross 1892, p .  660 -rrb- . 
 -lrb-  buckingham and ross 1892, p .  660 -rrb- . 
mackenzie's first biography in 1892 referred to him as canada's stainless statesman  -lrb-  buckingham and ross 1892, dedication introduction  -rrb-  . 
newspaper around the world and in canada had this to say about him . 
he entered the house of commons of canada in 1867, representing the lambton ,  ontario ,  riding . 
an historian at the time said ,  “he was ,  and ever will remain ,  the sir galahad of canadian politics”  -lrb-  marquis 1903, p .  418 -rrb- . 
very proud of his scottish heritage he was forever a scot “nemo me impune lacessit”  -lrb-  no one attacks me with impunity  -rrb-   -lrb-  ross 1913, p .  56 -rrb- . 
dr .  thomas compared him to the duke of wellington who “stood four square ,  to all the winds that blow . ”  -lrb-  buckingham and ross 1892, p .  643, tennyson’s ode to the death of the duke of wellington  -rrb-  . 
the ashoka chakra was created by ashoka during his reign . 
edicts of ashoka -the edicts of ashoka are a collection of 33 inscriptions on the pillars of ashoka ,  as well as boulders and cave walls ,  made by ashoka during his reign . 
the ashoka chakra  -lrb-  the wheel of ashoka  -rrb-  is a depiction of the dharmachakra  -lrb-  the wheel of dharma  -rrb-  . 
it is very important in dating the consecration of ashoka . 
following are some of the legends narrated in the `` ashokavadana '' about ashoka:
ashoka was given royal military training . 
ashoka also invited buddhists and non-buddhists for religious conferences . 
the ashoka chakra can also been seen on the base of the lion capital of ashoka which has been adopted as the national emblem of india . 
ashoka ruled for an estimated 36 years and died in 232 bce . 
the use of buddhist sources in reconstructing the life of ashoka has had a strong influence on perceptions of ashoka ,  as well as the interpretations of his edicts . 
ashoka was born to the mauryan emperor ,  bindusara and subhadrangī  -lrb-  or dharmā  -rrb-  . 
the pillars of ashoka are a series of columns dispersed throughout the northern indian subcontinent ,  and erected by ashoka during his reign in the 3rd century bce . 
one of the more enduring legacies of ashoka was the model that he provided for the relationship between buddhism and the state . 
 ''this '' ashoka is very different from the `` shadowy do-gooder '' of later pali chronicles . 
ashoka  -lrb-  ; iast: aśoka ,  brāhmi: 𑀅𑀲𑁄𑀓  -rrb-  ,  sometimes ashoka the great ,  was an indian emperor of the maurya dynasty ,  who ruled almost all of the indian subcontinent from to 232 bce . 
this lion capital of ashoka from sarnath has been adopted as the national emblem of india and the wheel  -lrb-  `` ashoka chakra ''  -rrb-  from its base was placed onto the center of the national flag of india . 
following this ,  ashoka was stationed at ujain ,  the capital of malwa ,  as governor . 
ashoka also said that all his courtiers always governed the people in a moral manner . 
ashokavadana – the `` aśokāvadāna '' is a 2nd-century ce text related to the legend of ashoka . 
the lion capital of ashoka is a sculpture of four lions standing back to back . 
ashoka also innovated by using the permanent qualities of stone for his written edicts ,  as well as his pillars with buddhist symbolism . 
after ashoka's accession ,  mahendra headed a buddhist mission ,  sent probably under the auspices of the emperor ,  to sri lanka . 
ashoka waged a destructive war against the state of kalinga  -lrb-  modern odisha  -rrb-  ,  which he conquered in about 260 bce . 
from the various sources that speak of his life ,  ashoka is believed to have had five wives . 
thus ,  a ' is an american in the continent sense ,  and a ``  '' is an american in the u . s .  sense . 
in english ,  `` american '' was used especially for people in the british america . 
these specific terms may be less common than the term `` american '' . 
use of the term `` american '' for u . s .  nationals is common at the united nations ,  and financial markets in the united states are referred to as `` american financial markets '' . 
the adjective `` american '' subsequently denoted the new world . 
in hungarian the term amerikai  -lrb-  american  -rrb-  refers to a person or a thing from the united states . 
portuguese has ' ,  denoting both a person or thing from the americas and a u . s .  national . 
french ,  german ,  italian ,  japanese ,  hebrew ,  arabic ,  and russian speakers may use cognates of `` american '' to refer to inhabitants of the americas or to u . s .  nationals . 
the meaning of the word american in the english language varies according to the historical ,  geographical ,  and political context in which it is used . 
ada is an international standard; the current version  -lrb-  known as ada 2012 -rrb- is defined by iso/iec 8652:2012.
the first validated ada implementation was the nyu ada/ed translator ,  certified on april 11, 1983.
ada was named after ada lovelace  -lrb-  1815–1852 -rrb- ,  who has been credited as the first computer programmer . 
ada is designed for development of very large software systems . 
ada was originally targeted at embedded and real-time systems . 
ada's dynamic memory management is high-level and type-safe . 
ada 95, the joint iso/ansi standard  -lrb-  iso-8652:1995 -rrb- was published in february 1995, making ada 95 the first iso standard object-oriented programming language . 
this version of the language is commonly known as ada 83, from the date of its adoption by ansi ,  but is sometimes referred to also as ada 87, from the date of its adoption by iso . 
ada 95 added support for object-oriented programming ,  including dynamic dispatch . 
unlike most iso standards ,  the ada language definition  -lrb-  known as the `` ada reference manual '' or `` arm '' ,  or sometimes the `` language reference manual '' or `` lrm ''  -rrb-  is free content . 
the movie was also nominated for 10 academy awards ,  with cuarón nominated in best picture ,  best director ,  best foreign language film ,  best original screenplay ,  and best cinematography . 
cuarón is the first latin american director to win the academy award for best director . 
cuarón himself received two nominations for his work on the film in best film editing  -lrb-  with alex rodríguez  -rrb-  and best adapted screenplay  -lrb-  with several collaborators  -rrb-  . 
cuarón won for best directing ,  becoming the first latin american to win the award ,  while he and mark sanger shared the award for best film editing . 
for `` gravity '' ,  cuarón received several major accolades for his achievement in directing ,  winning the academy award for best director and best film editing ,  the golden globe award for best director ,  the bafta award for best direction and the directors guild of america award for outstanding directing – feature film . 
in 2010, cuarón began to develop the film `` gravity '' ,  a drama set in space . 
cuarón shared an academy award nomination for best original screenplay with co-writer and brother carlos cuarón . 
he taught that god the father and the son of god did not always exist together eternally . 
the arian concept of christ is based on the belief that the son of god did not always exist but was begotten within time by god the father . 
therefore ,  the son was rather the very first and the most perfect of god's creatures ,  and he was made `` god '' only by the father's permission and power . 
arians taught that the logos was a divine being begotten by god the father before the creation of the world ,  made him a medium through whom everything else was created ,  and that the son of god is subordinate to god the father . 
the emperor never remarried . 
antoninus pius  -lrb-  ; ; 19 september 867 march 161 -rrb- ,  also known as antoninus ,  was roman emperor from 138 to 161.
antoninus is unique among roman emperors in that he has no other biographies . 
he was one of the five good emperors in the nerva–antonine dynasty and the aurelii . 
antoninus was the last roman emperor recognised by the indian kingdoms . 
faustina bore antoninus four children ,  two sons and two daughters . 
he was next appointed by the emperor hadrian as one of the four proconsuls to administer italia ,  then greatly increased his reputation by his conduct as proconsul of asia ,  probably during 134–135.
born into a senatorial family ,  antoninus held various offices during the reign of emperor hadrian ,  acquiring favor which saw him adopted as hadrian's son and successor shortly before hadrian's death . 
although only one of his four children survived to adulthood ,  antoninus came to be ancestor to four generations of prominent romans ,  including the emperor commodus . 
one highlight during his reign occurred in 148, with the nine-hundredth anniversary of the foundation of rome being celebrated by the hosting of magnificent games in rome . 
his record for the second-longest reign would be unbeaten for 168 years ,  until 329 when it was surpassed by constantine the great . 
antoninus was known as an avid observer of rites of religion and of formal celebrations – both roman and foreign . 
the text specifically states that it was the first time there had been direct contact between the two countries . 
one modern scholar has written `` it is almost certain not only that at no time in his life did he ever see ,  let alone command ,  a roman army ,  but that ,  throughout the twenty-three years of his reign ,  he never went within five hundred miles of a legion '' . 
some time between 110 and 115, antoninus married annia galeria faustina the elder . 
the first group of people claiming to be an ambassadorial mission of romans to china was recorded in 166 ad by the `` hou hanshu '' . 
also ,  as one could not have a wife and an official concubine  -lrb-  or two concubines  -rrb-  at the same time ,  antoninus avoided being pressed into a marriage with a noblewoman from another family  -lrb-  later ,  marcus aurelius would also reject the advances of his former fiancée ceionia fabia ,  lucius verus's sister ,  on the grounds of protecting his children from a stepmother ,  and took a concubine instead  -rrb-  . 
rijndael is a family of ciphers with different key and block sizes . 
the advanced encryption standard  -lrb-  aes  -rrb-  ,  also known by its original name rijndael  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a specification for the encryption of electronic data established by the u . s .  national institute of standards and technology  -lrb-  nist  -rrb-  in 2001.
such systems are examples of `` argots à clef '' ,  or `` coded argots . `` 
 ''piaf '' is a parisian argot word for `` bird ,  sparrow '' . 
specific words can go from argot into common speech or the other way . 
the materials used to transfer and reject heat from the heat source in electronics are often anisotropic . 
another is wood ,  which is easier to split along its grain than across it . 
seismic anisotropy is the variation of seismic wavespeed with direction . 
and let p be the planar albedo ,  which represents the total reflectance from the scene . 
plasmas may also show `` filamentation ''  -lrb-  such as that seen in lightning or a plasma globe  -rrb-  that is directional . 
radiance fields  -lrb-  see brdf  -rrb-  from a reflective surface are often not isotropic in nature . 
liquid crystals are examples of anisotropic liquids . 
an `` anisotropic liquid '' has the fluidity of a normal liquid ,  but has an average structural order relative to each other along the molecular axis ,  unlike water or chloroform ,  which contain no structural ordering of the molecules . 
some materials conduct heat in a way that is isotropic ,  that is independent of spatial orientation around the heat source . 
anisotropic etching can also refer to certain chemical etchants used to etch a certain material preferentially over certain crystallographic planes  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  koh etching of silicon 100 produces pyramid-like structures  -rrb- 
alpha decay is much more easily shielded against than other forms of radioactive decay . 
alpha decay typically occurs in the heaviest nuclides . 
exceptionally ,  however ,  beryllium-8 decays to two alpha particles . 
by 1928, george gamow had solved the theory of alpha decay via tunneling . 
alpha decay occurs in such nuclei as a means of increasing stability by reducing size . 
americium-241, an alpha emitter ,  is used in smoke detectors . 
alpha decay or α-decay is a type of radioactive decay in which an atomic nucleus emits an alpha particle  -lrb-  helium nucleus  -rrb-  and thereby transforms or 'decays' into a different atomic nucleus ,  with a mass number that is reduced by four and an atomic number that is reduced by two . 
however ,  since the mass numbers of most alpha emitting radioisotopes exceed 210, far greater than the mass number of the alpha particle  -lrb-  4 -rrb- the part of the energy going to the recoil of the nucleus is generally quite small . 
in the report ,  the hlp wrote that:
using the world bank definition of $1.9/day ,   ,  roughly 766 million people remained in extreme poverty  -lrb-  or roughly 1 in 10 people  -rrb-  . 
on the other hand ,  civil conflict also remains a prime cause for the perpetuation of poverty throughout the developing world . 
in september 2000, world leaders gathered at the millennium summit held in new york ,  launching the united nations millennium project suggested by then un secretary-general kofi annan . 
on september 23, 2015, the uk-based `` financial times '' reported that the world bank intends to revise its income-based benchmark upward ,  to $1.90 a day based on 2011 prices . 
however ,  in 2008, the world bank pushed the line to $1.25 to recognize higher price levels in several developing countries than previously estimated . 
in 2013, a prevalent finding in a report by the world bank was that extreme poverty is most prevalent in what they call low income countries . 
this goal was created to end poverty in all its forms everywhere ,  and the international community ,  including the un ,  the world bank and the united states ,  has set a target of ending extreme poverty by 2030.
despite these reservations ,  several prominent international and national organizations ,  including the un ,  the world bank and the united states federal government  -lrb-  via usaid  -rrb-  ,  have set a target of reaching global zero by the end of 2030.
the 2005 world summit ,  held in september and was organized to measure international progress towards fulfilling the millennium development goals  -lrb-  mdgs  -rrb-  . 
there would be no mechanical or microprogramming difficulty in placing the direction of motion under the control of the user . 
the introduction for the first time ,  in 1845, of user operations for a variety of service functions including ,  most importantly ,  an effective system for user control of looping in user programs . 
the committee acknowledged the usefulness and value of the machine ,  but could not estimate the cost of building it ,  and were unsure whether the machine would function correctly after being built . 
this machine was built using materials and engineering tolerances that would have been available to babbage ,  quelling the suggestion that babbage's designs could not have been produced using the manufacturing technology of his time . 
the analytical engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit ,  control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops ,  and integrated memory ,  making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as turing-complete . 
it was first described in 1837 as the successor to babbage's difference engine ,  a design for a simpler mechanical computer . 
allan g .  bromley has assumed that the card deck could be read in forwards and backwards directions as a function of conditional branching after testing for conditions ,  which would make the engine turing-complete:
in 27 bc ,  octavian made a show of returning full power to the roman senate and relinquishing his control of the roman provinces and their armies . 
augustus  -lrb-  ; 23 september 63 bc – 19 august ad 14 -rrb- was a roman statesman and military leader who was the first emperor of the roman empire ,  controlling imperial rome from 27 bc until his death in ad 14.
marching into rome ,  octavian and marcus agrippa were elected as dual consuls by the senate . 
octavian and lepidus launched a joint operation against sextus in sicily in 36 bc . 
on 16 january 27 bc the senate gave octavian the new titles of `` augustus '' and `` princeps '' . 
by 23 bc ,  some of the un-republican implications were becoming apparent concerning the settlement of 27 bc . 
moreover ,  command of these provinces provided octavian with control over the majority of rome's legions . 
arriving in rome on 6 may 44 bc ,  octavian found consul mark antony ,  caesar's former colleague ,  in an uneasy truce with the dictator's assassins . 
in a meeting near bologna in october 43 bc ,  octavian ,  antony ,  and lepidus formed the second triumvirate . 
octavian became the most powerful political figure in the city of rome and in most of its provinces ,  but he did not have a monopoly on political and martial power . 
after the death of marcellus in 23 bc ,  augustus married his daughter to agrippa . 
while his paternal family was from the town of velletri ,  approximately from rome ,  augustus was born in the city of rome on 23 september 63 bc . 
in supporting octavian ,  antony expected to gain support for his own campaign against the parthian empire ,  desiring to avenge rome's defeat at carrhae in 53 bc . 
at the urging of cicero ,  the senate inducted octavian as senator on 1 january 43 bc ,  yet he also was given the power to vote alongside the former consuls . 
on 1 january 42 bc ,  the senate posthumously recognized julius caesar as a divinity of the roman state ,  `` divus iulius '' . 
in 19 bc ,  the senate granted augustus a form of 'general consular imperium' ,  which was probably 'imperium consulare maius' ,  like the proconsular powers that he received in 23 bc . 
years of civil war had left rome in a state of near lawlessness ,  but the republic was not prepared to accept the control of octavian as a despot . 
in fact ,  he dated his 'reign' from the completion of the second settlement ,  1 july 23 bc . 
historians usually refer to the new caesar as `` octavian '' during the time between his adoption and his assumption of the name augustus in 27 bc in order to avoid confusing the dead dictator with his heir . 
both consuls were killed ,  however ,  leaving octavian in sole command of their armies . 
lepidus' troops deserted him ,  however ,  and defected to octavian since they were weary of fighting and were enticed by octavian's promises of money . 
octavian made another bold move in 44 bc when ,  without official permission ,  he appropriated the annual tribute that had been sent from rome's near eastern province to italy . 
to further cement relations of alliance with mark antony ,  octavian gave his sister ,  octavia minor ,  in marriage to antony in late 40 bc . 
octavian could not rely on his limited funds to make a successful entry into the upper echelons of the roman political hierarchy . 
roman troops captured the kingdom of armenia in 34 bc ,  and antony made his son alexander helios the ruler of armenia . 
the territorial agreement between the triumvirate and sextus pompeius began to crumble once octavian divorced scribonia and married livia on 17 january 38 bc . 
cicero also defended octavian against antony's taunts about octavian's lack of noble lineage and aping of julius caesar's name ,  stating `` we have no more brilliant example of traditional piety among our youth . `` 
the breach between antony and octavian prompted a large portion of the senators ,  as well as both of that year's consuls ,  to leave rome and defect to antony . 
to a large extent ,  the public were aware of the vast financial resources that octavian commanded . 
trapped on land and sea ,  deserters of antony's army fled to octavian's side daily while octavian's forces were comfortable enough to make preparations . 
lepidus was driven into exile and stripped of his position ,  and antony committed suicide following his defeat at the battle of actium by octavian in 31 bc . 
in the face of octavian's large and capable force ,  antony saw the danger of staying in rome and ,  to the relief of the senate ,  he left rome for cisalpine gaul ,  which was to be handed to him on 1 january . 
for example ,  octavian allowed the proscription of his ally cicero ,  antony the proscription of his maternal uncle lucius julius caesar  -lrb-  the consul of 64 bc  -rrb-  ,  and lepidus his brother paullus . 
while octavian acted as consul in rome ,  he dispatched senators to the provinces under his command as his representatives to manage provincial affairs and ensure that his orders were carried out . 
a temporary peace agreement was reached in 39 bc with the treaty of misenum; the blockade on italy was lifted once octavian granted pompeius sardinia ,  corsica ,  sicily ,  and the peloponnese ,  and ensured him a future position as consul for 35 bc . 
octavian had the senate grant him ,  his wife ,  and his sister tribunal immunity ,  or `` sacrosanctitas '' ,  in order to ensure his own safety and that of livia and octavia once he returned to rome . 
on 5 february 2 bc ,  augustus was also given the title `` pater patriae '' ,  or `` father of the country '' . 
octavian lacked the resources to confront pompeius alone ,  however ,  so an agreement was reached with the second triumvirate's extension for another five-year period beginning in 37 bc . 
octavian became consul once again on 1 january 33 bc ,  and he opened the following session in the senate with a vehement attack on antony's grants of titles and territories to his relatives and to his queen . 
lepidus was left with the province of africa ,  stymied by antony ,  who conceded hispania to octavian instead . 
octavian began to bolster his personal forces with caesar's veteran legionaries and with troops designated for the parthian war ,  gathering support by emphasizing his status as heir to caesar . 
lesser antarctica is covered by the west antarctic ice sheet . 
some 98% of antarctica is covered by the antarctic ice sheet ,  the world's largest ice sheet and also its largest reservoir of fresh water . 
ice shelves and rises populate the ice sheet on the periphery . 
transport in antarctica has transformed from explorers crossing the isolated remote area of antarctica by foot to a more open era due to human technologies enabling more convenient and faster transport ,  predominantly by air and water ,  as well as land . 
the geography of alabama describes a state in the southeastern united states in north america . 
southeast of the appalachian valley region ,  the piedmont plateau also crosses the alabama border from the n . e . 
adjoining the cumberland plateau region on the southeast is the appalachian valley  -lrb-  locally known as coosa valley  -rrb-  region ,  which is the southern extremity of the appalachian mountains ,  and occupies an area within the state of about  . 
the fauna and flora of alabama are similar to those of the gulf states in general and have no distinctive characteristics . 
extending entirely across the state of alabama for about northern boundary ,  and in the middle stretching farther south ,  is the cumberland plateau ,  or tennessee valley region ,  broken into broad tablelands by the dissection of rivers . 
the governor and lieutenant governor are not elected on the same ticket . 
she is the second female governor of alabama . 
the governor of alabama is the chief executive of the u . s .  state of alabama . 
there have officially been 54 governors of the state of alabama; this official numbering skips acting and military governors . 
these books are:
some were not accepted by the jews as part of the hebrew bible canon and the apocrypha is not part of the historical jewish canon . 
the eastern orthodox church accepts a few more books than appear in the catholic canon . 
roman catholics and orthodox christians as well as protestants generally agree on the canon of the new testament ,  see development of the new testament canon . 
the book of enoch is included in the biblical canon of the oriental orthodox churches of ethiopia and eritrea . 
the ethiopian orthodox have in the past also included i & ii clement and shepherd of hermas in their new testament canon . 
protestants accept none of these additional books as canon either ,  but see them having roughly the same status as the other apocrypha . 
slightly varying collections of apocryphal ,  deuterocanonical ,  or intertestamental books of the bible form part of the roman catholic ,  eastern orthodox and oriental orthodox canons  -lrb-  cf development of the old testament canon  -rrb-  . 
the canonical validity of the intertestamental books was challenged in the 16th century by protestants . 
the actual status of the books which the catholic church terms `` deuterocanonicals ''  -lrb-  second canon  -rrb-  and protestantism refers to as `` apocrypha '' has been an issue of disagreement which preceded the reformation . 
the term `` apocrypha '' commonly appears in christian religious contexts concerning disagreements about biblical canonicity . 
the epistles of paul and the gospels also show influences from the book of jubilees ,  which is part of the ethiopian canon ,  as well as the assumption of moses and the testaments of the twelve patriarchs ,  which are included in no biblical canon . 
some u . s .  laws directly apply to antarctica . 
south african law applies to all south african citizens in antarctica ,  and they are subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate's court in cape town . 
marshals in antarctica to provide a law enforcement presence . 
that year ,  norway formally laid claim to the area between its queen maud land and the south pole . 
antarctica currently has no permanent population and therefore it has no citizenship nor government . 
in regard to violations of the antarctic treaty and related agreements ,  south africa also asserts jurisdiction over south african residents and members of expeditions organised in south africa . 
lawson's brother ,  george h .  lawson ,  founded the united states league in 1910.
he founded the lawson aircraft company in green bay ,  wisconsin ,  to build military training aircraft and later the lawson airplane company in south milwaukee ,  wisconsin ,  to build airliners . 
the league lasted less than a season ,  but it was revived for one season by george lawson's associates in 1912.
he later managed in the minors from 1905 to 1907.
lawson repeatedly predicted the worldwide adoption of lawsonian principles by the year 2000.
iowa state university is home to 36,321 students  -lrb-  fall 2017 -rrb- ,  which make up approximately one half of the city's population . 
ames has the headquarters for the iowa department of transportation . 
the exterior of the shell is striated and dull . 
the aperture of the shell is very wide and nacreous . 
other common names are ear shells ,  sea ears ,  and muttonfish or muttonshells in australia ,  ormer in great britain ,  abalone in south africa ,  and in new zealand . 
a mantle cleft in the shell impresses a groove in the shell ,  in which are the row of holes characteristic of the genus . 
the majority of abalone species are found in cold waters ,  such as off the coasts of new zealand ,  south africa ,  australia ,  western north america ,  and japan . 
the meat was used as food ,  and the shell was used as currency for many tribes . 
in new zealand ,  abalone is called `` pāua ''  -lrb-   ,  from the māori language  -rrb-  . 
there is an active trade in the shells ,  which sell for more than us$1,400 per metric tonne . 
the shells of abalone are occasionally used in new age smudging ceremonies to catch falling ash . 
 -lrb-  scuba diving for abalone in the states of new south wales and western australia is illegal; a free-diving catch limit of two is allowed  -rrb-  . 
the shells of abalones have a low ,  open spiral structure ,  and are characterized by several open respiratory pores in a row near the shell's outer edge . 
 ''haliotis australis '' and `` haliotis virginea '' are also found in new zealand waters ,  but are less popular than `` h .  iris '' . 
abalone is also farmed in australia ,  canada ,  chile ,  france ,  iceland ,  ireland ,  mexico ,  namibia ,  new zealand ,  south africa ,  spain ,  thailand ,  and the united states . 
the shell of abalones is convex ,  rounded to oval in shape ,  and may be highly arched or very flattened . 
abalone pearl jewelry is very popular in new zealand and australia ,  in no minor part due to the marketing and farming efforts of pearl companies . 
in south africa ,  all persons harvesting this shellfish need permits that are issued annually ,  and no abalone may be harvested using scuba gear . 
the abbess is required to be an austrian archduchess . 
in lutheran churches ,  the title of abbess  -lrb-  german `` äbtissin ''  -rrb-  has in some cases  -lrb-  e . g .    -rrb- 
the last such ruling abbess was sofia albertina ,  princess of sweden . 
in christianity ,  an abbess  -lrb-  latin `` abbatissa '' ,  feminine form of `` abbas , ``  abbot  -rrb-  is the female superior of a community of nuns ,  which is often an abbey . 
the term abdominal surgery broadly covers surgical procedures that involve opening the abdomen . 
he is buried in the former convent of abensberg . 
the town has had a coat of arms since 1338, that of the counts of abensberg . 
the swords recall the battle of abensberg . 
the town is divided into the municipalities of abensberg ,  arnhofen ,  holzharlanden ,  hörlbach ,  offenstetten ,  pullach and sandharland . 
in the middle ages ,  the people of abensberg enjoyed a level of autonomy above their lord . 
john wesley has historically been the most influential advocate for the teachings of arminian soteriology . 
arminian theology usually falls into one of two groups — classical arminianism ,  drawn from the teaching of jacobus arminius — and wesleyan arminian ,  drawing primarily from wesley . 
arminianism is known to some as a soteriological diversification of protestant calvinist christianity; to others ,  arminianism is a reclamation of early church theological consensus . 
the current scholarly support for arminianism is wide and varied . 
many christian denominations have been influenced by arminian views on the will of man being freed by grace prior to regeneration ,  notably the baptists in the 16th century ,  the methodists in the 18th century and the seventh-day adventist church in the 19th century . 
this same dynamic between arminianism and calvinism can be seen in the heated discussions between friends and fellow anglican ministers john wesley and george whitefield . 
classical arminianism is the theological system that was presented by jacobus arminius and maintained by some of the remonstrants; its influence serves as the foundation for all arminian systems . 
lutherans espouse a view of salvation and election distinct from both the calvinist and arminian schools of soteriology . 
almost all the songs on the project's albums are credited to `` woolfson/parsons '' . 
arista records then signed the alan parsons project participants for further albums . 
the alan parsons project were an english rock band active between 1975 and 1990, whose core membership consisted of alan parsons and eric woolfson . 
meanwhile ,  woolfson made concept albums titled `` freudiana ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  about sigmund freud's work on psychology ,  and ``  ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb-; this continued from the alan parsons project's first album about edgar allan poe's literature . 
a small number of musicians worked with the alan parsons project regularly . 
even though the studio version of `` freudiana '' was produced by parsons  -lrb-  and featured the regular project backing musicians ,  making it an 'unofficial' project album  -rrb-  ,  it was primarily woolfson's idea to turn it into a musical . 
in contrast ,  `` almost no '' means `` a negligible amount ''; that is ,  `` almost no elements of x '' means `` the elements of some negligible subset of x '' . 
benzene ,  ch ,  is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon ,  and it was the first one named as such . 
this leaves one electron to share with one of the two neighbouring carbon atoms ,  thus creating a double bond with one carbon and leaving a single bond with the other ,  which is why the benzene molecule is drawn with alternating single and double bonds around the hexagon . 
the church at the abbey was commenced in 1089 ad by st .  hugh ,  the sixth abbot . 
the monks of the abbey lived in a house built against the north wall of the church . 
the church at bayham old abbey had no aisles in the nave or the choir . 
the head abbey in england was at welbeck but the best preserved are easby abbey in yorkshire ,  and bayham old abbey in kent . 
the nave of the church was on the north boundary of the cloister . 
the abbey church occupied the centre of a quadrangular area ,  about square . 
the abbey was surrounded by fortified walls on three sides . 
in 1055, st mary's abbey ,  york was built in england's north by the order of saint benedict . 
in 1245 ad it was raised to the status of an abbey ,  answerable only to the pope . 
to the north of the church and to the right of the main entrance to the abbey ,  was a residence for distinguished guests . 
there are many famous abbeys across europe . 
the physic garden occupied the north east corner of the abbey . 
one door of the parlour led to the cloisters and the other led to the outer part of the abbey . 
therefore ,  they built their churches in the shape of a long room . 
on the south side of the cloister was the refectory . 
the same principle governed the choice of site for cistercian abbeys in that a most dismal site might be improved by the building of an abbey . 
the layout of the church and associated buildings of an abbey often follows a set plan determined by the founding religious order . 
by the twelfth century ,  the abbey of cluny was the head of an order consisting of 314 monasteries . 
the cloister and buildings lie directly to the south of the church . 
in the dechristianization of france during the french revolution in 1790 ad ,  the abbey church was bought by the town and almost entirely destroyed . 
histoire ,  sciences sociales ''  -lrb-  1994–   -rrb-  . 
the annales school kept its infrastructure ,  but lost its `` mentalités '' . 
the `` annales '' school  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a group of historians associated with a style of historiography developed by french historians in the 20th century to stress long-term social history . 
the wageningen school centered on bernard slicher van bath was viewed internationally as a dutch counterpart of the annales school ,  although slicher van bath himself vehemently rejected the idea of a quantitative `` school '' of historiography . 
the journal began in strasbourg as `` annales d'histoire économique et sociale ''; it moved to paris and kept the same name from 1929 to 1939.
the book dramatically raised the worldwide profile of the annales school . 
the reciprocal influence between the french school and polish historiography was particularly evident in studies on the middle ages and the early modern era studied by braudel . 
the `` annales '' school systematically reached out to create an impact on other countries . 
almost all matter observable from the earth seems to be made of matter rather than antimatter . 
the idea of negative matter appears in past theories of matter that have now been abandoned . 
assuming a 100% conversion of antiprotons to antihydrogen ,  it would take 100 billion years to produce 1 gram or 1 mole of antihydrogen  -lrb-  approximately atoms of anti-hydrogen  -rrb-  . 
the antiprotons are still hot when initially trapped . 
some hundreds of millions of antihydrogen atoms have been made in this fashion . 
this was the first time that neutral antimatter had been trapped . 
alpha has used these trapped atoms to initiate research into the spectral properties of the antihydrogen . 
cosmic ray antiprotons also have a much higher energy than their normal-matter counterparts  -lrb-  protons  -rrb-  . 
antimatter cannot be stored in a container made of ordinary matter because antimatter reacts with any matter it touches ,  annihilating itself and an equal amount of the container . 
most of the sought-after high-precision tests of the properties of antihydrogen could only be performed if the antihydrogen were trapped ,  that is ,  held in place for a relatively long time . 
on 26 april 2011, alpha announced that they had trapped 309 antihydrogen atoms ,  some for as long as 1,000 seconds  -lrb-  about 17 minutes  -rrb-  . 
there is strong evidence that the observable universe is composed almost entirely of ordinary matter ,  as opposed to an equal mixture of matter and antimatter . 
in 2011, cern scientists were able to preserve antihydrogen for approximately 17 minutes . 
antimatter particles bind with one another to form antimatter ,  just as ordinary particles bind to form normal matter . 
in 1999, cern activated the antiproton decelerator ,  a device capable of decelerating antiprotons from to —still too `` hot '' to produce study-effective antihydrogen ,  but a huge leap forward . 
the process by which this inequality between matter and antimatter particles developed is called baryogenesis . 
this measurement represents the first time that a property of antimatter is known more precisely than the equivalent property in matter . 
satellite experiments have found evidence of positrons and a few antiprotons in primary cosmic rays ,  amounting to less than 1% of the particles in primary cosmic rays . 
the house was bought by josep batlló in 1900.
casa batlló  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a building in the center of barcelona . 
in 1906 josep batlló still owned the home . 
the family lived on the noble floor of casa batlló until the middle of the 1950s . 
the building had a basement ,  a ground floor ,  four other floors and a garden in the back . 
in 2005, casa batlló became a unesco world heritage site . 
the building that is now casa batlló was built in 1877, commissioned by lluís sala sánchez . 
josep batlló died in 1934 and the house was kept in order by the wife until her death in 1940  . 
in 1904 josep batlló hired gaudí to design his home; at first his plans were to tear down the building and construct a completely new house . 
güell and gaudí conceived this park ,  situated within a natural park . 
the park was built from 1900 to 1914 and was officially opened as a public park in 1926.
park güell is designed and composed to bring the peace and calm that one would expect from a park . 
the park was originally part of a commercially unsuccessful housing site ,  the idea of count eusebi güell ,  after whom the park was named . 
the park güell  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is a public park system composed of gardens and architectonic elements located on carmel hill ,  in barcelona ,  catalonia ,  spain . 
in 1940, milà died . 
however ,  the casa milà was not built entirely to gaudí's specifications . 
gaudí ,  as he had done in casa batlló ,  designed furniture specifically for the main floor . 
casa milà was built for roser segimón and her husband pere milà . 
 ''casa milà '' is part of the unesco world heritage site `` works of antoni gaudí '' . 
the other floors are not open to visitors . 
milà was having to pay the mortgage . 
casa milà also caused some administrative problems . 
gaudí ,  a catholic and a devotee of the virgin mary ,  planned for the casa milà to be a spiritual symbol . 
after gaudí's death in 1926, segimon got rid of most of the furniture that gaudí had designed and covered over parts of gaudí's designs with new decorations in the style of louis xvi . 
gaudí's la pedrera was inspired by a mountain ,  but there is no agreement as to which mountain was the reference model . 
the building is 1,323 m per floor on a plot of 1,620 m .  gaudí made the first sketches in his workshop in the sagrada família . 
gaudí's work was designated a historic and artistic monument on july 24, 1969.
for the floors of casa milà ,  gaudí used a model of floor forms of square timbers with two colors ,  and the hydraulic pavement hexagonal pieces of blue and sea motifs that had originally been designed for the batllo house . 
gaudí carved oak doors similar to what he had done for the casa y bardes ,  but these were only included on two floors as when segimon discovered the price ,  she decided there would be no more at that quality . 
some people say that the interior layout of la pedrera comes from studies that gaudí made of medieval fortresses . 
the insurance company northern took over the main floor in 1966.
gaudí's original facade had some of its lower-level ironwork removed . 
then one can rewrite the field in the form
the opposite is also true: the antiparticle of the positron is the electron . 
one may try to quantize an electron field without mixing the annihilation and creation operators by writing
however ,  if one now writes down the hamiltonian
solutions of the dirac equation contained negative energy quantum states . 
these holes were interpreted as `` negative-energy electrons '' by paul dirac and by mistake he identified them with protons in his 1930 paper `` a theory of electrons and protons '' however ,  these `` negative-energy electrons '' turned out to be positrons ,  and not protons . 
a unified interpretation of antiparticles is now available in quantum field theory ,  which solves both these problems . 
this technique is the most widespread method of computing amplitudes in quantum field theory today . 
so one has to introduce the charge conjugate `` antiparticle '' field ,  with its own creation and annihilation operators satisfying the relations
he is best known as a founding member of n . w . a . 
after leaving n . w . a ,  arabian prince began a solo career . 
nazel was born in compton ,  california to the son of joseph `` skippy '' nazel jr .  ,  a prominent african american author and radio talk show host . 
for example ,  the order does not matter in the multiplication of real numbers ,  that is ,   ,  so we say that the multiplication of real numbers is a commutative operation . 
here ,  ∗ is used to replace the symbol of the operation ,  which may be any symbol ,  and even the absence of symbol  -lrb-  juxtaposition  -rrb-  as for multiplication . 
since this holds true when performing addition and multiplication on any real numbers ,  it can be said that `` addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative operations '' . 
the asf was formed from the apache group and incorporated on march 25, 1999.
the asf board of directors has responsibility for overseeing the asf's activities and acting as a central point of contact and communication for its projects . 
the asf also holds several apachecon conferences each year ,  highlighting apache projects and related technology . 
in this way ,  the asf gains the necessary intellectual property rights for the development and distribution of all its projects . 
see also us labor law and  . 
ada also sets minimum requirements for space layout in order to facilitate wheelchair securement on public transport . 
title iv of the ada amended the landmark communications act of 1934 primarily by adding section  . 
title ii also applies to all state and local public housing ,  housing assistance ,  and housing referrals . 
title ii applies to public transportation provided by public entities through regulations by the u . s .  department of transportation . 
title iii also has application to existing facilities . 
the ada provides explicit coverage for service animals . 
ada disabilities include both mental and physical medical conditions . 
on march 5, 1975, steve wozniak attended the first meeting of the homebrew computer club in gordon french's garage . 
both steve jobs and steve wozniak have stated that apple did not assign serial numbers to the apple l .  several boards have been found with numbered stickers affixed to them ,  which appear to be inspection stickers from the pcb manufacturer/assembler . 
the apple i went on sale in july 1976 at a price of  ,  because wozniak `` liked repeating digits '' and because of a one-third markup on the $500 wholesale price . 
about 200 units were produced ,  and all but 25 were sold during nine or ten months . 
the skull also included forward-pointing nasalssomething different to any dinosaurand fenestrae differing from both the drawing and other skulls . 
until 1970, `` apatosaurus '' skeletons were mounted with speculative skull casts ,  when mcintosh showed that more robust skulls assigned to `` diplodocus '' were more likely from `` apatosaurus '' . 
after holland's death in 1934, museum staff placed a cast of a `` camarasaurus '' skull on the mount . 
the skull of `` apatosaurus '' was confused with that of `` camarasaurus '' and `` brachiosaurus '' until 1909, when the holotype of `` a .  louisae '' was found ,  and a complete skull just a few meters away from the front of the neck . 
while most other museums were using cast or sculpted `` camarasaurus '' skulls on `` apatosaurus '' mounts ,  the yale peabody museum decided to sculpt a skull based on the lower jaw of a `` camarasaurus '' ,  with the cranium based on marsh's 1891 illustration of the skull . 
the specimen was found in cactus park quarry in western colorado . 
no `` apatosaurus '' skull was mentioned in literature until the 1970s when john stanton mcintosh and david berman redescribed the skulls of `` diplodocus '' and `` apatosaurus '' . 
the skull and teeth of `` allosaurus '' were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size . 
the braincase and frontals may also have had a joint . 
it may have belonged to something similar to ,  or the same as ,  `` australovenator '' ,  or it may represent an abelisaur . 
 ''a .  fragilis '' is the type species and was named by marsh in 1877.
big al two is also known to have multiple injuries . 
however ,  they found that the specimen was undiagnostic ,  and thus `` a .  lucaris '' was a `` nomen dubium '' . 
it may be closely related to `` acrocanthosaurus '' . 
the skull had a pair of horns above and in front of the eyes . 
 ''a .  lucaris '' ,  another marsh name ,  was given to a partial skeleton in 1878.
 ''l .  sulcatus '' ,  named by marsh in 1896 for a morrison theropod tooth ,  which like `` l .  stechowi '' is now regarded as a dubious `` ceratosaurus ''-like ceratosaur . 
there was a ridge along the back of the skull roof for muscle attachment ,  as is also seen in tyrannosaurids . 
 ''a .  europaeus '' was found in the kimmeridgian-age porto novo member of the lourinhã formation ,  but may be the same as `` a .  fragilis '' . 
 ''allosaurus '' was a typical large theropod ,  having a massive skull on a short neck ,  a long tail and reduced forelimbs . 
several gigantic specimens have been attributed to `` allosaurus '' ,  but may in fact belong to other genera . 
inside the lacrimal bones were depressions that may have held glands ,  such as salt glands . 
due to having a much weaker bite force and a much wider gape than most other large carnivorous dinosaurs ,  it may have attacked large prey by ambush ,  using its upper jaw like a hatchet . 
a more recent discovery is a partial skeleton from the peterson quarry in morrison rocks of new mexico; this large allosaurid may be another individual of `` saurophaganax '' . 
this type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey ,  with the goal of weakening the victim . 
 ''allosaurus '' was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of western american fossil-bearing rock known as the morrison formation ,  accounting for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens ,  and as such was at the top trophic level of the morrison food web . 
conversely ,  the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically ,  increasing in size without changing in proportion . 
 '' ''antrodemus '' '' has been used informally for convenience when distinguishing between the skull gilmore restored and the composite skull restored by madsen . 
medullary bone tissue  -lrb-  endosteally derived ,  ephemeral ,  mineralization located inside the medulla of the long bones in gravid female birds  -rrb-  has been reported in at least one `` allosaurus '' specimen ,  a shin bone from the cleveland-lloyd quarry . 
although the idea of two common morrison allosaur species was followed in some semi-technical and popular works ,  the 2000 thesis on allosauridae noted that charles gilmore mistakenly reconstructed usnm 4734 as having a shorter skull than the specimens referred by paul to `` atrox '' ,  refuting supposed differences between usnm 4734 and putative `` a .  atrox '' specimens like dino 2560, amnh 600, and amnh 666.
design work on the ak-47 began in 1945.
in 1974, the soviets began replacing their ak-47 and akm rifles with a newer design ,  the ak-74, which uses 5.45×39mm ammunition . 
in november 1947, the new prototypes  -lrb-  ak-47s  -rrb-  were completed . 
the ak-47, officially known as the avtomat kalashnikova  -lrb-  ; also known as the kalashnikov and ak  -rrb-  ,  is a gas-operated ,  7.62×39mm assault rifle ,  developed in the soviet union by mikhail kalashnikov . 
the ak fires the 7.62×39mm cartridge with a muzzle velocity of  . 
it is the originating firearm of the kalashnikov rifle  -lrb-  or `` ak ''  -rrb-  family . 
in 1949, it was adopted by the soviet army as `` 7.62 mm kalashnikov assault rifle  -lrb-  ak  -rrb- ``  . 
however ,  this new kalashnikov design lost out to a simonov design . 
kalashnikov's rifles ak-1  -lrb-  with a milled receiver  -rrb-  and ak-2  -lrb-  with a stamped receiver  -rrb-  proved to be reliable weapons and were accepted to a second round of competition along with other designs . 
all 100 series aks use plastic furniture with side-folding stocks . 
early steel ak-47 magazines are long; the later ribbed steel akm and newer plastic 7.62×39mm magazines are about shorter . 
kalashnikov started work on a submachine gun design in 1942 and with a light machine gun in 1943.
there were two forms of input and output: primary user input and output and an intermediate results output and input . 
he submitted many of these problems to atanasoff . 
the abc was built by atanasoff and berry in the basement of the physics building at iowa state college during 1939–42.
on june 26, 1947, j .  presper eckert and john mauchly were the first to file for patent on a digital computing device  -lrb-  eniac  -rrb-  ,  much to the surprise of atanasoff . 
this problem was not solved by the time atanasoff left the university for war-related work . 
the united states district court for the district of minnesota released its judgement on october 19, 1973, finding in `` honeywell v .  sperry rand '' that the eniac patent was a derivative of john atanasoff's invention . 
 -lrb-  the largest problem that could be solved without the use of the intermediate output and input was two simultaneous equations ,  a trivial problem .   -rrb- 
the andes mountains are the world's highest mountain range outside asia . 
the andes or andean mountains  -lrb-    -rrb-  are the longest continental mountain range in the world ,  forming a continuous highland along the western edge of south america . 
 ''macrotherium magnum '' must have been an animal of about nine feet in length . 
anchors can either be temporary or permanent . 
since all anchors that embed themselves in the bottom require the strain to be along the seabed ,  anchors can be broken out of the bottom by shortening the rope until the vessel is directly above the anchor; at this point the anchor chain is `` up and down '' ,  in naval parlance . 
before dropping the anchor ,  the fishing process is reversed ,  and the anchor is dropped from the end of the cathead . 
the stockless anchor ,  patented in england in 1821, represented the first significant departure in anchor design in centuries . 
in recent years there has been something of a spurt in anchor design . 
vessels carry one or more temporary anchors ,  which may be of different designs and weights . 
plough anchors are usually stowed in a roller at the bow . 
the term `` aweigh '' describes an anchor when it is hanging on the rope and is not resting on the bottom . 
until the mid-20th century ,  anchors for smaller vessels were either scaled-down versions of admiralty anchors ,  or simple grapnels . 
this claw-shaped anchor was designed by peter bruce from the isle of man in the 1970s . 
this is particularly important for light ,  modern anchors designed to bury in the bottom ,  where scopes of 5- to 7-to-1 are common ,  whereas heavy anchors and moorings can use a scope of 3-to-1, or less . 
anbar  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a town in iraq ,  at lat . 
anbar used to host an assyrian community from the fifth century: the town was the seat of a bishopric of the church of the east . 
anbar was adjacent or identical to the babylonian jewish center of nehardea  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and lies a short distance from the present-day town of fallujah ,  formerly the babylonian jewish center of pumbedita  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
its great natural strength and situation ,  not far from the mouth of the sis pass ,  and near the great road which debouched from the cilician gates ,  made anazarbus play a considerable part in the struggles between the eastern roman empire and the early muslim invaders . 
it was situated in anatolia in modern turkey ,  in the present çukurova  -lrb-  or classical aleian plain  -rrb-  about 15 km west of the main stream of the present ceyhan river  -lrb-  or classical pyramus river  -rrb-  and near its tributary the sempas su . 
