in dna replication ,  dna-dependent dna polymerases make copies of dna polynucleotide chains . 
dna can be twisted like a rope in a process called dna supercoiling . 
modified bases also occur in dna . 
dna can be damaged by many sorts of mutagens ,  which change the dna sequence . 
enzymes called dna ligases can rejoin cut or broken dna strands . 
enzymes can also bind to dna and of these ,  the polymerases that copy the dna base sequence in transcription and dna replication are particularly important . 
topoisomerases are required for many processes involving dna ,  such as dna replication and transcription . 
all the functions of dna depend on interactions with proteins . 
dna was first isolated by friedrich miescher in 1869.
rna-dependent dna polymerases are a specialized class of polymerases that copy the sequence of an rna strand into dna . 
twin helical strands form the dna backbone . 
this changes the accessibility of the dna template to the polymerase . 
they are also used in dna repair and genetic recombination . 
these compact structures guide the interactions between dna and other proteins ,  helping control which parts of the dna are transcribed . 
both strands of double-stranded dna store the same biological information . 
in dna ,  fraying occurs when non-complementary regions exist at the end of an otherwise complementary double-strand of dna . 
dna nanotechnology uses the unique molecular recognition properties of dna and other nucleic acids to create self-assembling branched dna complexes with useful properties . 
one major difference between dna and rna is the sugar ,  with the 2-deoxyribose in dna being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in rna . 
these enzymes are also needed to relieve the twisting stresses introduced into dna strands during processes such as transcription and dna replication . 
seventeen non canonical bases are known to occur in dna . 
the reason for the presence of these non canonical bases in dna is not known . 
the two strands of dna run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel . 
genomic dna is tightly and orderly packed in the process called dna condensation ,  to fit the small available volumes of the cell . 
the backbone of the dna strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues . 
these enzymes are essential for most processes where enzymes need to access the dna bases . 
deoxyribozymes ,  also called dnazymes or catalytic dna ,  are first discovered in 1994.
uracil is not usually found in dna ,  occurring only as a breakdown product of cytosine . 
in dna ,  the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine; the purines are adenine and guanine . 
transcription is carried out by a dna-dependent rna polymerase that copies the sequence of a dna strand into rna . 
in most organisms ,  dna polymerases function in a large complex called the replisome that contains multiple accessory subunits ,  such as the dna clamp or helicases . 
in technology ,  these sequence-specific nucleases are used in molecular cloning and dna fingerprinting . 
in a dna double helix ,  each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand . 
dna is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides . 
at the ends of the linear chromosomes are specialized regions of dna called telomeres . 
joseph sr .  and rose elizabeth fitzgerald ,  were the parents of nine children: joseph jr .  ,  john ,  rosemary ,  kathleen ,  eunice ,  patricia ,  robert ,  jean ,  and ted . 
joseph sr .  expected his eldest son ,  joseph jr .  ,  to go into politics and to ultimately be elected president . 
ted served in the senate with his brother robert ,  and was serving in the senate when his nephew ,  joseph p .  ii ,  and son ,  patrick j .  ,  served in the u . s .  house of representatives . 
patrick kennedy was born there in 1823.
p . j . 
in november 2012, joseph p .  kennedy iii ,  son of former rep .  joseph p .  kennedy ii and grandson of the late sen .  robert f .  kennedy ,  was elected to the u . s .  house of representatives from massachusetts' 4th congressional district . 
a direct democracy gives the voting population the power to:
democracy  -lrb-   ``  '' ,  literally `` rule by 'people' ''  -rrb-  is a system of government where the citizens exercise power by voting . 
however ,  the power to call parliament remained at the pleasure of the monarch . 
democracy contrasts with forms of government where power is either held by an individual ,  as in an absolute monarchy ,  or where power is held by a small number of individuals ,  as in an oligarchy . 
an elected president ,  with or without significant powers ,  became the head of state in these countries . 
most western countries have representative systems . 
majority rule is often listed as a characteristic of democracy . 
the bill set out the requirement for regular elections ,  rules for freedom of speech in parliament and limited the power of the monarch ,  ensuring that ,  unlike much of europe at the time ,  royal absolutism would not prevail . 
furthermore ,  any voting would be ethno-colour blind . 
countries that were once part of the british empire often adopted the british westminster system . 
this indicates that forms of democracy may have been invented in other societies around the world . 
the particular powers held by the prime minister and president vary by country . 
over time ,  these either had their powers limited  -lrb-  as with the british house of lords  -rrb-  or else became elective and remained powerful  -lrb-  as with the australian senate  -rrb-  . 
there are two main aspects of freedom: being ruled and ruling in turn ,  since everyone is equal according to number ,  not merit ,  and to be able to live as one pleases . 
countries freedom house regards as free and respectful of basic human rights and the rule of law are 85 in number and represent 38 percent of the global population . 
other uses of `` democracy '' include that of direct democracy . 
full enfranchisement of citizens was not secured until after the civil rights movement gained passage by the united states congress of the voting rights act of 1965.
a semi-presidential system is a system of democracy in which the government includes both a prime minister and a president . 
during the middle ages ,  there were various systems involving elections or assemblies ,  although often only involving a small part of the population . 
the bill of rights in 1791 set limits on government power to protect personal freedoms but had little impact on judgements by the courts for the first 130 years after ratification . 
the american revolution led to the adoption of the united states constitution in 1787, the oldest surviving ,  still active ,  governmental codified constitution . 
in 2008, the german parliament proposed but shelved a bill that would grant the vote to each citizen at birth ,  to be used by a parent until the child claims it for themselves . 
aristotle contrasted rule by the many  -lrb-  democracy/timocracy  -rrb-  ,  with rule by the few  -lrb-  oligarchy/aristocracy  -rrb-  ,  and with rule by a single person  -lrb-  tyranny or today autocracy/absolute monarchy  -rrb-  . 
presidential democracy is a system where the public elects the president through free and fair elections . 
the first parliament of great britain was established in 1707, after the merger of the kingdom of england and the kingdom of scotland under the acts of union . 
in 1876 turkey transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a consitutional one ,  and held two elections the next year to elect members to her newly formed parliament . 
for aristotle the underlying principle of democracy is freedom ,  since only in a democracy can the citizens have a share in freedom . 
the term `` republic '' has many different meanings ,  but today often refers to a representative democracy with an elected head of state ,  such as a president ,  serving for a limited term ,  in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state ,  even if these states also are representative democracies with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister . 
a parpolity or participatory polity is a theoretical form of democracy that is ruled by a nested council structure . 
most importantly ,  citizens do not really rule themselves unless they directly decide laws and policies . 
direct democracy is a political system where the citizens participate in the decision-making personally ,  contrary to relying on intermediaries or representatives . 
he also thought that there was a good and a bad variant of each system  -lrb-  he considered democracy to be the degenerate counterpart to timocracy  -rrb-  . 
according to the theory of direct democracy ,  on the other hand ,  citizens should vote directly ,  not through their representatives ,  on legislative proposals . 
in other words ,  citizens can `` vote with their feet '' or `` vote with their dollars '' ,  resulting in significant informal government-by-the-masses that exercises many `` powers '' associated with formal government elsewhere . 
the term appeared in the 5th century bc to denote the political systems then existing in greek city-states ,  notably athens ,  to mean `` rule of the people '' ,  in contrast to aristocracy  -lrb-   ,  ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` rule of an elite '' . 
no consensus exists on how to define democracy ,  but legal equality ,  political freedom and rule of law have been identified as important characteristics . 
in most modern democracies ,  the whole body of eligible citizens remain the sovereign power but political power is exercised indirectly through elected representatives; this is called a representative democracy . 
with its emphasis on notions of social contract and the collective will of all the voters ,  democracy can also be characterised as a form of political collectivism because it is defined as a form of government in which all eligible citizens have an equal say in lawmaking . 
even though the rights of the individual were not secured by the athenian constitution in the modern sense  -lrb-  the ancient greeks had no word for `` rights ''  -rrb-  ,  the athenians enjoyed their liberties not in opposition to the government but by living in a city that was not subject to another power and by not being subjects themselves to the rule of another person . 
the united nations ,  as well as the creation of new institutions such as a world parliament ,  which ideally would enhance public control over ,  and accountability in ,  international politics . 
however ,  if any democracy is not structured so as to prohibit the government from excluding the people from the legislative process ,  or any branch of government from altering the separation of powers in its own favour ,  then a branch of the system can accumulate too much power and destroy the democracy . 
a council court of randomly chosen citizens serves as a check on the tyranny of the majority ,  and rules on which body gets to vote on which issue . 
within modern-day representative governments ,  certain electoral tools like referendums ,  citizens' initiatives and recall elections are referred to as forms of direct democracy . 
athenian democracy was not only `` direct '' in the sense that decisions were made by the assembled people ,  but also the `` most direct '' in the sense that the people through the assembly ,  boule and courts of law controlled the entire political process and a large proportion of citizens were involved constantly in the public business . 
in the 1860 united states census ,  the slave population in the united states had grown to four million ,  and in reconstruction after the civil war  -lrb-  late 1860s  -rrb-  ,  the newly freed slaves became citizens with a nominal right to vote for men . 
in some countries ,  freedom of political expression ,  freedom of speech ,  freedom of the press ,  and internet democracy are considered important to ensure that voters are well informed ,  enabling them to vote according to their own interests . 
the founding fathers of the united states rarely praised and often criticised democracy ,  which in their time tended to specifically mean direct democracy ,  often without the protection of a constitution enshrining basic rights; james madison argued ,  especially in `` the federalist '' no . 
democracy has taken a number of forms ,  both in theory and practice . 
formula_1 is true if formula_2 is true ,  or if formula_3 is true ,  or if both formula_2 and formula_3 are true . 
in classical logic ,  disjunctive syllogism  -lrb-  historically known as modus tollendo ponens  -lrb-  mtp  -rrb-  ,  latin for `` mode that affirms by denying ''  -rrb-  is a valid argument form which is a syllogism having a disjunctive statement for one of its premises . 
a definition is a statement of the meaning of a term  -lrb-  a word ,  phrase ,  or other set of symbols  -rrb-  . 
in modern usage ,  a `` definition '' is something ,  typically expressed in words ,  that attaches a meaning to a word or group of words . 
the `` definiens '' is not `` the meaning '' of the word defined ,  but is instead something that `` conveys the same meaning '' as that word . 
the differentia  -rrb-  . 
quaaludes were so popular at disco clubs that the drug was nicknamed `` disco biscuits '' . 
from 1974 to 1977, disco music continued to increase in popularity as many disco songs topped the charts . 
disco fashions were very trendy in the late 1970s . 
several parodies of the disco style were created . 
in the 1990s ,  disco and its legacy became more accepted by music artists and listeners alike ,  as more songs and films were released that referenced disco . 
new york city is considered as the birthplace of disco . 
nu-disco is a 21st-century dance music genre associated with the renewed interest in 1970s and early 1980s disco ,  mid-1980s italo disco ,  and the synthesizer-heavy euro disco aesthetics . 
on july 21, 1979, the top six records on the u . s .  music charts were disco songs . 
at that time ,  disco was one of the forms of music most open to gay performers . 
but i think it disco demolition night hastened its demise '' . 
in italy raffaella carrà is the most successful disco act . 
disco was a key influence in the development of electronic dance music and house music . 
synthesizers are also fairly common in disco ,  especially in the late 1970s . 
mixing engineers and record producers helped to develop the `` disco sound '' by creating a distinctive-sounding ,  sophisticated disco mix . 
many motown groups who had left the record label charted with disco songs . 
the `` disco sound '' was much more costly to produce than many of the other popular music genres from the 1970s . 
even mainstream rock artists adopted elements of disco . 
in 1977, giorgio moroder again became responsible for a development in disco . 
the disco sound had a strong influence on early hip hop . 
at the request of motown that he produce songs in the disco genre ,  marvin gaye released `` got to give it up '' in 1978, despite his dislike of disco . 
disco was the last popular music movement driven by the baby boom generation . 
in 1974, new york city's wpix-fm premiered the first disco radio show . 
the rising popularity of disco came in tandem with developments in the role of the dj . 
examples of songs during this time that were influenced by disco included deee-lite's `` groove is in the heart ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  u2's `` lemon ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  blur's `` girls & boys ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- & `` entertain me ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  pulp's `` disco 2000 ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  and jamiroquai's `` canned heat ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  while films such as `` boogie nights ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- and `` the last days of disco ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- featured primarily disco soundtracks . 
during the disco era ,  many nightclubs would commonly host disco dance competitions or offer free dance lessons . 
during the early 1980s ,  dance music dropped the complicated song structure and orchestration that typified the disco sound . 
he also said that disco was the result of an `` unholy '' union between homosexuals and blacks . 
several of motown's solo artists who left the label went on to have successful disco songs . 
in 1976 donna summer's version of `` could it be magic '' brought disco further into the mainstream . 
during the 1970s ,  many tv theme songs were produced  -lrb-  or older themes updated  -rrb-  with disco influenced music . 
other disco songs from 2014 include `` i want it all '' by karmin and 'wrong club '' by the ting tings . 
another euro disco act was the french diva amanda lear ,  where euro disco sound is most heard in enigma  -lrb-  `` give a bit of mmh to me ''  -rrb-  song  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- . 
another notable disco success that year was george mccrae's `` rock your baby '': it became the united kingdom's first number one chart disco single . 
july 12, 1979, became known as `` the day disco died '' because of disco demolition night ,  an anti-disco demonstration in a baseball double-header at comiskey park in chicago . 
some of these influences had already begun to emerge during the mid-1970s ,  at the height of disco's popularity . 
disco is a music genre and subculture that emerged in the 1970s from the united states' urban nightlife scene . 
as the backup band ,  topped the `` billboard '' pop chart in march 1973, and has been called `` disco '' . 
in 1972, the four seasons released `` the night '' ,  a song with disco elements which appealed to the northern soul scene . 
 ''the best disco music contained within it a remarkably powerful sense of collective euphoria . `` 
in 2013, several 1970s-style disco and funk songs charted ,  and the pop charts had more dance songs than at any other point since the late 1970s . 
it is one of the distinct fiddle traditions within irish traditional music . 
the fiddle ,  and traditional music in general ,  remained popular in donegal not only because of the international coverage of certain artists but because of local pride in the music . 
modern donegal fiddle music is often played in concerts and recorded on albums . 
as irish music was consolidated and organised under the comhaltas ceoltóirí éireann movement in the 1960s ,  both strengthened the interest in traditional music but sometimes conflicted with the donegal tradition and its social conventions . 
this sometimes cause antagonism between donegal players and the main organisation of traditional music in ireland . 
the donegal style of fiddling is a label often applied to music from this area ,  though one also might plausibly identify several different ,  but related ,  styles within the county . 
the early doubles used two triggers ,  one for each barrel . 
a double-barreled shotgun is a shotgun with two parallel barrels ,  allowing two shots to be fired in quick succession . 
in the event that an inertial trigger does not toggle to the second barrel when firing low recoil shotshells ,  manually selecting the order to the second barrel will enable the second barrel to fire when the trigger is depressed again . 
one of the advantages of the double ,  with double triggers or sst ,  is that a second shot can be taken almost immediately after the first ,  without removing the gun from the firing position on the shoulder and without any other action than a second trigger pull ,  utilizing different chokes for the two shots . 
later models use a single trigger that alternately fires both barrels ,  called a `` single selective trigger '' or `` sst '' . 
dessert wines are sweet wines typically served with dessert . 
these are some major categories in which desserts can be placed . 
dessert  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a course that concludes a meal ,  often an evening meal . 
desserts are typically eaten in australia ,  and most daily meals `` end with simple desserts , ``  which can include various fruits . 
shows like these have displayed extreme desserts and made a game show atmosphere which made desserts a more competitive field . 
sweet desserts usually contain cane sugar ,  palm sugar ,  honey or some types of syrup such as molasses ,  maple syrup ,  treacle ,  or corn syrup . 
alcohol can also be used as an ingredient ,  to make alcoholic desserts . 
dessert nowadays are made into drinks as well ,  such as bubble tea . 
europeans began to manufacture sugar in the middle ages ,  and more sweet desserts became available . 
cakes are sweet tender breads made with sugar and delicate flour . 
ice cream ,  gelato ,  sorbet and shaved-ice desserts fit into this category . 
in asia ,  desserts are often eaten between meals as snacks rather than as a concluding course . 
the market for desserts has grown over the last few decades ,  which was greatly increased by the commercialism of baking desserts and the rise of food productions . 
some documentation makes a distinction between des as a standard and as an algorithm ,  referring to the algorithm as the dea  -lrb-  data encryption algorithm  -rrb-  . 
the data encryption standard  -lrb-  des   -rrb-  is a symmetric-key algorithm for the encryption of electronic data . 
furthermore ,  des has been withdrawn as a standard by the national institute of standards and technology . 
a double-hulled tanker refers to an oil tanker which has a double hull . 
after the exxon valdez oil spill disaster in alaska in 1989, the us government required all new oil tankers built for use between us ports to be equipped with a full double hull . 
a number of manufacturers have embraced oil tankers with a double hull because it strengthens the hull of ships ,  reducing the likelihood of oil disasters in low-impact collisions and groundings over single-hull ships . 
water is the world's most consumed drink ,  however ,  97% of water on earth is non-drinkable salt water . 
wine is an alcoholic drink made from fermented grapes or other fruits . 
some drinks ,  such as wine ,  can be used as an alternative investment . 
drinks such as soda pop ,  sparkling water ,  iced tea ,  lemonade ,  root beer ,  fruit punch ,  milk ,  hot chocolate ,  tea ,  coffee ,  milkshakes ,  and tap water and energy drinks are all soft drinks . 
water is the chief constituent in all drinks ,  and the primary ingredient in most . 
carbonated drinks refer to drinks which have carbon dioxide dissolved into them . 
non-alcoholic drinks often signify drinks that would normally contain alcohol ,  such as beer and wine ,  but are made with less than  . 5 percent alcohol by volume . 
a non-alcoholic drink is one that contains little or no alcohol . 
alcoholic drinks are served in drinking establishments ,  which have different cultural connotations . 
it is also a method of producing spirits from milder alcoholic drinks . 
the term `` wine '' can also refer to starch-fermented or fortified drinks having higher alcohol content ,  such as barley wine ,  huangjiu ,  or sake . 
it is thought by some to be the oldest fermented drink . 
the category includes drinks that have undergone an alcohol removal process such as non-alcoholic beers and de-alcoholized wines . 
in addition ,  alcoholic drinks such as wine ,  beer ,  and liquor ,  which contain the drug ethanol ,  have been part of human culture for more than 8,000 years . 
the most popular varieties internationally are soy milk ,  almond milk ,  rice milk and coconut milk . 
beer is an alcoholic drink produced by the saccharification of starch and fermentation of the resulting sugar . 
in western cultures ,  water is often drunk cold . 
a drink is a form of liquid which has been prepared for human consumption . 
carbonation is the process of dissolving carbon dioxide into a liquid ,  such as water . 
in china and japan ,  the establishment would be a tea house ,  were people would socialise whilst drinking tea . 
a drink  -lrb-  or beverage  -rrb-  is a liquid intended for human consumption . 
an alcoholic mixed drink that contains two or more ingredients is referred to as a cocktail . 
fresh and dried dill leaves  -lrb-  sometimes called `` dill weed '' to distinguish it from dill seed  -rrb-  are widely used as herbs in europe and central asia . 
dill oil is extracted from the leaves ,  stems and seeds of the plant . 
dill  -lrb-  `` anethum graveolens ''  -rrb-  is an annual herb in the celery family apiaceae . 
if `` v '' is finite-dimensional ,  then `` v '' has the same dimension as `` v '' . 
if `` v '' is finite-dimensional ,  then `` v '' is isomorphic to `` v '' . 
any bilinear form on `` v '' gives a mapping of `` v '' into its dual space via
in mathematics ,  any vector space `` v '' has a corresponding dual vector space  -lrb-  or just dual space for short  -rrb-  consisting of all linear functionals on `` v '' ,  together with the vector space structure of pointwise addition and scalar multiplication by constants . 
the dual space as defined above is defined for all vector spaces ,  and to avoid ambiguity may also be called the `` algebraic dual space '' . 
when defined for a topological vector space ,  there is a subspace of the dual space ,  corresponding to continuous linear functionals ,  called the `` continuous dual space '' . 
hubbard said that in dianetics ,  it was the analytical mind and not the reactive mind that was the most important because the analytical mind `` computes decisions '' even when these are dictated by the reactive mind . 
hubbard defined the third mind ,  or the somatic mind ,  as `` that mind which ,  directed by the analytical or reactive mind ,  places solution into effect on the physical level . `` 
when a person is `` aberrated , ``  the reactive mind controls the somatic mind . 
dianetics divides the mind into three parts: the conscious `` analytical mind '' ,  the subconscious `` reactive mind '' ,  and the somatic mind . 
when hubbard presented dianetics ,  he did so in terms of `` terra incognita , ``  or to scientologists the human mind . 
the benefits of going clear ,  according to hubbard ,  were dramatic . 
hubbard developed dianetics ,  claiming that it could eradicate these aberrations . 
hubbard always claimed that his ideas of dianetics originated in the 1920s and 1930s . 
with the use of dianetics techniques ,  hubbard claimed ,  the reactive mind could be processed and all stored engrams could be refiled as experience . 
campbell published some of hubbard's short stories and winter hoped that his colleagues would likewise be attracted to hubbard's dianetics system . 
hubbard stated ,  `` the analytical is so important to the intelligent being and the somatic mind so important to the athlete that dianetics processing can be said to consist of deintensifying the reactive mind so that the analytical and somatic minds can be free to function properly . `` 
hubbard writes: `` again ,  dianetics is not being released to a profession ,  for no profession could encompass it . `` 
hubbard claimed that these engrams are the cause of almost all psychological and physical problems . 
l .  ron hubbard published dianetics on may 9, 1950, as a `` branch of self-help psychology '' . 
in 1966, hubbard declared south african scientologist john mcmaster to be the first true clear . 
the report's subjects are not identified by name ,  but one of them is clearly hubbard himself  -lrb-  `` case 1080a ,  r .  l . ``   -rrb-  . 
one treatment method hubbard drew from in developing dianetics was abreaction therapy . 
according to hubbard ,  auditing enables the pre-clear to `` contact '' and `` release '' engrams stored in the reactive mind ,  relieving him of the physical and mental aberrations connected with them . 
hubbard wrote an additional six books in 1951, drawing the attention of a significant fan base . 
the data may pass through an operational data store and may require data cleansing for additional operations to ensure data quality before it is used in the dw for reporting . 
the access layer helps users retrieve data . 
so for a disperser ,  an event formula_1 we have: formula_2
this lasted until the end of the devonian ,   . 
the devonian was a relatively warm period ,  and probably lacked any glaciers . 
the devonian period is formally broken into early ,  middle and late subdivisions . 
murchison and sedgwick won the debate and named the period they proposed as the devonian system . 
the devonian period was a time of great tectonic activity ,  as euramerica and gondwana drew closer together . 
the warming at the end of the devonian may even have contributed to the extinction of the stromatoporoids . 
finally ,  the late devonian started with the frasnian ,   ,  during which the first forests took shape on land . 
david thompson was born in westminster ,  middlesex ,  to recent welsh migrants david and ann thompson . 
naukane ,  known as coxe to thompson ,  accompanied thompson across the continent to lake superior before journeying on to england . 
david thompson was the first european to navigate the full length of the columbia river . 
upon his arrival back in montreal ,  thompson retired with a generous pension from the north west company . 
in 1804, at the annual meeting of the north west company in kaministiquia ,  thompson was made a full partner of the company . 
the land mass mapped by thompson amounted to of wilderness  -lrb-  one-fifth of the continent  -rrb-  . 
in 1843 thompson completed his atlas of the region from hudson bay to the pacific ocean . 
there is a monument dedicated to david thompson  -lrb-  maintained by the state of north dakota  -rrb-  near the former town site of the ghost town ,  verendrye ,  north dakota ,  located approximately north and west of karlsruhe ,  north dakota . 
thompson wintered at saleesh house before beginning his final journey back to montreal in 1812, where the north west company was based . 
by the time of thompson's death ,  the couple had been married 57 years ,  the longest marriage known in canada pre-confederation . 
the order consists of three families ,  22 genera and about 850 species . 
however ,  that study also indicated both a clear delineation of the order from other orders particularly asparagales ,  and a lack of homogeneity within the order . 
the three families included in order dioscoreales also represent three different ecological groups of plants . 
dioscoreales is monophyletic and is placed as a sister order to pandanales ,  as shown in cladogram i . 
apg iii  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- did not change this ,  so the order now comprises three families burmanniaceae ,  dioscoreaceae and nartheciaceae . 
the three families of dioscreales constitutes about 22 genera and about 849 species making it one of the smaller monocot orders . 
species from this order are distributed across all of the continents except antarctica . 
dioscoreaceae and burmanniaceae were in a sister group relationship . 
dental treatments are carried out by a dental team ,  which often consists of a dentist and dental auxiliaries  -lrb-  dental assistants ,  dental hygienists ,  dental technicians ,  as well as dental therapists  -rrb-  . 
it is thought that dental surgery was the first specialization from medicine . 
1690 -rrb- made an early dental observation with characteristic humour:
dentists in the united kingdom are now regulated by the general dental council . 
an ancient sumerian text describes a `` tooth worm '' as the cause of dental caries . 
the majority of dental treatments are carried out to prevent or treat the two most common oral diseases which are dental caries  -lrb-  tooth decay  -rrb-  and periodontal disease  -lrb-  gum disease or pyorrhea  -rrb-  . 
fauchard was the pioneer of dental prosthesis ,  and he discovered many methods to replace lost teeth . 
historically ,  dental extractions have been used to treat a variety of illnesses . 
though not mandatory ,  many dentists choose to complete an internship or residency focusing on specific aspects of dental care after they have received their dental degree . 
the pelican was replaced by the dental key which ,  in turn ,  was replaced by modern forceps in the 19th century . 
for example ,  dentists that graduated from israeli dental schools may recommend the removal of asymptomatic impacted third molar  -lrb-  wisdom teeth  -rrb-  more often than dentists that graduated from latin american or eastern european dental schools . 
in the united kingdom ,  the 1878 british dentists act and 1879 dentists register limited the title of `` dentist '' and `` dental surgeon '' to qualified and registered practitioners . 
in german ,  the diameter symbol  -lrb-  german ``  ''  -rrb-  is also used as an average symbol  -lrb-  `` durchschnittszeichen ''  -rrb-  . 
for any solid object or set of scattered points in n-dimensional euclidean space ,  the diameter of the object or set is the same as the diameter of its convex hull . 
the diameter symbol ⌀ is distinct from the empty set symbol ∅ ,  from an  -lrb-  italic  -rrb-  uppercase phi `` φ '' ,  and from the nordic vowel ø . 
the symbol or variable for diameter ,  ⌀ ,  is similar in size and design to ø ,  the latin small letter o with stroke . 
it is often abbreviated dia ,  dia ,  d ,  or ⌀ . 
if the court does so ,  the lawyer may thereafter ask witness leading questions during direct examination . 
the direct examination or examination-in-chief is one stage in the process of adducing evidence from witnesses in a court of law . 
alcohol intoxication is the negative health effects due to the recent drinking of ethanol  -lrb-  alcohol  -rrb-  . 
the process of reducing the size of a data file is often referred to as data compression . 
a number of lossless audio compression formats exist . 
audio data compression ,  not to be confused with dynamic range compression ,  has the potential to reduce the transmission bandwidth and storage requirements of audio data . 
this is the same as considering absolute entropy  -lrb-  corresponding to data compression  -rrb-  as a special case of relative entropy  -lrb-  corresponding to data differencing  -rrb-  with no initial data . 
lossless data compression algorithms usually exploit statistical redundancy to represent data without losing any information ,  so that the process is reversible . 
compression is useful because it reduces resources required to store and transmit data . 
this equivalence has been used as a justification for using data compression as a benchmark for `` general intelligence . `` 
data compression can be viewed as a special case of data differencing: data differencing consists of producing a `` difference '' given a `` source '' and a `` target , ``  with patching producing a `` target '' given a `` source '' and a `` difference , ``  while data compression consists of producing a compressed file given a target ,  and decompression consists of producing a target given only a compressed file . 
during its recorded history ,  the area has also been known as `` congo '' ,  `` congo free state '' ,  `` belgian congo '' ,  and `` zaire '' . 
few people in the congo have been unaffected by the conflict . 
by 1908 public and diplomatic pressure had led leopold ii to annex the congo as the belgian congo colony . 
in the first congo war ,  rwanda invaded zaire; mobutu lost his power during this process . 
today ,  the congo remains dangerously unstable . 
by june 2003, all foreign armies except those of rwanda had pulled out of congo . 
the renamed belgian congo was put under the direct administration of the belgian government and its ministry of colonies . 
the french colony of middle congo  -lrb-  moyen congo  -rrb-  also chose the name republic of congo upon its independence ,  so the two countries are more commonly known as congo-léopoldville and congo-brazzaville ,  after their capital cities . 
dr congo had a transitional government in july 2003 until the election was over . 
on 15 november 1908 king léopold ii of belgium formally relinquished personal control of the congo free state . 
the region that is now the democratic republic of the congo was first settled about 80,000 years ago . 
the congo free state was a corporate state privately controlled by leopold ii of belgium through the `` association internationale africaine '' ,  a non-governmental organization . 
after an uprising by the congolese people ,  belgium surrendered to the independence of the congo in 1960.
kabila was succeeded by his son ,  joseph . 
in this period congo's second richest province ,  kasai ,  also announced its independence on 8 august 1960.
belgian rule in the congo was based around the `` colonial trinity ''  -lrb-  `` trinité coloniale ''  -rrb-  of state ,  missionary and private company interests . 
the response of the international community has been incommensurate with the scale of the disaster resulting from the war in the congo . 
on 6 december 2006 joseph kabila was sworn in as president . 
at the end of the conference ,  on 27 january 1960, it was announced that elections would be held in the congo on 22 may 1960, and full independence granted on 30 june 1960.
on 13 january the administration announced several reforms ,  and the belgian king ,  baudouin ,  declared that independence would be granted to the congo in the future . 
elema also began fighting the government mainly with machetes ,  bows and arrows in congo’s haut katanga and tanganyika provinces . 
armed groups are often accused of being proxies or being supported by regional governments interested in eastern congo’s vast mineral wealth . 
dense grasslands extend beyond the congo river in the north . 
the democratic republic of the congo forms part of the congo river basin ,  which covers an area of almost  . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 46.3% ,  51.1% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 2.7% was 65 years or older
international bank for reconstruction and development  -lrb-  ibrd  -rrb-  trust fund for the congo . 
international bank for reconstruction and development  -lrb-  ibrd  -rrb-  trust fund for the congo . 
at the time of its independence in 1960, the democratic republic of the congo was the second most industrialized country in africa after south africa . 
the conflicts in the drc were over water ,  minerals ,  and other resources . 
the democratic republic of congo ranks 183 on the low end of the ease of doing business scale as ranked by the world bank . 
the drc is consistently rated the lowest on the un human development index . 
it is hard for the drc to encourage foreign trade because of the regulatory barriers . 
since then ,  corruption ,  war and political instability have been a severe detriment to further growth ,  today leaving drc with a gdp per capita among the world's lowest . 
125 companies in 2003 contributed to the conflict in drc showing the corruption . 
with the help of the international development association the drc has worked toward the reestablishment of social services . 
the informal sector  . 
ground transport in the democratic republic of congo has always been difficult . 
kabila was assassinated on 16 january 2001 and his son joseph kabila was named head of state ten days later . 
under laurent kabila's regime ,  all executive ,  legislative ,  and military powers were first vested in the president ,  laurent-désiré kabila . 
the government of former president mobutu sese seko was toppled by a rebellion led by laurent kabila in may 1997, with the support of rwanda and uganda . 
under the global and all-inclusive agreement ,  signed on 17 december 2002, in pretoria ,  there was to be one president and four vice-presidents ,  one from the government ,  one from the rally for congolese democracy ,  one from the mlc ,  and one from civil society . 
as of 8 august 2017 there are 54 political parties legally operating in the congo . 
it was also ,  arguably ,  in the first steps of the congo into independence ,  the underlying cause of the crisis between prime minister patrice lumumba and president joseph kasa vubu ,  who ultimately dismissed each other ,  in 1960.
the younger kabila continued with his mother's transitional parliament ,  but overhauled his entire cabinet ,  replacing it with a group of technocrats ,  with the stated aim of putting the country back on the track of development ,  and coming to a decisive end of the second congo war . 
from the day of the arguably ill-prepared independence of the democratic republic of the congo ,  the tensions between the powerful leaders of the political elite ,  such as joseph kasa vubu ,  patrice lumumba ,  moise tshombe ,  joseph mobutu and others ,  jeopardize the political stability of the new state . 
on 15 december 2018 us state department announced it had decided to evacuate its employees’ family members from democratic republic of congo just before the congolese elections to choose a successor to president joseph kabila . 
ground transport in the democratic republic of congo  -lrb-  drc  -rrb-  has always been difficult . 
in 2007 china agreed to lend the drc us$5bn for two major transport infrastructure projects to link mineral-rich katanga ,  specifically lubumbashi ,  by rail to an ocean port  -lrb-  matadi  -rrb-  and by road to the kisangani river port ,  and to improve its links to the transport network of southern africa in zambia . 
comparative figures for zambia and botswana are 721 km and 3427 km respectively . 
the road network is theoretically divided into four categories  -lrb-  national roads ,  priority regional roads ,  secondary regional roads and local roads  -rrb-  ,  however ,  the united nations joint logistics centre  -lrb-  unjlc  -rrb-  reports that this classification is of little practical use because some roads simply do not exist . 
below the chief of staff ,  the current organisation of the fardc is not fully clear . 
the fardc was rebuilt patchily as part of the peace process which followed the end of the second congo war in july 2003.
there is also a central logistics base . 
after five years of turbulence ,  in 1965 mobutu used his position as anc chief of staff to seize power in the 1965 democratic republic of the congo coup d'état . 
the declaration of the 10th brigade's commander ,  former dsp officer jean-pierre ondekane ,  on 2 august 1998 that he no longer recognised kabila as the state's president was one of the factors in the beginning of the second congo war . 
the library of congress country study for the congo says at this point that: `` on 5 september 1960 kasavubu also appointed mobutu as head of the anc . 
the colonel tshatshi military camp in the kinshasa suburb of ngaliema hosts the defence department and the chiefs of staff central command headquarters of the fardc . 
both lundula and mobutu were former sergeants of the `` force publique '' . 
in addition to armed forces chiefs of staff ,  in 1966 lieutenant colonel ferdinand malila was listed as army chief of staff . 
by 20 july 1960, 3,500 troops for onuc had arrived in the congo . 
elements of the `` force publique '' were also used to form belgian colonial units that fought in the east african campaign during world war ii . 
the majority of fardc members are land forces ,  but it also has a small air force and an even smaller navy . 
the armed forces of the democratic republic of the congo  -lrb-   fardc  -rrb-  is the state organisation responsible for defending the democratic republic of the congo . 
it should be made clear also that joseph kabila does not trust the military; the republican guard is the only component he trusts . 
mobutu's support for the fnla policy backfired when the mpla won in angola . 
united nations security council resolution 161 of 21 february 1961, called for the withdrawal of belgian officers from command positions in the anc ,  and the training of new congolese officers with un help . 
a decision on which factions were to name chiefs of staff and military regional commanders was announced on 19 august 2003 as the first move in military reform ,  superimposed on top of the various groups of fighters ,  government and former rebels . 
in september 2014, president kabila reshuffled the command structure and in addition to military regions created three new 'defense zones' which would be subordinated directly to the general staff . 
new commanders of branches were also appointed: a congolese military analyst based in brussels ,  jean-jacques wondo ,  provided an outline of the updated command structure of the fardc following the shake up of the high command:
general jean-claude kifwa ,  commander of the republican guard ,  was appointed as a regional military commander . 
in august 1960, due to rejection of requests to the un for aid to suppress the south kasai and katanga revolts ,  lumumba's government decided to request soviet help . 
however ,  in katanga belgian officers resisted the africanisation of the army . 
in january 1979 `` general de division '' mosambaye singa boyenge was named as both military region commander and region commissioner for shaba . 
denmark borders both the baltic and north seas along its tidal shoreline . 
denmark experiences a temperate climate . 
according to 2017 figures from statistics denmark ,  86.9% of denmark’s population of over 5,760,694 was of danish descent ,  defined as having at least one parent who was born in denmark and has danish citizenship . 
of these ,  20.9 million are slaughtered in denmark . 
 ,  denmark has no environment tax on electricity . 
denmark had a government budget surplus of 1.1% of gdp in 2017.
agriculture was once the most important industry in denmark . 
the danish currency is the danish krone ,  subdivided into 100 øre . 
almost all of the land area of denmark is arable . 
inflation in denmark as measured by the official consumer price index of statistics denmark was 1.1% in 2017.
income inequality has traditionally been low in denmark . 
10 eu member countries had a lower unemployment rate than denmark in 2017.
as a small open economy ,  denmark is very dependent on its foreign trade . 
denmark has the highest retail consumption share for organic products in the world . 
in 2016, the average marginal tax rate on labour income for all danish tax-payers was 38.9% . 
in 2017 total output  -lrb-  gross value added  -rrb-  in manufacturing industries amounted to 14.4% of total output in denmark . 
denmark has an unemployment insurance system called the a-kasse  -lrb-  `` arbejdsløshedskasse ''  -rrb-  . 
altogether ,  total employment in 2017 amounted to 2,919,000 people according to statistics denmark . 
by 1 july 2018, the net foreign wealth or net international investment position of denmark was equal to 64.6% of gdp ,  denmark thus having the largest net foreign wealth relative to gdp of any eu country . 
the electricity grids of western denmark and eastern denmark were not connected until 2010 when the 600mw great belt power link went into operation . 
denmark also has a small production of fox ,  chinchilla and rabbit furs . 
unlike in most western countries there is no legal minimum wage in denmark . 
fur animal production on an industrial scale started in the 1930s in denmark . 
during the last three decades household saving rates in denmark have increased considerably . 
danish fiscal policy is generally considered healthy . 
in international comparisons ,  denmark has a relatively equal income distribution . 
denmark has a very long tradition of adhering to a fixed exchange-rate system and still does so today . 
since 2000, denmark has increased gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  and at the same time decreased energy consumption . 
the share of total energy production is smaller: in 2015, wind accounted for 5% of total danish energy production . 
transport in denmark is developed and modern . 
the modern danish military can be traced back to 1510, with the creation of the royal danish navy . 
danish defence expenditures  -lrb-  1949–1989 -rrb- danish defence expenditures  -lrb-  1990–  -rrb-  the danish royal army  -lrb-    -rrb-  consists of 2 brigades ,  organised into 3 regiments ,  and a number of support centres ,  all commanded through the army staff . 
today ,  danish defence consists of: the royal danish army ,  denmark's principal land warfare branch; the royal danish navy ,  a blue-water navy with a fleet of 20 commissioned ships; and the royal danish air force ,  an air force with an operational fleet consisting of both fixed-wing and rotary aircraft . 
this list lists the complete expenditures for the danish ministry of defence . 
with the september 11 attacks ,  denmark joined us forces in the war on terror ,  participating in both the war in afghanistan and the iraq war . 
the army also provides protection for the danish royal family ,  in the form of the royal guard company and the guard hussar regiment mounted squadron . 
approximately 95% of the budget goes directly to running the danish military including the home guard . 
danish defence  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  is the unified armed forces of the kingdom of denmark ,  charged with the defence of denmark and its constituent ,  self-governing nations greenland and the faroe islands . 
the foreign policy of the kingdom of denmark is based on its identity as a sovereign state in europe ,  the arctic and the north atlantic . 
following world war ii ,  the kingdom of denmark ended its two-hundred-year-long policy of neutrality . 
djibouti is a country in the horn of africa . 
a local battalion from french somaliland participated in the liberation of paris in 1944.
the french territory of afars and issas also differed from french somaliland in terms of government structure ,  as the position of governor general changed to that of high commissioner . 
after the italian invasion and occupation of ethiopia in the mid-1930s ,  constant border skirmishes occurred between french forces in french somaliland and italian forces in italian east africa . 
in 1967, shortly after the second referendum was held ,  the former `` côte française des somalis ''  -lrb-  french somaliland  -rrb-  was renamed to `` territoire français des afars et des issas '' . 
that same year ,  france rejected the united nations' recommendation that it should grant french somaliland independence . 
at its height ,  the adal kingdom controlled large parts of modern-day djibouti ,  somalia ,  eritrea and ethiopia . 
growing french interest in the area took place against a backdrop of british activity in egypt and the opening of the suez canal in 1869.
the djibouti area has been inhabited since at least the neolithic . 
it was rochet d'hericourt's exploration into shoa  -lrb-  1839–42 -rrb- that marked the beginning of french interest in the djiboutian coast of the red sea . 
the ifat sultanate was a medieval kingdom in the horn of africa . 
djibouti is a country in the horn of africa . 
djibouti is a multilingual nation . 
there are three official languages in djibouti: somali ,  arabic and french . 
djibouti is a multiethnic country . 
he took 100% of the votes in a 78.9% turnout . 
in 1977, a third referendum took place . 
on 8 april 2005, president guelleh was sworn in for his second six-year term after a one-man election . 
guelleh took the oath of office as the second president of the republic of djibouti on may 8, 1999, with the support of an alliance between the rpp and the government-recognised section of the afar-led frud . 
the president is directly elected by popular vote for a six-year term . 
djibouti’s merchandise trade balance has shown a large deficit . 
djibouti's gross domestic product expanded by an average of more than 6 percent per year ,  from us$341 million in 1985 to us$1.5 billion in 2015.
there is very limited information for djibouti’s current account; the country’s merchandise trade deficit was estimated at us$737 million in 2004.
but improvement in expenditure management brought down the fiscal deficit to us$11 million in 2005.
the djibouti armed forces  -lrb-  djaf  -rrb-   -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  are the military forces of djibouti . 
the first war which involved the djiboutian armed forces was the djiboutian civil war between the djiboutian government ,  supported by france ,  and the front for the restoration of unity and democracy  -lrb-  `` frud ''  -rrb-  . 
the ogaden war  -lrb-  13 july 1977 – 15 march 1978 -rrb- was a conflict fought between the ethiopian government and somali government . 
spain had little to no success in colonizing dominica and in 1690, the french established their first permanent settlements in dominica . 
in 1761, during the seven years' war a british expedition against dominica led by lord rollo was successful and the island was conquered along with several other caribbean islands . 
many of the remaining carib people live in dominica's carib territory ,  a district on dominica's east coast . 
the arawaks were guided to dominica ,  and other islands of the caribbean ,  by the south equatorial current from the waters of the orinoco river . 
french invasions in 1795 and 1805 ended in failure . 
in 1961, a dominica labor party government led by edward oliver leblanc was elected . 
on november 3, 1978, the commonwealth of dominica was granted independence by the united kingdom . 
dominica was the last island to be formed in the caribbean . 
dominica is the largest and most northerly of the windward islands . 
agoucha bay sandwich bay grand baptiste bay petit bapitiste bay  la taille bay rough bay marigot bay walker's rest bay sophia bay londonderry bay  mango hole bay middle bay panto hole bay petite soufriere bay  soufriere bay  woodbridge bay prince rupert bay douglas bay
the caribbean sea offshore of the island of dominica is home to many cetaceans . 
dominica is an island in the caribbean sea ,  located about halfway between the french islands of guadeloupe  -lrb-  to the north  -rrb-  and martinique  -lrb-  to the south  -rrb-  . 
bays are as follows from the northern tip of the island in a clockwise direction:
some plants and animals thought to be extinct on surrounding islands can still be found in dominica's forests . 
according to the preliminary 2011 census results dominica has a population of 71,293.
the island also is divided into 10 parishes ,  whose governance is unrelated to the town governments: saint andrew ,  saint david ,  saint george ,  saint john ,  saint joseph ,  saint luke ,  saint mark ,  saint patrick ,  saint paul ,  and saint peter . 
the court of appeal of the eastern caribbean supreme court is headquartered in saint lucia ,  but at least one of its 16 high court judges must reside in dominica and preside over the high court of justice . 
appeals can be made to the eastern caribbean court of appeal and ,  ultimately ,  to the caribbean court of justice . 
west of dominica . 
dominica's highest court of appeal is the caribbean court of justice ,  in effect from 6 march 2015.
the commonwealth of dominica has been a member of organisation internationale de la francophonie since 1979.
the dominican republic's population was in  . 
in the national anthem of the dominican republic  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the term `` dominicans '' does not appear . 
however ,  the island has this name by santo domingo de guzmán ,  founder of the order of the dominicans . 
the dominican republic is divided into 31 provinces . 
the dominican republic is the most visited destination in the caribbean . 
the dominican republic is the most visited destination in the caribbean . 
the dominican republic has a rapid transit system in santo domingo ,  the country's capital . 
the dominican republic's capital and largest metropolitan area santo domingo is on the southern coast . 
the dominican republic has a multi-party political system . 
for a long time ,  the u . s .  and the dominican elite supported the trujillo government . 
the dominican republic has the second largest military in the caribbean region after cuba . 
the population of the dominican republic is mostly spanish-speaking . 
haiti imposed a `` heavy tribute '' on the dominican people . 
the residents were called `` dominicans ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which is the adjective form of `` domingo '' ,  and the revolutionaries named their newly independent country `` dominican republic ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
some dominicans born in the united states now reside in the dominican republic ,  creating a kind of expatriate community . 
the dominican republic has four important mountain ranges . 
the dominicans repelled the haitian forces ,  on both land and sea ,  by december 1845.
wilson thus ordered the u . s .  occupation of the dominican republic . 
the capital city santo domingo had a population of 2,907,100 in 2010.
dominican republic is located near fault action in the caribbean . 
the dominican republic's first constitution was adopted on november 6, 1844.
haiti had formed two regiments composed of dominicans from the city of santo domingo; these were used by hérard to suppress the uprising . 
the dominican national police force contains 32,000 agents . 
the dominican republic's relationship with neighbouring haiti is strained over mass haitian migration to the dominican republic ,  with citizens of the dominican republic blaming the haitians for increased crime and other social problems . 
there are many small offshore islands and cays that are part of the dominican territory . 
tourism is one of the fueling factors in the dominican republic's economic growth . 
the dominican republic is a regular member of the organisation internationale de la francophonie . 
four major rivers drain the numerous mountains of the dominican republic . 
the dominicans established a house of high studies in the island of santo domingo that today is known as the universidad autónoma de santo domingo and dedicated themselves to the protection of the native taínos of the island ,  who were subjected to slavery ,  and to the education of the inhabitants of the island . 
the dominican republic has very strong ties and relations with puerto rico . 
the dominican republic is the largest economy  -lrb-  according to the u . s .  state department and the world bank  -rrb-  in the caribbean and central american region . 
the dominican republic is situated on the eastern part of the second largest island in the greater antilles ,  hispaniola . 
the `` dominican '' word comes from the latin `` dominicus '' ,  meaning sunday . 
spanish rule finally came to an end with the war of restoration in 1865, after four years of conflict between dominican nationalists and spanish sympathizers . 
the dominican republic  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a country located in the island of hispaniola ,  in the greater antilles archipelago of the caribbean region . 
the dominican republic has the ninth-largest economy in latin america and is the largest economy in the caribbean and central american region . 
the dominican republic has the ninth-largest economy in latin america and is the largest economy in the caribbean and central american region . 
the three major parties are the conservative social christian reformist party  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  in power 1966–78 and 1986–96; the social democratic dominican revolutionary party  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  in power in 1963, 1978–86, and 2000–04; and the centrist liberal and reformist dominican liberation party  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  in power 1996–2000 and since 2004.
navidad bank and silver bank have been officially claimed by the dominican republic . 
haitian creole is the largest minority language in the dominican republic and is spoken by haitian immigrants and their descendants . 
in 1938, reports from the dominican republic revealed hundreds more haitians had been killed and thousands deported . 
a large dominican diaspora exists ,  mostly in the united states ,  contributes to development ,  sending billions of dollars to dominican families in remittances . 
the dominican republic has a close relationship with the united states and with the other states of the inter-american system . 
the `` llano costero del caribe ''  -lrb-  `` caribbean coastal plain ''  -rrb-  is the largest of the plains in the dominican republic . 
the dominican republic has a tropical rainforest climate in the coastal and lowland areas . 
on april 17, 1655, the english landed on nearby hispaniola and marched 30 miles overland to santo domingo ,  the main spanish stronghold on the island . 
remittances in dominican republic increased to us$4571.30 million in 2014 from us$3333 million in 2013  -lrb-  according to data reported by the inter-american development bank  -rrb-  . 
the dominican republic's population is 70% of racially mixed origin ,  16% black ,  and 14% white . 
the acronym ,  'din' is often incorrectly expanded as '  -lrb-  `` german industry standard ''  -rrb-  . 
common examples in modern technology include din and mini-din connectors for electronics ,  and the din rail . 
in 1905, the dominican peso was replaced by the u . s .  dollar . 
after returning to lead dominican forces against a new haitian invasion in 1849, santana marched on santo domingo ,  deposing jimenes . 
but while more than ten thousand tainos fought against the spanish ,  they succumbed to the power of the spanish weaponry . 
the population of the new spanish colony stood at approximately 104,000.
an estimated 6,000 to 10,000 dominicans died ,  many of them civilians killed when the dominican air force bombed their crowded santo domingo neighborhoods prior to the u . s .  invasion . 
spain's hold over santo domingo remained precarious . 
the dominican republic's first constitution was adopted on november 6, 1844.
haitian losses were 350 killed and 10 captured; the dominicans lost 16 killed . 
in march 1861, santana officially restored the dominican republic to spain . 
united states marines landed in santo domingo on may 15, 1916.
in addition ,  the us forces airlifted in relief supplies for dominican nationals . 
dominican leaders—recognizing their vulnerability both to spanish and to haitian attack and also seeking to maintain their slaves as property—attempted to annex themselves to gran colombia . 
after a year of civil war ,  santana seized santo domingo and installed himself as president . 
although trujillo sought to emulate generalissimo francisco franco ,  he welcomed spanish republican refugees following the spanish civil war . 
in 1586, sir francis drake captured the city of santo domingo ,  collecting a ransom for its return to spanish rule . 
in 1844, dominican independence was proclaimed and the republic ,  which was often known as santo domingo until the early 20th century ,  maintained its independence except for a short spanish occupation from 1861 to 1865 and occupation by the united states from 1916 to 1924.
after his inauguration in august ,  at his request ,  the dominican congress proclaimed the beginning of the 'era of trujillo' . 
santana initially was named capitan-general of the new spanish province ,  but it soon became obvious that spanish authorities planned to deprive him of his power ,  leading him to resign in 1862.
french forces checked spanish progress toward port-au-prince in the south ,  but the spanish pushed rapidly through the north ,  most of which they occupied by 1794.
although the spanish military effort went well on hispaniola ,  it did not so in europe . 
when guarionex attacked the spanish again ,  in 1497, both he and caonabo were caught by the spanish and both shipped to spain; on the journey caonabo died—according to legend ,  of rage—and guarionex drowned . 
dominicans constituted one of the many diverse units which fought alongside spanish forces under bernardo de gálvez during the conquest of british west florida  -lrb-  1779–81 -rrb- . 
in 1860, a group of americans tried unsuccessfully to take over the small dominican island of alto velo off the southwestern border coast of hispaniola . 
following the rebellion of the army in spain during 1820, which restored the liberal constitution ,  some of the colonial administrators in santo domingo broke with the mother country; and on december 1, 1821, the spanish lieutenant governor ,  josé núñez de cáceres ,  proclaimed the independence of `` spanish haiti . `` 
when the war of jenkins' ear between spain and britain broke out in 1739, spanish privateers ,  particularly from santo domingo ,  began to troll the caribbean sea ,  a development that lasted until the end of the eighteenth century . 
a group of dominican dissidents killed trujillo in a car chase on the way to his country villa near san cristóbal on may 30, 1961.
within the decade ,  spanish colonialism began to crumble ,  and rebels won emancipation . 
so large numbers of dutch traders/pirates joined their english and french brethren on the spanish main . 
haiti served as a haven for dominican political exiles and a base of operations for insurgents ,  often with the support of the haitian government ,  during the frequent civil wars and revolutions of the period . 
without adequate roads ,  the regions of the dominican republic developed in isolation from one another . 
puerto ricans were imported to work under near-slave conditions on puerto rican-owned sugar plantations in the dominican republic ,  in the area of la romana ,  during the nineteenth century . 
in the 1560s english pirates joined the french in regularly raiding spanish shipping in the americas . 
 -lrb-  forty u . s .  sailors died separately when a hurricane wrecked their ship on santo domingo's rocky shore .   -rrb- 
the recorded history of the dominican republic began when the genoa-born navigator christopher columbus ,  working for the spanish crown ,  happened upon a large island in the region of the western atlantic ocean that later came to be known as the caribbean . 
the most notorious rebel of seibo was a daring dominican bandit with the nom de guerre of vicentico evangelista . 
except for the city of santo domingo ,  which managed to maintain some legal exports ,  dominican ports were forced to rely on contraband trade ,  which ,  along with livestock ,  became the sole source of livelihood for the island dwellers . 
it was dominican peasants who tracked down and captured or killed most of the fugitives ,  for which they received cash bounties from trujillo's government . 
protestant churches in samaná and santo domingo were taken over ,  burned ,  or confiscated for military purposes ,  forcing many dominican protestants to consider moving to haiti in search of religious toleration . 
in 1904, american warships bombarded insurgents in santo domingo for insulting the united states flag and damaging an american steamer . 
the mona passage ,  a channel about 130 km wide ,  separates the country  -lrb-  and hispaniola  -rrb-  from puerto rico . 
an important aspect of the dominican economy is the free trade zone industry  -lrb-  ftz  -rrb-  ,  which made up u . s .  $4.55 billion in dominican exports for 2006  -lrb-  70% of total exports  -rrb-  . 
in 1999 it was estimated to employ around 58.7 percent of the workforce ,  making this the most important sector of the dominican economy . 
the sector employed mated 24.3 percent of the workforce in 1998.
in 2001, dominican livestock included 187,000 goats and 106,000 sheep . 
the dominican republic has the ninth largest economy in latin america ,  and is the largest in the caribbean and central america region . 
tourism is the single biggest revenue earner ,  with receipts increasing more than tenfold from us$173 million in 1980 to more than us$2 billion by 2000.
in 1998, arable land totaled ; with land under permanent crops at  . 
the value of exports amounted to us$1.9 billion in 1996, but the contribution to the trade balance was only us$520 million because many of the basic materials for the free zones had to be imported and paid for . 
the dominican republic’s most important trading partner is the united states  -lrb-  about 40% of total commercial exchange  -rrb-  . 
remittances were close to $2.7 billion in 2006.
the main service provider in the dominican republic is tricom . 
there are new companies using new technologies that are expanding quickly such as claro tv  -lrb-  iptv and satellite tv  -rrb-  ,  wind telecom  -lrb-  mmds  -rrb-  and sky  -lrb-  satellite tv  -rrb-  . 
in the dominican republic there are 46 in vhf and uhf channels free-to-air channels . 
there are five main highways  -lrb-  dr-1, dr-2, dr-3, dr-4, dr-5 -rrb- they are in good condition in the dominican republic connecting its biggest cities and tourist centers . 
the santo domingo metro is the first mass transit system in the country ,  and second in the caribbean & central american nations after the tren urbano in san juan ,  puerto rico . 
the santiago light rail system is a planned light rail system in the dominican republic's second largest city ,  still in developing stages it was said to start on mid-2008 but right now is currently on hold due to lack of approval and of central government funds . 
the dominican air force was founded in 1948 with 20,000 people . 
antiterrorism command of the dominican armed forces
the armed forces of the dominican republic  -lrb-  spanish: fuerzas armadas de la república dominicana  -rrb-  is the combined national military of the dominican republic . 
the dominican republic's military is second in size to cuba's in the caribbean . 
the navy operates two main bases ,  one in the port of santo domingo in the dominican capital called `` naval base 27 de febrero '' and another in bahía de las calderas ,  in the province of peravia ,  called las calderas naval base in the southern part from the country . 
they also are active in efforts to control contraband and illegal immigration from haiti to the dominican republic and from the dominican republic to the united states  -lrb-  via illegal transportation of immigrants to puerto rico  -rrb-  . 
haiti under their president jean-pierre boyer had invaded and occupied dominican republic from 1822 to 1844.
