nitrox with more than 40% oxygen is uncommon within recreational diving . 
nitrox is known by many names: enriched air nitrox ,  oxygen enriched air ,  nitrox ,  eanx or safe air . 
enriched air nitrox ,  nitrox with an oxygen content above 21% ,  is mainly used in scuba diving to reduce the proportion of nitrogen in the breathing gas mixture . 
the two most common recreational diving nitrox mixes contain 32% and 36% oxygen ,  which have maximum operating depths  -lrb-  mods  -rrb-  of and respectively when limited to a maximum partial pressure of oxygen of  . 
maximum operating depth  -lrb-  mod  -rrb-  is the maximum safe depth at which a given nitrox mixture can be used . 
the use of oxygen at high altitudes or as oxygen therapy may be as supplementary oxygen ,  added to the inspired air ,  which would technically be a use of nitrox ,  blended on site ,  but this is not normally referred to as such ,  as the gas provided for the purpose is oxygen . 
nitrox refers to any gas mixture composed  -lrb-  excepting trace gases  -rrb-  of nitrogen and oxygen . 
at 18m the gas is switched to oxygen for the rest of the treatment . 
an acceptable maximum partial pressure of oxygen is selected based on depth and planned bottom time ,  and this value is used to calculate the oxygen content of the best mix for the dive:
diving with and handling nitrox raise a number of potentially fatal dangers due to the high partial pressure of oxygen  -lrb-  ppo  -rrb-  . 
some of these would be published later as additional ' ,  ' ,  ``  '' ,  and `` furniture music '' . 
jean cocteau gathered the six remaining members ,  forming the groupe des six  -lrb-  to which satie would later have access ,  but later again would fall out with most of its members  -rrb-  . 
in his later years ,  satie would reject all his cabaret music as vile and against his nature ,  but for the time being ,  it was an income . 
his work was a precursor to later artistic movements such as minimalism ,  surrealism ,  repetitive music ,  and the theatre of the absurd . 
in 1893, satie met the young maurice ravel for the first time ,  satie's style emerging in the first compositions of the youngster . 
other work and episodes in this last period of satie's life:
by mid-1896, all of satie's financial means had vanished ,  and he had to move to cheaper and much smaller lodgings ,  first at the  ,  and two years later ,  after he had composed the two first sets of ``  '' in 1897, to arcueil ,  a suburb some five kilometres from the centre of paris . 
meanwhile ,  debussy was having one of his first major successes with ' in 1902, leading a few years later to 'who-was-precursor-to-whom' debates between the two composers ,  in which maurice ravel would also get involved . 
satie's last compositions were two 1924 ballets . 
from 1899 on ,  satie started making money as a cabaret pianist ,  adapting over a hundred compositions of popular music for piano or piano and voice ,  adding some of his own . 
besides the legendre form given below ,  the elliptic integrals may also be expressed in carlson symmetric form . 
in general ,  integrals in this form cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions . 
the letter was most probably written while paul was in corinth ,  probably while he was staying in the house of gaius ,  and transcribed by tertius ,  his amanuensis . 
erastus ,  mentioned in  ,  also lived in corinth ,  being the city's commissioner for public works and city treasurer at various times ,  again indicating that the letter was written in corinth . 
she outlived all her children except for john and eleanor . 
archbishop samson of reims acted for eleanor . 
in the 2014 film ``  '' ,  eleanor is played by debbie rochon . 
there is no claim that eleanor invented courtly love ,  for it was a concept that had begun to grow before eleanor's court arose . 
king alfonso viii and eleanor's daughter ,  queen eleanor of castile ,  had two remaining unmarried daughters ,  urraca and blanche . 
eugene did not ,  as eleanor had hoped ,  grant an annulment . 
contemporary sources praise eleanor's beauty . 
in april 1145, eleanor gave birth to a daughter ,  marie . 
eleanor survived richard and lived well into the reign of her youngest son ,  king john . 
by the time of her death she had outlived all of her children except for king john of england and queen eleanor of castile . 
he and eleanor were anointed and crowned king and queen of france on christmas day of the same year . 
eleanor then returned to fontevraud where she took the veil as a nun . 
as duchess of aquitaine ,  eleanor was the most eligible bride in europe . 
by all accounts ,  eleanor's father ensured that she had the best possible education . 
this vase is the only object connected with eleanor of aquitaine that still survives . 
eleanor was imprisoned for the next 16 years ,  much of the time in various locations in england . 
in 1167, eleanor's third daughter ,  matilda ,  married henry the lion of saxony . 
eleanor died in 1204 and was entombed in fontevraud abbey next to her husband henry and her son richard . 
sometime between the end of march and the beginning of may ,  eleanor left poitiers ,  but was arrested and sent to the king at rouen . 
as soon as the annulment was granted ,  eleanor became engaged to the duke of normandy ,  who became king henry ii of england in 1154.
her birthplace may have been poitiers ,  bordeaux ,  or nieul-sur-l'autise ,  where her mother and brother died when eleanor was 6 or 8.
on 25 july 1137, eleanor and louis were married in the cathedral of saint-andré in bordeaux by the archbishop of bordeaux . 
once her sons had left for paris ,  eleanor may have encouraged the lords of the south to rise up and support them . 
archbishop samson received assurances from louis that eleanor's lands would be restored to her . 
during the period from henry's accession to the birth of eleanor's youngest son john ,  affairs in the kingdom were turbulent: aquitaine ,  as was the norm ,  defied the authority of henry as eleanor's husband and answered only to their duchess . 
the letter is addressed to philemon ,  apphia and archippus ,  and the church in philemon's house . 
the epistle of paul to philemon ,  known simply as philemon ,  is one of the books of the christian new testament . 
the preservation of the letter suggests that paul's request was granted . 
verses 13–14 suggest that paul wants philemon to send onesimus back to paul  -lrb-  possibly freeing him for the purpose  -rrb-  . 
in this case ,  timothy may have encountered philemon while accompanying paul in his work in ephesus . 
some have speculated that archippus ,  described by paul as a `` fellow soldier '' ,  is the son of philemon and apphia . 
onesimus ,  a slave that had departed from his master philemon ,  was returning with this epistle wherein paul asked philemon to receive him as a `` brother beloved . `` 
according to the majority interpretation ,  paul wrote this letter on behalf of onesimus ,  a runaway slave who had wronged his owner philemon . 
that an elliptic curve group could provide the same level of security afforded by an rsa-based system with a large modulus and correspondingly larger key: for example ,  a 256-bit elliptic curve public key should provide comparable security to a 3072-bit rsa public key . 
this set together with the group operation of elliptic curves is an abelian group ,  with the point at infinity as identity element . 
at the rsa conference 2005, the national security agency  -lrb-  nsa  -rrb-  announced suite b which exclusively uses ecc for digital signature generation and key exchange . 
the structure of the group is inherited from the divisor group of the underlying algebraic variety . 
ecc requires smaller keys compared to non-ec cryptography  -lrb-  based on plain galois fields  -rrb-  to provide equivalent security . 
the eden project is said to have contributed over £1 billion to the cornish economy . 
the clay pit in which the project is sited was in use for over 160 years . 
the eden project  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a popular visitor attraction in cornwall ,  england ,  uk . 
the first part of the eden project ,  the visitor centre ,  opened to the public in may 2000.
in 2014 eden accounts showed a surplus of £2 million . 
unlike in the council of the european union ,  where members are directly and indirectly elected ,  and the european parliament ,  where members are directly elected ,  the commissioners are proposed by the council of the european union ,  on the basis of suggestions made by the national governments ,  and then appointed by the european council after the approval of the european parliament . 
lisbon also combined the posts of european commissioner for external relations with the council's high representative for the common foreign and security policy . 
the treaty further provides that the most recent european elections should be ``  ''taken into account '' '' when appointing the commission ,  although the president is still proposed by the european council; the european parliament ``  ''elects '' '' the commission ,  rather than ``  ''approves '' '' it as under the treaty of nice . 
in response to the scandal ,  the european anti-fraud office  -lrb-  olaf  -rrb-  was created . 
the commission operates as a cabinet government ,  with 28 members of the commission  -lrb-  informally known as `` commissioners ''  -rrb-  . 
as a result of the increase in the number of states ,  the amsterdam treaty triggered a reduction in the number of commissioners to one per state ,  rather than two for the larger states . 
the european commission  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-  is an institution of the european union ,  responsible for proposing legislation ,  implementing decisions ,  upholding the eu treaties and managing the day-to-day business of the eu . 
the complexity of a filter may be specified according to the order of the filter . 
typically digital iir filters are designed as a series of digital biquad filters . 
all low-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by
all band-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by
since classical analog filters are iir filters ,  there has been a long history of studying the range of possible transfer functions implementing various of the above desired filter responses in continuous time systems . 
an iir filter can thus be much more efficient in such cases . 
digital filters are much more flexible to synthesize and use than analog filters ,  where the constraints of the design permits their use . 
classical analog filters are iir filters ,  and classical filter theory centers on the determination of transfer functions given by low order rational functions ,  which can be synthesized using the same small number of reactive components . 
this includes non-causal filters and filters in more than one dimension such as those used in image processing; those filters are subject to different constraints leading to different design methods . 
most filters implemented in analog electronics ,  in digital signal processing ,  or in mechanical systems are classified as causal ,  time invariant ,  and linear signal processing filters . 
although a digital filter can be an iir filter if the algorithm implementing it includes feedback ,  it is also possible to easily implement a filter whose impulse truly goes to zero after n time steps; this is called a finite impulse response  -lrb-  fir  -rrb-  filter . 
among the time-domain filters we here consider ,  there are two general classes of filter transfer functions that can approximate a desired frequency response . 
linear filters process time-varying input signals to produce output signals ,  subject to the constraint of linearity . 
in such languages ,  the ergative case is typically marked  -lrb-  most salient  -rrb-  ,  while the absolutive case is unmarked . 
the ergative case  -lrb-  abbreviated   -rrb-  is the grammatical case that identifies the noun as a subject of a transitive verb in ergative–absolutive languages . 
in several places ,  however ,  josephus has `` essaios '' ,  which is usually assumed to mean `` essene ''  -lrb-  “judas of the `` essaios '' race”; “simon of the `` essaios '' race”; “john the `` essaios ''”; “those who are called by us `` essaioi ''”; “simon a man of the `` essaios '' race”  -rrb-  . 
josephus uses the name `` essenes '' in his two main accounts but some manuscripts read here `` essaion ''  -lrb-  “holding the essenes in honour”; “a certain essene named manaemus”; “to hold all essenes in honor”; “the essenes”  -rrb-  . 
it was proposed before the dead sea scrolls were discovered that the name came into several greek spellings from a hebrew self-designation later found in some dead sea scrolls ,  `` 'osey hatorah '' ,  “observers of torah” . 
philo's usage is `` essaioi '' ,  although he admits this greek form of the original name ,  that according to his etymology signifies “holiness” ,  to be inexact . 
this aspect was retained in the film's original screenplay ,  but was deleted in the filmed version . 
over 50 critics listed the film among the best of 1999.
given kubrick's fear of flying ,  the entire film was shot in england . 
kubrick obtained the filming rights for `` dream story '' in the 1960s ,  considering it a perfect text for a film adaptation about sexual relations . 
reviewer james berardinelli stated that it was arguably one of kubrick's best films . 
nicole kidman ,  one of the stars of the film ,  briefly wrote about the completion of the film and the release of the film being at the same time of john f .  kennedy jr's death from her perspective:
the film's production ,  at 400 days ,  holds the guinness world record for the longest continuous film shoot . 
in a reddit `` ask me anything '' session ,  stanley kubrick's daughter ,  katharina kubrick ,  claimed that her father was very proud of the film . 
 ''dvd talk '' similarly dissociates the film from this genre . 
fridolin is also conscious of looking old in the novella ,  though he hardly does in the film . 
eyes wide shut is a 1999 erotic mystery psychological drama film directed ,  produced ,  and co-written by stanley kubrick . 
r .  lee ermey ,  an actor in kubrick's film `` full metal jacket '' ,  stated that kubrick phoned him two weeks before his death to express his despondency over `` eyes wide shut '' . 
this is left unexplained in the film and left to the viewer's interpretation . 
it has been argued that the dramatic climax of the novella is actually albertina's dream ,  and the film has shifted the focus to bill's visit to the secret society's orgy ,  whose content is more shocking in the film . 
jocelyn pook wrote the original music for `` eyes wide shut '' ,  but like other kubrick movies ,  the film was noted for its use of classical music . 
jan harlan ,  kubrick's brother-in-law and executive producer ,  reported that kubrick was `` very happy '' with the film and considered it to be his `` greatest contribution to the art of cinema '' . 
the bbc listed it number 61 in its list of the 100 greatest american films of all time . 
kubrick died six days after showing his final cut to warner bros .  ,  making the film his final directorial effort . 
overseas earnings of over $105 million led to a $162,091,208 box office run worldwide ,  turning it into the highest-grossing kubrick film . 
though warner bros .  insisted that kubrick had turned in his final cut before his death ,  the film was still in the final stages of post-production ,  which was therefore completed by the studio in collaboration with kubrick's estate . 
garrett brown ,  inventor of the steadicam ,  has expressed that he considers `` eyes wide shut '' to be an unfinished film:
mandy recovers with bill's aid . 
the film's wide opening occurred the following weekend ,  and topped the uk charts with £1,189,672.
the numbers put it as kubrick's second highest-grossing film in the country ,  behind `` 2001: a space odyssey '' ,  but were considered a box office disappointment . 
the entertainment industry  -lrb-  informally known as show business or show biz  -rrb-  is part of the tertiary sector of the economy and includes a large number of sub-industries devoted to entertainment . 
the `` poetic edda '' ,  also known as `` sæmundar edda '' or the `` elder edda '' ,  is a collection of old norse poems from the icelandic medieval manuscript codex regius  -lrb-  `` royal book ''  -rrb-  . 
the `` prose edda '' ,  sometimes referred to as the `` younger edda '' or `` snorri's edda '' ,  is an icelandic manual of poetics which also contains many mythological stories . 
 ''edda ''  -lrb-  ; old norse `` edda '' ,  plural `` eddur ''  -rrb-  is an old norse term that has been attributed by modern scholars to the collective of two medieval icelandic literary works: what is now known as the `` prose edda '' and an older collection of poems without an original title now known as the `` poetic edda '' . 
the difference between terrestrial time  -lrb-  tt  -rrb-   -lrb-  the successor to ephemeris time  -rrb-  and atomic time was later defined as follows:
difficulties were recognized ,  which led to these being in turn superseded in the 1990s by time scales terrestrial time  -lrb-  tt  -rrb-  ,  geocentric coordinate time gct -lrb-  tcg  -rrb-  and barycentric coordinate time bct -lrb-  tcb  -rrb-  . 
from the comparison of formulae  -lrb-  2 -rrb- and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- ,  both of which express the same real solar motion in the same real time but on different time scales ,  clemence arrived at an explicit expression ,  estimating the difference in seconds of time between ephemeris time and mean solar time ,  in the sense  -lrb-  et-ut  -rrb- :
 -lrb-  where `` the times of observation are in universal time ,  not corrected to newtonian time '' ,  and 0.0748b represents an irregular fluctuation calculated from lunar observations  -rrb-  . 
d brouwer suggested the name 'ephemeris time' . 
most of the following sections relate to the ephemeris time of the 1952 standard . 
when ephemeris time was first adopted ,  time scales were still based on astronomical observation ,  as they always had been . 
following this ,  an astronomical conference held in paris in 1950 recommended `` that in all cases where the mean solar second is unsatisfactory as a unit of time by reason of its variability ,  the unit adopted should be the sidereal year at 1900.0, that the time reckoned in this unit be designated `` ephemeris time '' '' ,  and gave clemence's formula  -lrb-  see definition of ephemeris time  -lrb-  1952 -rrb-  -rrb-  for translating mean solar time to ephemeris time . 
thus the aim developed ,  to provide a new time scale for astronomical and scientific purposes ,  to avoid the unpredictable irregularities of the mean solar time scale ,  and to replace for these purposes universal time  -lrb-  ut  -rrb-  and any other time scale based on the rotation of the earth around its axis ,  such as sidereal time . 
the atomic clocks gave rise to the atomic time scale ,  and to what was first called terrestrial dynamical time and is now terrestrial time ,  defined to provide continuity with et . 
the term ephemeris time  -lrb-  often abbreviated et  -rrb-  can in principle refer to time in connection with any astronomical ephemeris . 
where the time variable ,  here represented as e ,  now represents time in ephemeris centuries of 36525 ephemeris days of 86400 ephemeris seconds . 
de sitter offered a correction to be applied to the mean solar time given by the earth's rotation to get uniform time . 
in 1998, `` eastenders revealed '' was launched on bbc choice  -lrb-  now bbc three  -rrb-  . 
the bbc responded by saying they had been working that way for some time and it had not affected the quality of the show . 
when all the characters had been created ,  smith and holland set about casting the actors for the show . 
the bbc said the new set would allow for hd filming and better reflect the modern east end of london . 
in early 2003, viewers could watch episodes of `` eastenders '' on digital channel bbc three before they were broadcast on bbc one . 
 ''eastenders '' is the most complained about programme on the bbc . 
eastenders is a british soap opera created by julia smith and tony holland which has been broadcast on bbc one since 1985.
once they had decided on their 23 characters ,  they returned to london for a meeting with the bbc . 
show creators julia smith and tony holland also wrote a book about the show in 1987, entitled `` eastenders: the inside story ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  telling the story of how the show made it to screen . 
from 4 february 2010, cgi was used in the show for the first time ,  with the addition of computer-generated trains . 
in 2001, `` eastenders '' clashed with `` coronation street '' for the first time . 
the show's first episode attracted some 17million viewers ,  and it continued to attract high viewing figures from then on . 
in february 2008, it was reported that the set would transfer to pinewood studios in buckinghamshire ,  where a new set would be built as the set was looking `` shabby '' ,  with its flaws showing up on high-definition television broadcasts . 
in march 1983, under two years before `` eastenders '' first episode was broadcast ,  the show was a vague idea in the mind of a handful of bbc executives ,  who decided that what bbc1 needed was a popular bi-weekly drama series that would attract the kind of mass audiences that itv was getting with `` coronation street '' . 
 ''eastenders '' is shown on bbc entertainment  -lrb-  formerly bbc prime  -rrb-  in europe and in africa ,  where it is approximately six episodes behind the uk . 
 ''eastenders '' ,  while also featuring an east end street market ,  would be very different in its approach and impact . 
in sweden ,  denmark ,  finland and norway ,  the show is now cancelled but was for decades shown on bbc nordic channels with local subtitles . 
 ''eastenders '' was regularly repeated at 10pm on bbc choice from the channel's launch in 1998, a practice continued by bbc three for many years until mid-2012 with the repeat moving to 10:30pm . 
a previous uk soap set in an east end market was atv's `` market in honey lane '' between 1967 and 1969.
the launch was delayed until february 1985 due to a delay in the chat show `` wogan '' ,  that was to be a part of the major revamp in bbc1's schedules . 
since 1985, `` eastenders '' has remained at the centre of bbc one's primetime schedule . 
there was anxiety at first that the viewing public would not accept a new soap set in the south of england ,  though research commissioned by lead figures in the bbc revealed that southerners would accept a northern soap ,  northerners would accept a southern soap and those from the midlands ,  as julia smith herself pointed out ,  did not mind where it was set as long as it was somewhere else . 
 ''eastenders '' is the bbc's most consistent programme in terms of ratings . 
two special anniversary books have been written about the show; `` eastenders: the first 10 years: a celebration ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  by colin brake in 1995 and `` eastenders: 20 years in albert square ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  by rupert smith in 2005.
lock also wrote a character guide entitled `` who's who in eastenders ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  in 2000, examining main characters from the first 15 years of the show . 
the albert+ logo was first shown at the end of the `` eastenders '' titles for episode 5281 on 9 may 2016.
in april 2018 it was announced that drama would be showing repeats starting 6 august 2018 during weekdays and they are also available on-demand on the uktv play catch-up service for 30 days after the broadcast . 
a 2011 report from the national audit office  -lrb-  nao  -rrb-  showed that `` eastenders '' had an annual budget of £29.9 million . 
after they decided on the filming location of bbc elstree centre in hertfordshire ,  smith and holland set about creating the 23 characters needed ,  in just 14 days . 
while w was showing same-day repeats of `` eastenders '' ,  they also returned the weekend omnibus ,  starting on 20 february 2016.
on 2 march 2007, bbc signed a deal with google to put videos on youtube . 
press coverage of `` eastenders '' ,  which was already intense ,  went into overdrive once the show was broadcast . 
according to the book `` how to study television '' ,  in 1995 `` eastenders '' cost the bbc £40,000 per episode on average . 
there have also been adverts in magazines and on radio . 
realising the futility of the situation ,  grade decided to move the show to the later 7:30pm slot ,  but to avoid tabloid speculation that it was a `` panic move '' on the bbc's behalf ,  they had to `` dress up the presentation of that move in such a way as to protect the show '' giving `` all kinds of reasons '' for the move . 
you have to show shades of that change ,  but certain things are immutable ,  i would argue ,  like the vic and the market . `` 
also changes to working online has also saved transportation cost of distribution 2,500 dvds per year . 
 ,  `` eastenders '' has won nine bafta awards and the inside soap award for best soap for 14 years running  -lrb-  from 1997 to 2012 -rrb- ,  as well as twelve national television awards for most popular serial drama and 11 awards for best soap at the british soap awards . 
episodes of `` eastenders '' are available on-demand through bbc iplayer for 30 days after their original screening . 
on 1 december 2012, the bbc uploaded the first 54 episodes of `` eastenders '' to youtube ,  and on 23 july 2013 they uploaded a further 14 episodes bringing the total to 68.
walford east is a fictional tube station for walford ,  and a tube map that was first seen on air in 1996 showed walford east between bow road and west ham ,  in the actual location of bromley-by-bow on the district and hammersmith & city lines . 
as the show is filmed up to six weeks in advance ,  the trees need to have extra leaves stuck on them during the spring to make them look like they would in summer . 
walford has the postal district of e20.
the majority of `` eastenders '' episodes are filmed at the bbc elstree centre in borehamwood ,  hertfordshire . 
the scandal led to grantham's departure from the soap ,  but the occasion was used to mark the 20th anniversary of `` eastenders '' ,  with an episode showing den's murder at the queen vic pub . 
some of the basic techniques or stitches of the earliest embroidery are chain stitch ,  buttonhole or blanket stitch ,  running stitch ,  satin stitch ,  cross stitch . 
while similar to counted thread in regards to technique ,  in canvas work or needlepoint ,  threads are stitched through a fabric mesh to create a dense pattern that completely covers the foundation fabric . 
examples of canvas work include bargello and berlin wool work . 
counted-thread embroidery patterns are created by making stitches over a predetermined number of threads in the foundation fabric . 
machine embroidery is most typically done with rayon thread ,  although polyester thread can also be used . 
embroidery is the craft of decorating fabric or other materials using a needle to apply thread or yarn . 
the fabrics and yarns used in traditional embroidery vary from place to place . 
cotton thread ,  on the other hand ,  is prone to breaking and should be avoided if under 30 wt . 
those stitches remain the fundamental techniques of hand embroidery today . 
embroidery is available with a wide variety of thread or yarn color . 
this event was attended and commented on by numerous notable political figures of the time ,  and supported by the rhode island committee for humanities and the rhode island historical society . 
like other tonalists ,  his style and predominantly pastoral subject matter were drawn from his admiration for millet and the french barbizon school . 
bannister was born in st .  andrews ,  new brunswick and moved to new england in the late 1840s ,  where he remained for the rest of his life . 
in 1903 kraepelin moved to munich to become professor of clinical psychiatry at the university of munich . 
emil kraepelin  -lrb-  ; ; 15 february 1856 – 7 october 1926 -rrb- was a german psychiatrist . 
kraepelin began his medical studies in 1874 at the university of leipzig and completed them at the university of würzburg  -lrb-  1877–78 -rrb- . 
in the uk the evoluon is chiefly remembered from bert haanstra's wordless short film entitled simply `` evoluon '' ,  commissioned by philips to publicise the museum ,  and shown as a trade test colour film on bbc television from 1968 to 1972.
in october 2013 the evoluon was used to stage four 3d-concerts by the german electronic band kraftwerk ,  each before an audience of 1,200 spectators . 
william bagley  -lrb-  1874–1946 -rrb- was an important historical essentialist . 
lastly ,  bagley wrote of the importance of accuracy ,  thoroughness and effort on the part of the student in the classroom . 
the essentialist movement first began in the united states in the year 1938.
the role of the teacher as the leader of the classroom is a very important tenet of educational essentialism . 
 -lrb-  kohn ,  schools ,  232 -rrb-
according to dewey ,  the curriculum in the schools should reflect that of society . 
he and his wife enrolled their children in parker's school before founding their own school two years later . 
the ideas from reddie's abbotsholme spread to schools such as bedales school  -lrb-  1893 -rrb- ,  king alfred school ,  london  -lrb-  1898 -rrb- and st christopher school ,  letchworth  -lrb-  1915 -rrb- ,  as well as all the friends' schools ,  steiner waldorf schools and those belonging to the round square conference . 
education according to dewey is the `` participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race ''  -lrb-  dewey ,  1897, para . 
in 1896, john dewey opened what he called the laboratory school to test his theories and their sociological implications . 
by mid-century many public school programs had also adopted elements of progressive curriculum . 
for dewey ,  education ,  which regulates `` the process of coming to share in the social consciousness , ``  is the `` only sure '' method of ensuring social progress and reform  -lrb-  dewey ,  1897, para . 
william heard kilpatrick  -lrb-  1871–1965 -rrb- was a pupil of dewey and one of the most effective practitioners of the concept as well as the more adept at proliferating the progressive education movement and spreading word of the works of dewey . 
these schools operate to this day within a similar progressive approach . 
 ''education is the process of living and is not meant to be the preparation of future living '' ,   -lrb-  dewey ,  1897 -rrb- ,  so the school must represent the present life . 
pupils had equal voting rights with school staff . 
the late 1960s and early 1970s saw a rise and decline in the number of progressive schools . 
this forms the basis of dewey's assumption that one cannot learn without motivation . 
school reforms went through government reports in the 1940s and trials in the 1950s ,  resulting in the introduction in 1962 of public comprehensive schools  -lrb-  `` grundskola ''  -rrb-  instead of the previously separated parallel schools for theoretical and non-theoretical education . 
the method is focused on the child's powers and interests . 
the modern schools imparted day-time academic classes for children ,  and night-time continuing-education lectures for adults . 
the seeds of the debate over progressive education can be seen in the differences of parker and dewey . 
17 -rrb- dewey felt that as education is a social construct ,  it is ,  therefore ,  a part of society and should reflect the community . 
as schools become a means for social reconstruction ,  they must be given the proper equipment to perform this task and guide their students . 
by far the most common musical controller is the musical keyboard . 
in the 2010s ,  electronic musical instruments are now widely used in most styles of music . 
an electronic musical instrument is a musical instrument that produces sound using electronic circuitry . 
simple electronic musical instruments are sometimes called sound effects; the border between sound effects and actual musical instruments is often unclear . 
software sequencers were continuously utilized since the 1950s in the context of computer music ,  including computer- ''played '' music  -lrb-  software sequencer  -rrb-  ,  computer- ''composed '' music  -lrb-  music synthesis  -rrb-  ,  and computer `` sound generation ''  -lrb-  sound synthesis  -rrb-  . 
the increasing power and decreasing cost of sound-generating electronics  -lrb-  and especially of the personal computer  -rrb-  ,  combined with the standardization of the midi and open sound control musical performance description languages ,  has facilitated the separation of musical instruments into music controllers and music synthesizers . 
the xth sense is a wearable instrument that uses muscle sounds from the human body  -lrb-  known as mechanomyogram  -rrb-  to make music and sound effects . 
then barry vercoe wrote music 11 based on music iv-bf ,  a next-generation music synthesis program  -lrb-  later evolving into csound ,  which is still widely used  -rrb-  . 
audiocubes have applications in sound design ,  music production ,  djing and live performance . 
all electronic musical instruments can be viewed as a subset of audio signal processing applications . 
the fairlight cmi  -lrb-  computer musical instrument  -rrb-  ,  the first polyphonic digital sampler ,  was the harbinger of sample-based synthesizers . 
specialized conferences ,  notably the international conference on new interfaces for musical expression ,  have organized to report cutting-edge work ,  as well as to provide a showcase for artists who perform or create music with new electronic music instruments ,  controllers ,  and synthesizers . 
in 1980, a group of musicians and music merchants met to standardize an interface by which new instruments could communicate control instructions with other instruments and the prevalent microcomputer . 
however ,  it is increasingly common to separate user interface and sound-generating functions into a music controller  -lrb-  input device  -rrb-  and a music synthesizer ,  respectively ,  with the two devices communicating through a musical performance description language such as midi or open sound control . 
immersive virtual musical instruments ,  or immersive virtual instruments for music and sound aim to represent musical events and sound parameters in a virtual reality so that they can be perceived not only through auditory feedback but also visually in 3d and possibly through tactile as well as haptic feedback ,  allowing the development of novel interaction metaphors beyond manipulation such as prehension . 
an important new development was the advent of computers for the purpose of composing music ,  as opposed to manipulating or creating sounds . 
while the hammond organ was designed to be a lower-cost alternative to a pipe organ for church music ,  musicians soon discovered that the hammond was an excellent instrument for blues and jazz; indeed ,  an entire genre of music developed built around this instrument ,  known as the organ trio  -lrb-  typically hammond organ ,  drums ,  and a third instrument ,  either saxophone or guitar  -rrb-  . 
the cell can be discharged but not recharged . 
a secondary cell ,  for example a rechargeable battery ,  is a cell in which the chemical reactions are reversible . 
a bipolar electrode is an electrode that functions as the anode of one cell and the cathode of another cell . 
when the cell is being discharged ,  it behaves like a primary cell ,  with the anode as the negative and the cathode as the positive electrode . 
an epistolary novel is a novel written as a series of documents . 
there are two theories on the genesis of the epistolary novel . 
so did the diarist fanny burney in a successful comic first novel ,  `` evelina ''  -lrb-  1788 -rrb- . 
the epistolary novel slowly fell out of use in the late 18th century . 
the term `` evidence-based medicine '' ,  as it is currently used ,  has two main tributaries . 
evidence-based guidelines may provide the basis for governmentality in health care ,  and consequently play a central role in the governance of contemporary health care systems . 
systematic reviews of published research studies is a major part of the evaluation of particular treatments . 
it has subsequently spread to describe an approach to decision-making that is used at virtually every level of health care as well as other fields  -lrb-  evidence-based practice  -rrb-  . 
guyatt and others first published the term two years later  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- to describe a new approach to teaching the practice of medicine . 
evidence-based medicine  -lrb-  ebm  -rrb-  is an approach to medical practice intended to optimize decision-making by emphasizing the use of evidence from well-designed and well-conducted research . 
another example is the oxford  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  cebm levels of evidence . 
in 2000, a system was developed by the grade  -lrb-  short for grading of recommendations assessment ,  development and evaluation  -rrb-  working group and takes into account more dimensions than just the quality of medical research . 
this tributary of evidence-based medicine had its foundations in clinical epidemiology ,  a discipline that teaches health care workers how to apply clinical and epidemiological research studies to their practices . 
however ,  until recently ,  the process by which research results were incorporated in medical decisions was highly subjective . 
in ultimate frisbee ,  a goal is scored by completing a pass into the end zone . 
the end zones were invented as a result of the creation of the forward pass . 
thus ,  in 1912, the end zone was introduced in american football . 
scores in this sport are counted when a pass is received in the end zone . 
a team scores a touchdown by entering its opponent's end zone while carrying the ball or catching the ball while being within the end zone . 
at bmo field ,  home to the toronto argonauts ,  the end zones are only 18 yards . 
the end zone is the scoring area on the field ,  according to gridiron-based codes of football . 
he also established a close relationship with vincenzo gemito . 
ettore ximenes  -lrb-  april 11, 1855, palermo – december 20, 1926, rome  -rrb-  was an italian sculptor . 
in 1878, he also completed a life-size stucco of `` il ciceruacchio '' ,  a statue of the italian patriot angelo brunetti and his thirteen-year-old son ,  depicting them at the moment of their execution in 1849 by austrian troops . 
dijkstra died on 6 august 2002.
the award was first approved in 1969 and the first election was made in 1971 to dijkstra . 
dijkstra worked in austin until his retirement in november 1999.
edsger w .  dijkstra was born in rotterdam . 
the sleeping barber problem is also attributed to dijkstra . 
from the 1970s ,  dijkstra's chief interest was formal verification . 
but dijkstra chose this way of working to preserve his self-reliance . 
dijkstra's work is considered to be the first to introduce and demonstrate the self-stabilization concept . 
this annual award was renamed the dijkstra prize  -lrb-  edsger w .  dijkstra prize in distributed computing  -rrb-  the following year ,  in his honor . 
dijkstra was known to be a fan of algol 60, and worked on the team that implemented the first compiler for that language . 
in 1974 dijkstra presented three self-stabilizing algorithms for mutual exclusion on a ring . 
dijkstra was one of the very early pioneers of the research on principles of distributed computing . 
throughout dijkstra's career ,  his work was characterized by elegance and economy . 
in the world of computing science ,  dijkstra is well known as a `` character '' . 
in 1959 dijkstra published in a 3-page article 'a note on two problems in connexion with graphs' the algorithm to find the shortest path in a graph between any two given nodes ,  now called dijkstra's algorithm . 
in 1981 dijkstra developed smoothsort ,  a comparison-based sorting algorithm and a variation of heapsort . 
in a one-page paper from 1965 dijkstra introduced the 'mutual exclusion problem' for n processes and discussed a solution to it . 
the term `` separation of concerns '' was coined by dijkstra in his 1974 paper `` on the role of scientific thought '' . 
dijkstra was one of the most famous opponents of the engineering view of computing science . 
dijkstra was well known for his habit of carefully composing manuscripts with his fountain pen . 
the dijkstra award for outstanding academic achievement in computer science  -lrb-  loyola university chicago ,  department of computer science  -rrb-  is named for edsger w .  dijkstra . 
for some time dijkstra remained committed to physics ,  working on it in leiden three days out of each week . 
the academic study of concurrent computing started in the 1960s ,  with dijkstra  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- credited with being the first paper in this field ,  identifying and solving the mutual exclusion problem . 
in 1962 or 1963 dijkstra proposed the semaphore mechanism for mutual exclusion algorithm for n processes  -lrb-  a generalization of dekker's algorithm  -rrb-  ,  which was probably the first published concurrent algorithm and which introduced a new area of algorithmic research . 
the citation for the award reads: the introduction given at the awards ceremony is a tribute to dijkstra: in the words of sir tony hoare ,  frs ,  delivered by him at dijkstra's funeral: in march 2003, the following email was sent to the distributed computing community: former acm president peter j .  denning wrote about dijkstra: among dijkstra's awards and honors are:
dijkstra organized the design of the system in layers in order to reduce the overall complexity of the software . 
dijkstra's algorithmic work  -lrb-  especially graph algorithms ,  concurrent algorithms ,  and distributed algorithms  -rrb-  plays an important role in many areas of computing science . 
dijkstra and zonneveld ,  who collaborated on the compiler ,  agreed not to shave until the project was completed; while zonneveld shaved shortly thereafter ,  dijkstra kept his beard for the rest of his life . 
great books are great teachers; they are showing us every day what ordinary people are capable of . 
since people are human ,  one should teach first about humans ,  rather than machines or techniques ,  and about liberal ,  rather than vocational ,  topics . 
however ,  since the teachers associated with perennialism are in a sense the authors of the western masterpieces themselves ,  these teachers may be open to student criticism through the associated socratic method ,  which ,  if carried out as true dialogue ,  involves a balance between teacher activity and student activity ,  with the teacher promoting discussion . 
while the standard argument for utilizing a modern text supports distillation of information into a form relevant to modern society ,  perennialists argue that many of the historical debates and the development of ideas presented by the great books are relevant to any society ,  at any time ,  and thus that the suitability of the great books for instructional use is unaffected by their age . 
although perennialism may appear similar to essentialism ,  perennialism focuses first on personal development ,  while essentialism focuses first on essential skills . 
perennialism was originally religious in nature ,  developed first by thomas aquinas in the thirteenth century in his work `` de magistro ''  -lrb-  `` the teacher ''  -rrb-  . 
 ,  mdma has no accepted medical indications . 
mdma has been used as an adjunct to new age spiritual practices . 
sometimes mdma is labelled as an `` empathogenic '' drug ,  because of its empathy-producing effects . 
the desired short-term psychoactive effects of mdma have been reported to include:
in 2007, the european parliament officially adopted the flag for its own use . 
the european parliament used its own flag from 1973, but never formally adopted it . 
the official status of the emblem as the flag of the european union was to be formalised as part of the constitution of the european union . 
the european flag or flag of europe is an official symbol of two separate international organisations ,  the council of europe  -lrb-  coe  -rrb-  and the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  . 
alternatively ,  it is sometimes called the `` flag of the european union '' when representing the eu . 
following expo 58 in brussels ,  the flag caught on and the council of europe lobbied for other european organisations to adopt the flag as a sign of european unity . 
technically and officially ,  the `` european flag '' as used by the european union remains not a `` flag '' but `` a community 'logo' — or 'emblem' —  .  .  .  eligible to be reproduced on rectangular pieces of fabric '' . 
the council of europe urged it to be adopted by other european organisations ,  and in 1985 the european communities  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-  adopted it . 
the flag was widely used by advocates of european integration since the late 1990s or early 2000s . 
use of the flag has also been reported as representing the european team at the ryder cup golf competition in the early 2000s ,  although most european participants preferred to use their own national flags . 
 ''anthem of europe '' is the anthem of the council of europe and the european union . 
 ''ode to joy '' is the anthem of the council of europe and the european union ,  promoted as a symbol for the whole of europe as are the other european symbols . 
in 1992 the anthem was used by cis national football team at the 1992 uefa european football championship . 
 ''ode to joy '' ,  automatically orchestrated in seven different styles ,  has been used on 18 june 2015 during the ceremony celebrating the 5000th erc grantee as anthem of the european research council to represent achievements of european research . 
on 4 october 2010 the anthem was used when a european team beat a team representing the united states of america to win the ryder cup golf tournament . 
it was also played at the opening ceremony of the 2018 ryder cup ,  right after the anthem of the usa . 
the first known mass extinction in earth's history was the great oxygenation event 2.4 billion years ago . 
the holocene extinction event is currently under way . 
researchers have identified five major extinction events in earth's history since:
burke was born in dublin ,  ireland . 
he warned against the notion that the americans would back down in the face of force ,  since most americans were of british descent:
in may 1778, burke supported a parliamentary motion revising restrictions on irish trade . 
on 22 march 1775, in the house of commons ,  burke delivered a speech  -lrb-  published during may 1775 -rrb- on reconciliation with america . 
not only were all of these concerns reasonable ,  but some turned out to be prophetic—the american colonists did not surrender ,  even when things looked extremely bleak ,  and the british were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to win a war fought on american soil . 
this support for unpopular causes ,  notably free trade with ireland and catholic emancipation ,  led to burke losing his seat in 1780.
rockingham also introduced burke as a freemason . 
burke also supported the attempts of sir george savile to repeal some of the penal laws against catholics . 
on 19 april 1774 burke made a speech ,  `` on american taxation ''  -lrb-  published in january 1775 -rrb- ,  on a motion to repeal the tea duty:
in december 1765, burke entered the house of commons of the british parliament as member for wendover ,  a pocket borough in the gift of lord fermanagh ,  later 2nd earl verney and a close political ally of rockingham . 
the first great subject burke addressed was the controversy with the american colonies ,  which soon developed into war and ultimate separation; in reply to the 1769 grenvillite pamphlet ,  `` the present state of the nation '' ,  he published his own pamphlet on ,  `` observations on a late state of the nation '' . 
at about this same time ,  burke was introduced to william gerard hamilton  -lrb-  known as `` single-speech hamilton ''  -rrb-  . 
burke also helped raise a ward ,  edmund nagle  -lrb-  `` later '' admiral sir edmund nagle  -rrb-  ,  the son of a maternal cousin orphaned in 1763.
according to the historian j .  c .  d .  clark ,  this was in an age `` before 'celtic nationalism' sought to make irishness and englishness incompatible '' . 
early music is a broad musical era in the history of western art music . 
early music generally comprises medieval music  -lrb-  500–1400 -rrb- and renaissance music  -lrb-  1400–1600 -rrb- ,  but can also include baroque music  -lrb-  1600–1760 -rrb- . 
music critic michael kennedy excludes baroque ,  defining early music as `` musical compositions from the earliest times up to and including music of the renaissance period '' . 
the game is played by 2–6 players ,  with 4–5 making for the best game . 
as well as normal tiles ,  each player receives one trouble tile for use during the game . 
the game is thus reminiscent of the traveling salesman problem . 
euroscepticism  -lrb-  also known as eu-scepticism  -rrb-  means criticism of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  and european integration . 
the opposite of euroscepticism is known as pro-europeanism  -lrb-  or european unionism  -rrb-  . 
euroscepticism should not be confused with anti-europeanism ,  which is a dislike of european culture and european ethnic groups by non-europeans . 
in western european eu member countries ,  hard euroscepticism is currently a characteristic of many anti-establishment parties . 
soft euroscepticism is support for the existence of ,  and membership of ,  a form of european union ,  but with opposition to specific eu policies; or ,  in taggart's and szczerbiak's words ,  `` where there is not a principled objection to european integration or eu membership but where concerns on one  -lrb-  or a number  -rrb-  of policy areas lead to the expression of qualified opposition to the eu ,  or where there is a sense that 'national interest' is currently at odds with the eu's trajectory . `` 
eurobarometer surveys of eu citizens show that trust in the eu and its institutions has declined strongly since a peak in 2007.
a survey in  ,  conducted by tns opinion and social on behalf of the european commission ,  showed that ,  across the eu as a whole ,  those with a positive image of the eu are down from a high of 52% in 2007 to 37% in autumn 2015; this compares with 23% with a negative image of the eu ,  and 38% with a neutral image . 
a survey carried out in april 2018 for the european parliament by kantar public consulting found that support for the eu was “the highest score ever measured since 1983” . 
since 2015, trust in the eu has risen slightly in most eu countries as a consequence of falling unemployment rates and accelerating economic growth . 
in 2004, 37 members of the european parliament  -lrb-  meps  -rrb-  from the uk ,  poland ,  denmark and sweden founded a new european parliament group called `` independence and democracy '' from the old europe of democracies and diversities  -lrb-  edd  -rrb-  group . 
according to taggart and szczerbiak ,  hard euroscepticism  -lrb-  also called anti-eu-ism  -rrb-  is `` a principled opposition to the eu and european integration and therefore can be seen in parties who think that their countries should withdraw from membership ,  or whose policies towards the eu are tantamount to being opposed to the whole project of european integration as it is currently conceived . `` 
often an abbreviated notation is used in which formula_2 is interpreted directly as a random variable ,  but this can cause confusion . 
there are point and interval estimators . 
an `` estimator '' or `` point estimate '' is a statistic  -lrb-  that is ,  a function of the data  -rrb-  that is used to infer the value of an unknown parameter in a statistical model . 
emerald is a cyclosilicate . 
in canada ,  in 1997 emeralds were discovered in the yukon . 
in america ,  the distinction between traditional emeralds and the new vanadium kind is often reflected in the use of terms such as `` colombian emerald '' . 
gray is the normal saturation modifier or mask found in emeralds; a grayish-green hue is a dull-green hue . 
faceted emeralds are most commonly given an oval cut ,  or the signature emerald cut ,  a rectangular cut with facets around the top edge . 
in the first half of 2011, the kagem mines produced 3.74 tons of emeralds . 
in the 1960s ,  the american jewelry industry changed the definition of `` emerald '' to include the green vanadium-bearing beryl . 
in 1918, the canal was replaced by the larger new york state barge canal . 
the erie canal is a canal in new york ,  united states that is part of the east–west ,  cross-state route of the new york state canal system  -lrb-  formerly known as the new york state barge canal  -rrb-  . 
in 2012, the new york state canal system  -lrb-  which consists of the erie canal and a few smaller canals  -rrb-  was used to ship 42,000 tons of cargo . 
the canal was first proposed in the 1780s ,  then re-proposed in 1807.
in 2017, the new york state canal corporation was transferred from the new york state thruway to the new york power authority . 
additional feeder canals soon extended the erie canal into a system . 
in 1992, the new york state barge canal was renamed the new york state canal system  -lrb-  including the erie ,  cayuga-seneca ,  oswego ,  and champlain canals  -rrb-  and placed under the newly created new york state canal corporation ,  a subsidiary of the new york state thruway authority . 
the successes of the canal du midi in france  -lrb-  1681 -rrb- ,  bridgewater canal in britain  -lrb-  1769 -rrb- ,  and eider canal in denmark  -lrb-  1784 -rrb- spurred on what was called in britain `` canal mania '' . 
the erie canal was an immediate success . 
today ,  the reconfiguration of the canal created during the first enlargement is commonly referred to as the `` improved erie canal '' or the `` old erie canal '' ,  to distinguish it from the canal's modern-day course . 
there were some 42 commercial shipments on the canal in 2008, compared to 15 such shipments in 2007 and more than 33,000 shipments in 1855, the canal's peak year . 
in 1903 the new york state legislature authorized construction of the new york state barge canal as the `` improvement of the erie ,  the oswego ,  the champlain ,  and the cayuga and seneca canals '' . 
he later became the first canal commissioner . 
while the old canal ran next to the mohawk all the way to rome ,  the new canal ran through the river ,  which was straightened or widened where necessary . 
in 1918, the western part of the canal was enlarged to become part of the new york state barge canal ,  which also extended to the hudson river running parallel to the eastern half of the erie canal . 
there are a total of 36  -lrb-  35 numbered  -rrb-  locks on the erie canal . 
the canal saw a recovery in commercial traffic in 2008.
the canal began on the west side of the hudson river at albany ,  and ran north to watervliet ,  where the champlain canal branched off . 
the entire canal was officially completed on october 26, 1825.
the genesee valley canal was later abandoned and became the route of the genesee valley canal railroad . 
when completed in 1825, it was the second longest canal in the world  -lrb-  after the grand canal in china  -rrb-  and greatly affected the development and economy of new york ,  new york city ,  and the united states . 
because so many immigrants traveled on the canal ,  many genealogists have sought copies of canal passenger lists . 
distance is based on position markers from an interactive canal map provided online by the new york state canal corporation and may not exactly match specifications on signs posted along the canal . 
the new york ,  west shore and buffalo railway was completed in 1884, as a route running closely parallel to both the canal and the new york central railroad . 
from oneida lake ,  the new canal ran west along the oneida river ,  with cutoffs to shorten the route . 
the new york state legislature debated closing the locks of the erie canal on sundays ,  when they convened in 1858.
chicago ,  among other great lakes cities ,  recognized the importance of the canal to its economy ,  and two west loop streets are named `` canal '' and `` clinton ''  -lrb-  for canal proponent dewitt clinton  -rrb-  . 
the original canal was long ,  from albany on the hudson to buffalo on lake erie . 
ethanol is also used as a clean-burning fuel source . 
the largest single use of ethanol is as an engine fuel and fuel additive . 
ethanol has been used as rocket fuel and is currently in lightweight rocket-powered racing aircraft . 
in the united states ,  the ethanol fuel industry is based largely on corn . 
the us and many other countries primarily use e10  -lrb-  10% ethanol ,  sometimes known as gasohol  -rrb-  and e85  -lrb-  85% ethanol  -rrb-  ethanol/gasoline mixtures . 
ethanol  -lrb-  also called ethyl alcohol ,  grain alcohol ,  drinking alcohol ,  or simply alcohol  -rrb-  is a chemical compound ,  a simple alcohol with the chemical formula  . 
the “eth-” prefix and the qualifier “ethyl” in “ethyl alcohol” originally come from the name “ethyl” assigned in 1834 to the group − by justus liebig . 
world production of ethanol in 2006 was  ,  with 69% of the world supply coming from brazil and the united states . 
clapton wrote in his autobiography:
the 335 was only the second electric guitar clapton bought . 
clapton frequently appears as a guest on the albums of other musicians . 
in 1996 clapton had a relationship with singer-songwriter sheryl crow . 
clapton co-authored with others the book `` discovering robert johnson '' ,  in which clapton said johnson was: clapton also singled out buddy holly as an influence . 
clapton first visited the united states while touring with cream . 
clapton has been referred to as one of the most important and influential guitarists of all time . 
delaney bramlett encouraged clapton in his singing and writing . 
a year after harrison's death in 2001, clapton was musical director for the concert for george . 
clapton has organised the crossroads guitar festival in 1999, 2004, 2007, 2010 and 2013 to raise funds for this centre . 
clapton performed a two-night show with jeff beck at the o arena in london on 2010.
clapton cites muddy waters ,  freddie king ,  b . b . 
clapton would also get together with the bee gees for charity . 
clapton chose the name of the album `` because that's all i saw myself having left '' after his first rehabilitation from alcoholism . 
early during his stint in cream ,  clapton's first les paul standard was stolen . 
in the mid-1960s clapton left the yardbirds to play with john mayall & the bluesbreakers . 
clapton commented on the slim profile of the neck ,  which would indicate it was a 1960 model . 
clapton's grief was expressed in the song `` tears in heaven '' ,  which was co-written by will jennings . 
although clapton gained world fame for his playing on the influential album ,  `` blues breakers – john mayall – with eric clapton '' ,  this album was not released until he had left the band for the last time in july 1966.
in october 1963, clapton joined the yardbirds ,  a blues-influenced rock and roll band ,  and stayed with them until march 1965.
at the 1987 brit awards in london ,  clapton was awarded the prize for outstanding contribution to music . 
eric patrick clapton ,   -lrb-  born 1945 -rrb- ,  is an english rock and blues guitarist ,  singer ,  and songwriter . 
in october of that year ,  clapton did a seven-gig stint with casey jones & the engineers . 
clapton joined john mayall & the bluesbreakers in april 1965, only to quit a few months later . 
clapton married melia mcenery in a low-key church ceremony in january 2002.
clapton has been the recipient of 18 grammy awards ,  and the brit award for outstanding contribution to music . 
in 1968 clapton bought a gibson firebird and started using the 1964 cherry-red gibson es-335 again . 
that autumn ,  clapton released the album `` pilgrim '' ,  the first record featuring new material for almost a decade . 
on 28 february 2013, clapton announced his intention to stop touring in 2015 due to hassles with travel . 
on 2009 clapton appeared as a featured guest at the royal albert hall ,  playing `` further on up the road '' with joe bonamassa . 
clapton was born on 30 march 1945 in ripley ,  surrey ,  england ,  to 16-year-old patricia molly clapton  -lrb-   1929 – march 1999 -rrb- and edward walter fryer  -lrb-   1920 – 1985 -rrb- ,  a 25-year-old soldier from montreal ,  quebec . 
hendrix's arrival had an immediate and major effect on the next phase of clapton's career . 
an etiological myth ,  or origin myth ,  is a myth intended to explain the origins of cult practices ,  natural phenomena ,  proper names and the like . 
in theology ,  many religions have creation myths explaining the origins of the world or its relationship to believers . 
this formula also happens to be methyl acetate's molecular formula . 
thus ,  the empirical formula of methyl acetate is  . 
the molecular formula ,  on the other hand ,  shows the number of each type of atom in a molecule . 
for some ,  `` episcopal churches '' are churches that use a hierarchy of bishops that regard themselves as being in an unbroken ,  personal apostolic succession . 
it is the structure used by many of the major christian churches and denominations ,  such as the roman catholic ,  eastern orthodox ,  oriental orthodox ,  church of the east ,  anglican ,  and lutheran churches or denominations ,  and other churches founded independently from these lineages . 
more specifically ,  the capitalized appellation `` episcopal '' is applied to several churches historically based within anglicanism  -lrb-  `` episcopalianism ''  -rrb-  ,  including those still in communion with the church of england . 
over the course of the 20th century ,  `` great russian '' came to be known as russian proper ,  `` little russian '' as ukrainian and `` white russian '' as belarusian . 
the existing east slavic languages are belarusian ,  russian and ukrainian; rusyn is considered to be either a separate language or a dialect of ukrainian . 
when the common old east slavic language became separated from the ancient slavic tongue common to all slavs is difficult to ascertain ,  though in the 12th century the common language of rus' is still referred to in contemporary writing as slavic . 
the east slavic languages descend from a common predecessor ,  the language of the medieval kievan rus'  -lrb-  9th to 13th centuries  -rrb-  . 
gracen won the titles of miss arkansas in 1981 and miss america in 1982.
 -lrb-  `` principal doctrines '' 31–40 -rrb-
epicureanism was extremely popular from the very beginning . 
the roman orator cicero  -lrb-  106 – 43 bc  -rrb-  ,  who deplored epicurean ethics ,  lamented ,  `` the epicureans have taken italy by storm . `` 
i have written this letter to you on a happy day to me ,  which is also the last day of my life . 
epicurus  -lrb-  341–270 bc  -rrb-  was an ancient greek philosopher who founded a highly influential school of philosophy now called epicureanism . 
as such ,  christian writers such as justin martyr  -lrb-   100– 165 ad  -rrb-  ,  athenagoras of athens  -lrb-   133– 190 -rrb- ,  tertullian  -lrb-   155– 240 -rrb- ,  and clement of alexandria  -lrb-   150– 215 -rrb- ,  arnobius  -lrb-  died 330 -rrb- ,  and lactantius all singled it out for the most vitriolic criticism . 
epicurus's teachings were made respectable in england by the natural philosopher walter charleton  -lrb-  1619 – 1707 -rrb- ,  whose first epicurean work ,  `` the darkness of atheism dispelled by the light of nature ''  -lrb-  1652 -rrb- ,  advanced epicureanism as a `` new '' atomism . 
though popular ,  epicurean teachings were controversial from the beginning . 
in spite of this ,  dewitt argues that epicureanism and christianity share much common language ,  calling epicureanism `` the first missionary philosophy '' and `` the first world philosophy '' . 
epicureanism was a notoriously conservative philosophical school; although epicurus's later followers did expand on his philosophy ,  they dogmatically retained what he himself had originally taught without modifying it . 
none of the quattrocento humanists ever clearly endorsed epicureanism ,  but scholars such as francesco zabarella  -lrb-  1360–1417 -rrb- ,  francesco filelfo  -lrb-  1398–1481 -rrb- ,  cristoforo landino  -lrb-  1424–1498 -rrb- ,  and leonardo bruni  -lrb-   1370–1444 -rrb- did give epicureanism a fairer analysis than it had traditionally received and provided a less overtly hostile assessment of epicurus himself . 
around the same time ,  the epicurean injunction to `` live in obscurity '' was beginning to gain popularity as well . 
epicurus's `` letter to menoeceus '' ,  possibly an early work of his ,  is written in an eloquent style similar to that of the athenian rhetorician isocrates  -lrb-  436–338 bc  -rrb-  ,  but ,  for his later works ,  he seems to have adopted the bald ,  intellectual style of the mathematician euclid . 
the later skeptic philosopher sextus empiricus  -lrb-   160 – 210 ad  -rrb-  rejected the teachings of the epicureans specifically because he regarded them as theological `` dogmaticists '' . 
epicurus's ethical teachings also had an indirect impact on the philosophy of utilitarianism in england during the nineteenth century . 
epicurus himself criticizes popular religion in both his `` letter to menoeceus '' and his `` letter to herodotus '' ,  but in a restrained and moderate tone . 
epicurus's teachings caused strife in mytilene and he was forced to leave . 
during epicurus's lifetime ,  platonism was the dominant philosophy in higher education . 
he may have had access to the now-lost writings of the historian and ethnographer megasthenes ,  who wrote during the reign of seleucus i nicator  -lrb-  ruled 305–281 bc  -rrb-  . 
an epitaph may be written in prose or in poem verse; poets have been known to compose their own epitaphs prior to their death ,  as did william shakespeare . 
an epitaph  -lrb-  from greek `` epitaphios '' `` a funeral oration '' from ἐπί `` epi '' `` at ,  over '' and τάφος `` taphos '' `` tomb ''  -rrb-  is a short text honoring a deceased person . 
