the original word or phrase is known as the `` subject '' of the anagram . 
anagrams do not necessarily have to use all the letters ,  but they normally do . 
anagrams may be created as a commentary on the subject . 
 ''anagrams '' itself can be anagrammatized as ``  ''ars magna '' ''  -lrb-  latin ,  'the great art'  -rrb-  . 
anagrams in latin were considered witty over many centuries . 
an anagram which means the opposite of its subject is called an `` antigram '' . 
in a genre such as farce or parody ,  anagrams as names may be used for pointed and satiric effect . 
an anagram is a word or phrase formed by rearranging the letters of a different word or phrase ,  typically using all the original letters exactly once . 
while anagramming is certainly a recreation first ,  there are ways in which anagrams are put to use ,  and these can be more serious ,  or at least not quite frivolous and formless . 
for example ,  the word `` anagram '' can be rearranged into `` nag a ram '' ,  or the word `` binary '' into `` brainy '' . 
the anadyr is long and has a basin of  . 
its basin is surrounded by  -lrb-  north  -rrb-  amguyema river and palyavaam river ,   -lrb-  northwest  -rrb-  bolshoy anyuy river and the oloy branch of the omolon river and  -lrb-  southwest  -rrb-  penzhina river . 
there are ten species of salmon inhabiting the anadyr river basin . 
if the onemen bay is considered part of the river ,  it also receives the velikaya river  -lrb-  chukotka  -rrb-  from the south and the kanchalan river from the north . 
his name is also one of the 72 names inscribed on the eiffel tower . 
an autodidact ,  ampère was a member of the french academy of sciences and professor at the école polytechnique and the collège de france . 
ampère's name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the eiffel tower . 
for a time he took into his family the young student frédéric ozanam  -lrb-  1813–1853 -rrb- ,  one of the founders of the conference of charity ,  later known as the society of saint vincent de paul . 
after the death of his wife in july 1803, ampère moved to paris ,  where he began a tutoring post at the new école polytechnique in 1804.
industrial ammonia is sold either as ammonia liquor  -lrb-  usually 28% ammonia in water  -rrb-  or as pressurized or refrigerated anhydrous liquid ammonia transported in tank cars or cylinders . 
ammonia is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen with the formula nh . 
ammonia is a colourless gas with a characteristic pungent smell . 
substances containing ammonia ,  or those that are similar to it ,  are called `` ammoniacal '' . 
more than 30 specimens of all ages are known to science . 
between 1926 and 1972, no `` albertosaurus '' fossils were found at all; but ,  since the seventies ,  there has been a steady increase in the known material . 
two skin impressions from `` albertosaurus '' are known ,  both showing scales . 
most known `` albertosaurus '' individuals were aged 14 years or more at the time of death . 
the group seems to be composed of one very old adult; eight adults between 17 and 23 years old; seven sub-adults undergoing their rapid growth phases at between 12 and 16 years old; and six juveniles between the ages of 2 and 11 years ,  who had not yet reached the growth phase . 
 ''albertosaurus '' was smaller than some other tyrannosaurids ,  such as `` tarbosaurus '' and `` tyrannosaurus '' . 
the type specimen is a partial skull ,  collected in the summer of 1884 from an outcrop of the horseshoe canyon formation alongside the red deer river ,  in alberta . 
all identifiable fossils of `` albertosaurus sarcophagus '' are known from the upper horseshoe canyon formation in alberta . 
the massive skull of `` albertosaurus '' ,  which was perched on a short ,  s-shaped neck ,  was about long in the largest adults . 
a total of 1,128 `` albertosaurus '' bones had been secured ,  the largest concentration of large theropod fossils known from the cretaceous . 
like most of the other vertebrate fossils from the formation ,  `` albertosaurus '' remains are found in deposits laid down in the deltas and floodplains of large rivers during the later half of horseshoe canyon times . 
the comparison with modern animals and other tyrannosaurids lends support to this life history hypothesis ,  but bias in the fossil record may still play a large role ,  especially since more than two-thirds of all `` albertosaurus '' specimens are known from one locality . 
fossils have also been reported from the american states of montana ,  new mexico ,  and wyoming ,  but these probably do not represent `` a .  sarcophagus '' and may not even belong to the genus `` albertosaurus '' . 
most age categories of `` albertosaurus '' are represented in the fossil record . 
assembly language may also be called `` symbolic machine code '' . 
assembly code is converted into executable machine code by a utility program referred to as an `` assembler '' . 
mov al ,  61h ; load al with 97 decimal  -lrb-  61 hex  -rrb- 
a two-pass assembler would determine both addresses in pass 1, so they would be known when generating code in pass 2,
in an assembler with peephole optimization ,  addresses may be recalculated between passes to allow replacing pessimistic code with code tailored to the exact distance from the target . 
mov al ,  1h ; load al with immediate value 1 mov cl ,  2h ; load cl with immediate value 2 mov dl ,  3h ; load dl with immediate value 3
the conversion process is referred to as `` assembly '' ,  or `` assembling '' the source code . 
ambrosia is very closely related to the gods' other form of sustenance ,  `` nectar '' . 
both descriptions could be correct ,  as ambrosia could be a liquid considered a food  -lrb-  such as honey  -rrb-  . 
the consumption of ambrosia was typically reserved for divine beings . 
those who consume ambrosia typically had not blood in their veins ,  but ichor the blood of immortals . 
ambrose was one of the four original doctors of the church ,  and is the patron saint of milan . 
in 386 justina and valentinian received the arian bishop auxentius the younger ,  and ambrose was again ordered to hand over a church in milan for arian usage . 
ambrose was the governor of aemilia-liguria in northern italy until 374, when he became the bishop of milan . 
in the late 4th century there was a deep conflict in the diocese of milan between the nicene church and arians . 
in 286 diocletian had moved the capital of the western roman empire from rome to mediolanum  -lrb-  milan  -rrb-  . 
within a week ,  he was baptized ,  ordained and duly consecrated bishop of milan . 
ambrose was bishop of milan at the time of augustine's conversion ,  and is mentioned in augustine's `` confessions '' . 
this shows the strong position of a bishop in the western part of the empire ,  even when facing a strong emperor — the controversy of john chrysostom with a much weaker emperor a few years later in constantinople led to a crushing defeat of the bishop . 
however ,  ambrosian chant was named in his honor due to his contributions to the music of the church; he is credited with introducing hymnody from the eastern church into the west . 
aurelius ambrosius  -lrb-   – 397 -rrb- ,  better known in english as ambrose  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a bishop of milan who became one of the most influential ecclesiastical figures of the 4th century . 
one interpretation of ambrose's writings is that he was a christian universalist . 
ambrose's body may still be viewed in the church of saint ambrogio in milan ,  where it has been continuously venerated — along with the bodies identified in his time as being those of saints gervase and protase . 
ambrose ranks with augustine ,  jerome ,  and gregory the great ,  as one of the latin doctors of the church . 
ambrose prevailed upon gratian ,  valentinian and theodosius to reject requests to restore the altar . 
theodosius i ,  the emperor of the east ,  espoused the cause of justina ,  and regained the kingdom . 
in 392, after the death of valentinian ii and the fall of eugenius ,  ambrose supplicated the emperor for the pardon of those who had supported eugenius after theodosius was eventually victorious . 
ambracia  -lrb-  ;  ,  occasionally  ,  `` ampracia ''  -rrb-  ,  was a city of ancient greece on the site of modern arta . 
the early policy of ambracia was determined by its loyalty to corinth  -lrb-  for which it probably served as an entrepot in the epirus trade  -rrb-  ,  and its consequent aversion to corcyra  -lrb-  as ambracia participated on the corinthian side at the battle of sybota ,  which took place in 433 bc between the rebellious corinthian colony of corcyra  -lrb-  modern corfu  -rrb-  and corinth  -rrb-  . 
this kind of amber is known as `` bony amber '' . 
although all dominican amber is fluorescent ,  the rarest dominican amber is blue amber . 
its most familiar representative is dominican amber . 
heated above  ,  amber decomposes ,  yielding an oil of amber ,  and leaves a black residue which is known as `` amber colophony '' ,  or `` amber pitch ''; when dissolved in oil of turpentine or in linseed oil this forms `` amber varnish '' or `` amber lac '' . 
amber can be classified into several forms . 
such impure amber is called `` firniss '' . 
baltic amber is sometimes colored artificially ,  but also called `` true amber '' . 
other uncommon colors include red amber  -lrb-  sometimes known as `` cherry amber ''  -rrb-  ,  green amber ,  and even blue amber ,  which is rare and highly sought after . 
amber occurs in a range of different colors . 
these ambers are formed from resins with a sesquiterpenoid base ,  such as cadinene . 
dominican amber differentiates itself from baltic amber by being mostly transparent and often containing a higher number of fossil inclusions . 
such inclusion of other substances can cause amber to have an unexpected color . 
the two substances  -lrb-  `` yellow amber '' and `` grey amber ''  -rrb-  conceivably became associated or confused because they both were found washed up on beaches . 
caribbean amber ,  especially dominican blue amber ,  is mined through bell pitting ,  which is dangerous due to the risk of tunnel collapse . 
he was a son of king alaric ii and his first wife theodegotha ,  daughter of theoderic the great . 
amalaric  -lrb-  gothic: *amalareiks  -rrb-  ,  or in spanish and portuguese ,  `` amalarico '' ,   -lrb-  502–531 -rrb- was king of the visigoths from 511 until his death in battle in 531.
alphorns are today used as musical instruments . 
for a long time ,  scholars believed that the alphorn had been derived from the roman-etruscan lituus ,  because of their resemblance in shape ,  and because of the word `` liti '' ,  meaning alphorn in the dialect of obwalden . 
the alphorn or alpenhorn or alpine horn is a labrophone ,  consisting of a straight several-meter-long wooden natural horn of conical bore ,  with a wooden cup-shaped mouthpiece . 
canada also had a political dispute over conscription during world war ii . 
the first of these ,  the legion of the united states ,  was established in 1791.
england was one of the most centralized states in the middle ages ,  and the armies that fought in the hundred years' war were ,  predominantly ,  composed of paid professionals . 
there is also a very rare `` citizen army '' as used in switzerland  -lrb-  see military of switzerland  -rrb-  . 
within a national military force ,  the word army may also mean a field army . 
for the first time huge masses of the population could enter combat ,  rather than just the highly skilled professionals . 
as central governments grew in power ,  a return to the citizen armies of the classical period also began ,  as central levies of the peasantry began to be the central recruiting tool . 
the spartan army was one of the earliest known professional armies . 
the great commercial powers of the dutch and english matched much larger states in military might . 
similarly ,  mass protests against conscription to fight the vietnam war occurred in several countries in the late 1960s . 
civil bureaucracies  -lrb-  士大夫  -rrb-  arose to control the productive power of the states ,  and their military power . 
it has been argued that the drawing of men from across the nation into an organized corps helped breed national unity and patriotism ,  and during this period the modern notion of the nation state was born . 
sun tzu's `` the art of war '' remains one of china's seven military classics ,  even though it is two thousand years old . 
the defense of the state now rested on the commoners ,  not on the aristocrats . 
the states of china raised armies for at least 1000 years before the spring and autumn annals . 
alders are commonly found near streams ,  rivers ,  and wetlands . 
alder leaves and especially the roots are important to the ecosystem because they enrich the soil with nitrogen and other nutrients . 
the largest species are red alder  -lrb-  `` a .  rubra ''  -rrb-  on the west coast of north america ,  and black alder  -lrb-  `` a .  glutinosa ''  -rrb-  ,  native to most of europe and widely introduced elsewhere ,  both reaching over 30 m .  by contrast ,  the widespread `` alnus viridis ''  -lrb-  green alder  -rrb-  is rarely more than a 5-m-tall shrub . 
attendance at alcott's school was falling . 
in 1860, alcott was named superintendent of concord schools . 
during this time ,  the alcotts had another child . 
alcott's ideas as an educator were controversial . 
alcott preferred the term `` symposium '' for their group . 
alcott voted in a presidential election for the first time in 1860.
the experiment failed ,  the alcotts had to leave fruitlands . 
alcott became a member of the boston vigilance committee . 
on september 22, 1834, alcott opened a school of about 30 students ,  mostly from wealthy families . 
in late april 1840, alcott moved to the town of concord urged by emerson . 
the members of the alcott family were not happy with their fruitlands experience . 
as he was bedridden at the end of his life ,  alcott's daughter louisa may came to visit him at louisburg on march 1, 1888.
the concord school of philosophy ,  which closed following alcott's death in 1888, was reopened almost 90 years later in the 1970s . 
alcott married abby may in 1830 and they eventually had four surviving children ,  all daughters . 
in april 1882, alcott's friend and benefactor ralph waldo emerson was sick and bedridden . 
like emerson ,  alcott was always optimistic ,  idealistic ,  and individualistic in thinking . 
born in wolcott ,  connecticut in 1799, alcott had only minimal formal schooling before attempting a career as a traveling salesman . 
however ,  a phobia is an irrational fear as opposed to a rational fear . 
arachnophobia is the unreasonable fear of spiders and other arachnids such as scorpions . 
the fear of spiders can be treated by any of the general techniques suggested for specific phobias . 
this suggests arachnophobia may be a cultural ,  rather than genetic trait . 
the ancients used the calcite type ,  while the modern los angeles cathedral is using gypsum alabaster . 
both types of alabaster have similar properties . 
the coarser varieties of gypsum alabaster are converted by calcination into plaster of paris ,  and are sometimes known as `` plaster stone '' . 
calcite alabaster ,  harder than the gypsum variety ,  was the kind primarily used in ancient egypt and the wider middle east  -lrb-  but not assyrian palace reliefs  -rrb-  ,  and is also used in modern times . 
chemically ,  gypsum is a hydrous sulfate of calcium ,  while calcite is a carbonate of calcium . 
the name may be derived further from ancient egyptian ``  ''a-labaste '' '' ,  which refers to vessels of the egyptian goddess bast . 
ahab married jezebel ,  the daughter of the king of tyre . 
ahab became king of israel in the thirty-eighth year of asa ,  king of judah ,  and reigned for twenty-two years ,  according to 1 kings . 
most recently ,  michael d .  coogan has dated ahab's reign to 871–852 bc . 
algol is a triple-star system . 
 ''beta persei '' is the star's bayer designation . 
in chinese ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning `` mausoleum '' ,  refers to an asterism consisting of β persei ,  9 persei ,  τ persei ,  ι persei ,  κ persei ,  ρ persei ,  16 persei and 12 persei . 
astrologically ,  algol is considered one of the unluckiest stars in the sky ,  and was listed as one of the 15 behenian stars . 
algol gives its name to its class of eclipsing variable ,  known as algol variables . 
algol  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  designated beta persei  -lrb-  β persei ,  abbreviated beta per ,  β per  -rrb-  ,  known colloquially as the demon star ,  is a bright multiple star in the constellation of perseus and one of the first non-nova variable stars to be discovered . 
the total mass of the system is about 5.8 solar masses ,  and the mass ratios of aa1, aa2, and ab are about 4.5 to 1 to 2.
 ''grace '' ,  however ,  to john newton had a clearer meaning ,  as he used the word to represent god or the power of god . 
although `` amazing grace '' set to `` new britain '' was popular ,  other versions existed regionally . 
 ''amazing grace '' is a christian hymn published in 1779, with words written by the english poet and anglican clergyman john newton  -lrb-  1725–1807 -rrb- . 
according to the `` dictionary of american hymnology '' `` amazing grace '' is john newton's spiritual autobiography in verse . 
when originally used in olney ,  it is unknown what music ,  if any ,  accompanied the verses written by john newton . 
newton wrote the words from personal experience . 
newton claimed the only reason he left was because of polly . 
newton and cowper attempted to present a poem or hymn for each prayer meeting . 
the new testament served as the basis for many of the lyrics of `` amazing grace '' . 
 ''amazing grace '' ,  with the words written by newton and joined with `` new britain '' ,  the melody most currently associated with it ,  appeared for the first time in walker's shape note tunebook `` southern harmony '' in 1847.
with the advent of recorded music and radio ,  `` amazing grace '' began to cross over from primarily a gospel standard to secular audiences . 
ordained in the church of england in 1764, newton became curate of olney ,  buckinghamshire ,  where he began to write hymns with poet william cowper . 
according to newton ,  unconverted sinners were `` blinded by the god of this world '' until `` mercy came to us not only undeserved but undesired  .  .  .  our hearts endeavored to shut him out till he overcame us by the power of his grace . `` 
 ''amazing grace '' saw a resurgence in popularity in the u . s .  during the 1960s and has been recorded thousands of times during and since the 20th century ,  occasionally appearing on popular music charts . 
a tune named `` arlington '' accompanied newton's verses as much as `` new britain '' for a time in the late 19th century . 
grace is recalled three times in the following verse ,  culminating in newton's most personal story of his conversion ,  underscoring the use of his personal testimony with his parishioners . 
aol desktop version 10.x was different from previous aol browsers and aol desktop versions . 
by 1995, aol had about 20 million active users . 
the following year ,  aol time warner dropped the `` aol '' from its name . 
one by aol is further broken down into one by aol for publishers  -lrb-  formerly vidible ,  aol on network and be on for publishers  -rrb-  and one by aol for advertisers ,  each of which have several sub-platforms . 
aol announced alephd would be a part of the one by aol: publishers platform . 
on october 23, 2015, aol completed the acquisition . 
aol acquired a number of businesses and technologies help to form one by aol . 
aol discontinued access to usenet on june 25, 2005.
at one time ,  most aol users had an online `` profile '' hosted by the aol hometown service . 
on march 31, 1997, the short-lived eworld was purchased by aol . 
on october 31, aol hometown  -lrb-  a web hosting service for the websites of aol customers  -rrb-  and the aol journal blog hosting service were eliminated . 
aol continues to market `` computer checkup '' . 
on june 23, 2015, aol was acquired by verizon communications for $4.4 billion . 
in the following months ,  aol also made a deal with microsoft . 
in february 1991, aol for dos was launched using a geoworks interface followed a year later by aol for windows . 
aol desktop version 10.x was late marked as unsupported in favor of supporting the aol desktop 9.x versions . 
aol  -lrb-  stylized as aol .  ,  formerly a company known as aol inc .  and originally known as america online  -rrb-  is a web portal and online service provider based in new york city . 
aol desktop is an internet suite produced by aol that integrates a web browser ,  a media player and an instant messenger client . 
on april 3, 2006, aol announced it was retiring the full name america online; the official name of the service became aol ,  and the full name of the time warner subdivision became aol llc . 
the deal includes a `` perpetual '' license for aol to use these patents . 
aol quickly surpassed genie ,  and by the mid-1990s ,  it passed prodigy  -lrb-  which for several years allowed aol advertising  -rrb-  and compuserve . 
on july 16, 2014, aol earned an emmy nomination for the aol original series ,  the future starts here ,  in the news and documentary category . 
on september 3, 2015, aol agreed to buy millennial media for us$238 million . 
on july 19, 2006, aol's entire retention manual was released on the internet . 
there have been many complaints over rules that govern an aol user's conduct . 
aol then provided community-based message boards in lieu of usenet . 
the new identity ,  designed by wolff olins ,  was enacted onto all of aol's services on december 10, the date aol traded independently for the first time since the time warner merger on the new york stock exchange under the symbol aol . 
on march 13, 2008, aol purchased the social networking site bebo for $850m  -lrb-  £417m  -rrb-  . 
according to leaks of said program ,  aol joined the prism program in 2011.
as of 2019, following media brands became subsidiary of aol's parent verizon media . 
aol purchased search engine webcrawler in 1995, but the next year sold it to excite in a deal that makes excite the exclusive search and directory service on aol . 
when the value of bebo decreased to a tiny fraction of the $850 million aol paid for it ,  users were forced to recreate their profiles yet again ,  on a new service called aol lifestream . 
on april 24, the company launched the aol on network ,  a single website for its video output . 
on march 12, 2009, tim armstrong ,  formerly with google ,  was named chairman and ceo of aol . 
for computational reasons ,  astronomical year numbering and the iso 8601 standard designate years so that ad 1 = year 1, 1 bc = year 0, 2 bc = year −1, etc . 
this calendar era is based on the traditionally reckoned year of the conception or birth of jesus of nazareth ,  with `` ad '' counting years from the start of this epoch ,  and `` bc '' denoting years before the start of the era . 
in the ad year numbering system ,  whether applied to the julian or gregorian calendars ,  ad 1 is preceded by 1 bc . 
the terms  -lrb-  ad  -rrb-  and before christ  -lrb-  bc  -rrb-  are used to label or number years in the julian and gregorian calendars . 
thus dates using the year 0 or negative years may require further investigation before being converted to bc or ad . 
are sometimes used in place of ad and bc . 
astronomical year numbering and iso 8601 avoid words or abbreviations related to christianity ,  but use the same numbers for ad years . 
eusebius of caesarea in his `` chronicle '' used an era beginning with the birth of abraham ,  dated in 2016 bc  -lrb-  ad 1 = 2017 anno abrahami  -rrb-  . 
traditionally ,  english followed latin usage by placing the `` ad '' abbreviation before the year number . 
in 796 alcuin was in his sixties . 
alcuin graduated to become a teacher during the 750s . 
alcuin was born in northumbria ,  presumably sometime in the 730s . 
ecgbert was devoted to alcuin ,  who thrived under his tutelage . 
alcuin's sequence is the solution to one of the problems of that book . 
delia is also the addressee of several poems by alcuin . 
in 790 alcuin returned from the court of charlemagne to england ,  to which he had remained attached . 
alcuin college ,  one of the colleges of the university of york ,  england ,  is named after him . 
alcuin made the abbey school into a model of excellence and many students flocked to it . 
if so ,  alcuin's origins may lie in the southern part of what was formerly known as deira . 
the young alcuin came to the cathedral church of york during the golden age of archbishop ecgbert and his brother ,  the northumbrian king eadberht . 
in his `` life '' of st willibrord ,  alcuin writes that wilgils ,  called a `` paterfamilias '' ,  had founded an oratory and church at the mouth of the humber ,  which had fallen into alcuin's possession by inheritance . 
there are various traditions concerning angilbert's relationship with bertha ,  daughter of charlemagne . 
angilbert seems to have been brought up at the court of charlemagne at the palace school in aquae grani  -lrb-  aachen  -rrb-  . 
angilbert's poems were published by ernst dümmler in the `` monumenta germaniae historica '' . 
in organic chemistry ,  amines  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  are compounds and functional groups that contain a basic nitrogen atom with a lone pair . 
the corresponding kelvin and rankine temperature scales set their zero points at absolute zero by definition . 
the question remains whether both can have zero entropy at `` t '' = 0 even though each is perfectly ordered . 
in the quantum-mechanical description ,  matter  -lrb-  solid  -rrb-  at absolute zero is in its ground state ,  the point of lowest internal energy . 
moreover ,  the slopes of the derivatives of δ ''g '' and δ ''h '' converge and are equal to zero at `` t '' = 0.
he used a scale that marked the boiling-point of water at +73 and the melting-point of ice at + ,  so that the zero was equivalent to about −240 on the celsius scale . 
the laws of thermodynamics indicate that absolute zero cannot be reached using only thermodynamic means ,  because the temperature of the substance being cooled approaches the temperature of the cooling agent asymptotically ,  and a system at absolute zero still possesses quantum mechanical zero-point energy ,  the energy of its ground state at absolute zero . 
values of this order for the absolute zero were not ,  however ,  universally accepted about this period . 
temperatures that are expressed as negative numbers on the familiar celsius or fahrenheit scales are simply colder than the zero points of those scales . 
one model that estimates the properties of an electron gas at absolute zero in metals is the fermi gas . 
absolute zero is the lowest limit of the thermodynamic temperature scale ,  a state at which the enthalpy and entropy of a cooled ideal gas reach their minimum value ,  taken as 0.
with a better theoretical understanding of absolute zero ,  scientists were eager to reach this temperature in the lab . 
the same can be said to be true for the expansion process of such a system . 
a process that does not involve the transfer of heat or matter into or out of a system ,  so that  ,  is called an adiabatic process ,  and such a system is said to be adiabatically isolated . 
in practice ,  no process is truly adiabatic . 
an adiabatic process occurs without transfer of heat or mass of substances between a thermodynamic system and its surroundings . 
the parcel of air can only slowly dissipate the energy by conduction or radiation  -lrb-  heat  -rrb-  ,  and to a first approximation it can be considered adiabatically isolated and the process an adiabatic process . 
the other extreme kind of work is isochoric work  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  for which energy is added as work solely through friction or viscous dissipation within the system . 
in contrast ,  free expansion is an isothermal process for an ideal gas . 
one final thing to note when looking at the bonds of an amide is that there is also a hydrogen bond present between the active groups hydrogen and nitrogen atoms . 
an amide  -lrb-   or or   -rrb-  ,  also known as an acid amide ,  is a compound with the functional group re -lrb-  o  -rrb- nr′  -lrb-  r and r′ refer to h or organic groups  -rrb-  . 
the simplest amides are derivatives of ammonia wherein one hydrogen atom has been replaced by an acyl group . 
conversely ,  under extremely acidic conditions ,  the carbonyl oxygen can become protonated with a p ''k '' of roughly −1.
in the usual nomenclature ,  one adds the term `` amide '' to the stem of the parent acid's name . 
the term amide refers both to `` classes of compounds '' and to the `` functional group ''  -lrb-  re -lrb-  o  -rrb- nr′  -rrb-  within those compounds . 
because of the greater electronegativity of oxygen ,  the carbonyl  -lrb-  c=o  -rrb-  is a stronger dipole than the n–c dipole . 
some animists also view plant and fungi life as persons and interact with them accordingly . 
in such ,  harvey says ,  the animist takes an i-thou approach to relating to his world ,  where objects and animals are treated as a `` thou '' rather than as an `` it '' . 
the religious studies scholar graham harvey defined animism as the belief `` that the world is full of persons ,  only some of whom are human ,  and that life is always lived in relationship with others '' . 
in many animistic world views ,  the human being is often regarded as on a roughly equal footing with other animals ,  plants ,  and natural forces . 
various animistic cultures also comprehend as stones as persons . 
wind ,  similarly ,  can be conceived as a person in animistic thought . 
these approaches are careful to avoid the modernist assumptions that the environment consists dichotomously of a physical world distinct from humans ,  and from modernist conceptions of the person as composed dualistically as body and soul . 
for tylor ,  animism represented the earliest form of religion ,  being situated within an evolutionary framework of religion which has developed in stages and which will ultimately lead to humanity rejecting religion altogether in favor of scientific rationality . 
his suggested explanation ,  however ,  did not deal with the question of why such a belief became central to religion . 
some members of the non-tribal world also consider themselves animists  -lrb-  such as author daniel quinn ,  sculptor lawson oyekan and many contemporary pagans  -rrb-  . 
animism is used in the anthropology of religion as a term for the belief system of many indigenous peoples ,  especially in contrast to the relatively more recent development of organised religions . 
non-humans  -rrb-  . 
vivaldi's music was innovative . 
vivaldi wrote more than 500 other concertos . 
vivaldi's health was problematic . 
vivaldi's music is featured throughout the story . 
in the early 20th century ,  fritz kreisler's concerto in c ,  in the style of vivaldi  -lrb-  which he passed off as an original vivaldi work  -rrb-  helped revive vivaldi's reputation . 
in 1725, vivaldi returned to venice ,  where he produced four operas in the same year . 
janice jordan shefelman wrote a children's book detailing the life of vivaldi entitled `` i ,  vivaldi '' . 
however ,  the emperor died soon after vivaldi's arrival ,  and vivaldi himself died ,  in poverty ,  less than a year later . 
vivaldi's parents were giovanni battista vivaldi and camilla calicchio ,  as recorded in the register of san giovanni in bragora . 
vivaldi's works attracted cataloging efforts befitting a major composer . 
as well as about 46 operas ,  vivaldi composed a large body of sacred choral music . 
during this period vivaldi wrote the `` four seasons '' ,  four violin concertos that give musical expression to the seasons of the year . 
vivaldi got the censor to accept the opera the following year ,  and it was a resounding success . 
on his way to vienna ,  vivaldi may have stopped in graz to see anna girò . 
in a letter written by vivaldi to his patron marchese bentivoglio in 1737, he makes reference to his `` 94 operas '' . 
the resurrection of vivaldi's unpublished works in the 20th century is mostly due to the efforts of alfredo casella ,  who in 1939 organized the historic vivaldi week ,  in which the rediscovered gloria  -lrb-  rv 589 -rrb- and l'olimpiade were revived . 
vivaldi's father may have been a composer himself: in 1689, an opera titled `` la fedeltà sfortunata '' was composed by a giovanni battista rossi—the name under which vivaldi's father had joined the sovvegno di santa cecilia . 
compositions by vivaldi are identified today by rv number ,  the number assigned by danish musicologist peter ryom in works published mostly in the 1970s ,  such as the `` ryom-verzeichnis '' or `` répertoire des oeuvres d'antonio vivaldi '' . 
the aare  -lrb-    -rrb-  or aar is a tributary of the high rhine and the longest river that both rises and ends entirely within switzerland . 
sir walter scott rescued the `` jougs '' from threave castle in dumfries and galloway and attached them to the castellated gateway he built at abbotsford . 
scott's only son walter did not live to enjoy the property ,  having died on his way from india in 1847.
abbotsford is a historic country house in the scottish borders ,  near melrose ,  on the south bank of the river tweed . 
scott had only enjoyed his residence one year when  -lrb-  1825 -rrb- he met with that reverse of fortune which involved the estate in debt . 
abraham ,  originally abram ,  is the common patriarch of the three abrahamic religions . 
after this event ,  abraham went to beersheba . 
besides isaac and jacob ,  he is the one whose name would appear united with god ,  as god in judaism was called `` elohei abraham ,  elohei yitzchaq ve elohei ya`aqob ''  -lrb-  `` god of abraham ,  god of isaac ,  and god of jacob ''  -rrb-  and never the god of any one else . 
abimelech was informed that abraham was a prophet who would pray for him . 
after eating ,  abraham and the three visitors got up . 
early the next morning ,  abraham went to the place where he stood before god . 
ishmael was fourteen years old when abraham's son isaac was born to sarah . 
at some point in isaac's youth ,  abraham was commanded by god to offer his son up as a sacrifice in the land of moriah . 
abraham settled between kadesh and shur in the land of the philistines . 
abram ,  the original name of the biblical abraham ,  is also the name of dylan's own father . 
abraham does not loom so large in christianity as he does in judaism and islam . 
in jewish legend ,  god created heaven and earth for the sake of the merits of abraham . 
god declared sarai's new name: `` sarah '' ,  blessed her ,  and told abraham ,  `` i will give thee a son also of her '' . 
abraham then prayed for abimelech and his household ,  since god had stricken the women with infertility because of the taking of sarah . 
thirteen years later ,  when abram was 99 years of age ,  god declared abram's new name: `` abraham '' – `` a father of many nations '' . 
one of the visitors told abraham that upon his return next year ,  sarah would have a son . 
immediately after abraham's encounter with god ,  he had his entire household of men ,  including himself  -lrb-  age 99 -rrb- and ishmael  -lrb-  age 13 -rrb- ,  circumcised . 
early the next morning ,  abraham brought hagar and ishmael out together . 
kierkegaard wanted to understand the anxiety that must have been present in abraham when god asked him to sacrifice his son . 
abraxas  -lrb-  gk . 
the word may be related to `` abracadabra '' ,  although other explanations exist . 
the proper form of the name is evidently `` abrasax '' ,  as with the greek writers ,  hippolytus ,  epiphanias ,  didymus  -lrb-  `` de trin '' . 
absalom ,  david's third son ,  by maacah ,  was born in hebron . 
after this murder absalom fled to talmai ,  who was the king of geshur and absalom's maternal grandfather  -lrb-  see also or   -rrb-  . 
joab killed absalom with three darts through the heart . 
david took refuge from absalom's forces beyond the jordan river . 
the great temple and most of the ancient town are buried under the modern buildings to the north of the seti temple . 
funerary enclosures ,  misinterpreted in modern times as great 'forts' ,  were built on the desert behind the town by three kings of the second dynasty; the most complete is that of khasekhemwy . 
some of the tomb structures ,  referred to as `` forts '' by modern researchers ,  lay behind the town . 
the cemetery of private persons began during the first dynasty with some pit-tombs in the town . 
successively from the first dynasty to the twenty-sixth dynasty ,  nine or ten temples were built on one site at abydos . 
abydos was occupied by the rulers of the predynastic period ,  whose town ,  temple and tombs have been found there . 
the noble statuette of cheops in ivory ,  found in the stone chamber of the temple ,  gives the only portrait of this great pharaoh . 
a great temenos was laid out enclosing a much larger area and the new temple itself was about three times the earlier size . 
seti i ,  in the nineteenth dynasty ,  founded a temple to the south of the town in honor of the ancestral pharaohs of the early dynasties; this was finished by ramesses ii ,  who also built a lesser temple of his own . 
it is a chronological list showing cartouches of most dynastic pharaohs of egypt from menes until seti i's father ,  ramesses i . 
thutmose iii built a far larger temple ,  about  . 
seals attest theodosius as bishop of abydos in the 11th century ,  and john as metropolitan bishop of abydos in the 11/12th century . 
after the 7th century ad ,  abydos became a major seaport . 
in the spring of 196 bc ,  abydos was seized by antiochus iii ,  `` megas basileus '' of the seleucid empire ,  who refortified the city in 192/191 bc . 
abydos remained under persian control until it was seized by a macedonian army led by parmenion ,  a general of alexander the great ,  in the spring of 336 bc . 
abydos was ruled by daphnis ,  a pro-persian tyrant ,  in the 520s bc ,  but was occupied by the persian empire in 514.
a gymnasium was active at abydos in the 2nd century bc . 
attalus iii ,  king of pergamon ,  bequeathed his kingdom to rome upon his death in 133 bc ,  and thus abydos became part of the province of asia . 
after the death of alexander the great in 323 bc ,  abydos ,  as part of the satrapy of hellespontine phrygia ,  came under the control of leonnatus as a result of the partition of babylon . 
emperor manuel i komnenos repaired abydos' fortifications in the late 12th century . 
acacia s . l . 
from a population of only 4,000 or 5,000 in the 1940s ,  by the early 1960s ,  acapulco had a population of about 50,000.
there are two stories about how acapulco bay was discovered by europeans . 
acapulco is also mexico's largest beach and balneario resort city . 
in 1911, revolutionary forces took over the main plaza of acapulco . 
acapulco de juárez  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  commonly called acapulco ,  is a city ,  municipality and major seaport in the state of guerrero on the pacific coast of mexico ,  south of mexico city . 
cortés established acapulco as a major port by the early 1530s ,  with the first major road between mexico city and the port constructed by 1531.
the island and municipality of capul ,  in the philippines ,  derives its name from acapulco; capul was the western end of the trans-pacific sailing route from acapulco to what was then a spanish colony . 
from 1981 to 1984, kay was atari's chief scientist . 
kay is one of the fathers of the idea of object-oriented programming ,  which he named ,  along with some colleagues at parc . 
kay was also a senior fellow at hewlett-packard until hp disbanded the advanced software research team on july 20, 2005.
in an interview on education in america with the davis group ltd .  ,  kay said , 
while at parc ,  kay conceived the dynabook concept ,  a key progenitor of laptop and tablet computers and the e-book . 
because the dynabook was conceived as an educational platform ,  kay is considered to be one of the first researchers into mobile learning; many features of the dynabook concept have been adopted in the design of the one laptop per child educational platform ,  with which kay is actively involved . 
alan curtis kay  -lrb-  born may 17, 1940 -rrb- is an american computer scientist . 
kay has lectured extensively on the idea that the computer revolution is very new ,  and all of the good ideas have not been universally implemented . 
20k loc ? `` 
apl  -lrb-  named after the book `` a programming language ''  -rrb-  is a programming language developed in the 1960s by kenneth e .  iverson . 
algol 68 is substantially different from algol 60 and was not well received ,  so that in general `` algol '' means algol 60 and dialects thereof . 
in this capacity i was the editor of the algol 60 report ,  produced as the result of the algol 60 meeting in paris in january 1960. ''
algol 60 inspired many languages that followed it . 
algol introduced code blocks and the codice_1…codice_2 pairs for delimiting them . 
to date there have been at least 70 augmentations ,  extensions ,  derivations and sublanguages of algol 60.
in contrast ,  algol 68 offered an extensive library of `` transput ''  -lrb-  input/output  -rrb-  facilities . 
it was revised and expanded by peter naur for algol 60, and at donald knuth's suggestion renamed backus–naur form . 
awk was preceded by sed  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- . 
 ''awk is a language for processing text files . 
awk commands are the statements that are substituted for `` action '' in the examples above . 
- alfred v .  aho an awk program is a series of pattern action pairs ,  written as:
awk's built-in variables include the field variables: $1, $2, $3, and so on  -lrb-  $0 represents the entire record  -rrb-  . 
in the 1990s ,  perl became very popular ,  competing with awk in the niche of unix text-processing languages . 
odin and his wife ,  frigg ,  are the rulers of asgard . 
in norse religion ,  asgard  -lrb-  ; ; `` enclosure of the æsir ''  -rrb-  is one of the nine worlds and home to the æsir tribe of gods . 
apollo ran from 1961 to 1972, with the first manned flight in 1968.
msfc designed the heavy lift-class saturn launch vehicles ,  which would be required for apollo . 
the apollo program ,  also known as project apollo ,  was the third united states human spaceflight program carried out by the national aeronautics and space administration  -lrb-  nasa  -rrb-  ,  which succeeded in landing the first humans on the moon from 1969 to 1972.
schmitt participated in the lunar geology training of all of the apollo landing crews . 
the apollo lunar module  -lrb-  lm  -rrb-  was designed to descend from lunar orbit to land two astronauts on the moon and take them back to orbit to rendezvous with the command module . 
the saturn ib was an upgraded version of the saturn i . 
saturn ib launch vehicles and flights were designated with an as-200 series number ,  `` as '' indicating `` apollo saturn '' and the `` 2 '' indicating the second member of the saturn rocket family . 
saturn v launch vehicles and flights were designated with an as-500 series number ,  `` as '' indicating `` apollo saturn '' and the `` 5 '' indicating saturn v .  the three-stage saturn v was designed to send a fully fueled csm and lm to the moon . 
it also became clear that apollo would outgrow the canaveral launch facilities in florida . 
apollo used saturn family rockets as launch vehicles ,  which were also used for an apollo applications program ,  which consisted of skylab ,  a space station that supported three manned missions in 1973–74, and the apollo–soyuz test project ,  a joint us-soviet union earth-orbit mission in 1975.
it became clear that managing the apollo program would exceed the capabilities of robert r .  gilruth's space task group ,  which had been directing the nation's manned space program from nasa's langley research center . 
in september 1962, nasa planned to launch four manned csm flights on the saturn i from late 1965 through 1966, concurrent with project gemini . 
the june 11, 1962, decision to use lunar orbit rendezvous enabled the saturn v to replace the nova ,  and the msfc proceeded to develop the saturn rocket family for apollo . 
the apollo program was conceived during the eisenhower administration in early 1960, as a follow-up to project mercury . 
apollo set several major human spaceflight milestones . 
saturn i ,  the first us heavy lift launch vehicle ,  was initially planned to launch partially equipped csms in low earth orbit tests . 
in scottish law ,  consent is not a defense for assault . 
a person has committed an aggravated assault when that person attempts to:
consent may be a complete or partial defense to assault . 
aggravated assault is ,  in some jurisdictions ,  a stronger form of assault ,  usually using a deadly weapon . 
assault is an offence under s .  265 of the canadian criminal code . 
assault may overlap with an attempted crime; for example an assault may be charged as an attempted murder if it was done with intent to kill . 
the legal systems of civil law and scots law have never distinguished assault from battery . 
the account later ,  in speaking of a hall in the highest heaven called gimlé that shall survive when heaven and earth have died ,  explains: it is said that another heaven is to the southward and upward of this one ,  and it is called andlang `` andlangr '' 'endlong' but the third heaven is yet above that ,  and it is called vídbláin `` vídbláinn '' 'wide-blue' and in that heaven we think this abode is . 
modern commentators speculate  -lrb-  or sometimes state as fact  -rrb-  that álfheim was one of the nine worlds  -lrb-  `` heima ''  -rrb-  mentioned in stanza 2 of the eddic poem `` völuspá '' . 
ask and embla have been the subject of a number of references and artistic depictions . 
in norse mythology ,  ask and embla  -lrb-  from   -rrb- —male and female respectively—were the first two humans ,  created by the gods . 
old norse literally means `` ash tree '' but the etymology of `` embla '' is uncertain ,  and two possibilities of the meaning of `` embla '' are generally proposed . 
ask and embla are depicted on two of the sixteen wooden panels found on the oslo city hall in oslo ,  norway ,  by dagfin werenskiold . 
ask and embla go on to become the progenitors of all humanity and were given a home within the walls of midgard . 
in stanza 17 of the `` poetic edda '' poem `` völuspá '' ,  the völva reciting the poem states that hœnir ,  lóðurr and odin once found ask and embla on land . 
after the coosa and tallapoosa rivers ,  the principal tributary of the alabama is the cahaba river ,  which is about long and joins the alabama river about below selma . 
the alabama river has three lock and dams between montgomery and the mobile river . 
the alabama river ,  in the u . s .  state of alabama ,  is formed by the tallapoosa and coosa rivers ,  which unite about north of montgomery ,  near the suburb of wetumpka . 
the edmund pettus bridge crosses the alabama river near selma . 
alain de lille has often been confounded with other persons named alain ,  in particular with another alanus  -lrb-  alain ,  bishop of auxerre  -rrb-  ,  alan ,  abbot of tewkesbury ,  alain de podio ,  etc . 
alan wrote three very large theological textbooks ,  one being his first work ,  `` summa quoniam homines '' . 
alain de lille  -lrb-  latin: `` alanus ab insulis ''; 11281202/03 -rrb- was a french theologian and poet . 
alan's philosophy was a sort of mixture of aristotelian logic and neoplatonic philosophy . 
the christianization of the alemanni took place during merovingian times  -lrb-  6th to 8th centuries  -rrb-  . 
the alemanni  -lrb-  also `` alamanni ''; `` suebi '' `` swabians ''  -rrb-  were a confederation of germanic tribes on the upper rhine river . 
the alemanni were first mentioned by cassius dio describing the campaign of caracalla in 213.
most of the alemanni were probably at the time ,  in fact ,  resident in or close to the borders of germania superior . 
the german spoken today over the range of the former alemanni is termed alemannic german ,  and is recognised among the subgroups of the high german languages . 
in 496, the alemanni were conquered by frankish leader clovis and incorporated into his dominions . 
in this context ,  the use of alemanni is possibly an anachronism ,  but it reveals that ammianus believed they were the same people ,  which is consistent with the location of the alemanni of caracalla's campaigns . 
apostles of the alemanni were columbanus and his disciple saint gall . 
cassius dio portrays the alemanni as victims of this treacherous emperor . 
in retribution ,  caracalla then led the legio ii `` traiana fortis '' against the alemanni ,  who lost and were pacified for a time . 
moreover ,  the territory of germania superior was not originally included among the alemanni's possessions . 
the alemanni established a series of territorially defined `` pagi ''  -lrb-  cantons  -rrb-  on the east bank of the rhine . 
by caracalla's time ,  the name alemanni was being used by cantons themselves banding together for purposes of supporting a citizen army  -lrb-  the `` war bands ''  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  book ii . 31 -rrb- subsequently ,  the alemanni formed part of the frankish dominions and were governed by a frankish duke . 
before the mention of alemanni in the time of caracalla ,  one would search in vain for alemanni in the moderately detailed geography of southern germany in claudius ptolemy ,  written in greek in the mid-second century; at that time ,  the people who later used that name likely were known by other designations . 
a logical conclusion to draw is that the hermunduri extended over later swabia and therefore the alemanni originally derived from the hermunduri . 
nyse american ,  formerly known as the american stock exchange  -lrb-  amex  -rrb-  ,  and more recently as nyse mkt ,  is an american stock exchange situated in new york city ,  new york . 
until 1953, it was known as the new york curb exchange . 
on may 10, 2012, nyse amex equities changed its name to nyse mkt llc . 
on may 10, 2012, nyse amex equities changed its name to nyse mkt llc . 
in 1953 the curb exchange was renamed the american stock exchange . 
he also made connections with a number of other british naturalists—most significantly ,  darwin . 
as he later wrote in his autobiography:
he left london in 1837 to live with william and work as his apprentice for six years . 
darwin demurred at first ,  then began writing up a `` species sketch '' of his continuing work in may 1856.
his 1889 book `` darwinism '' used information he collected on his american trip ,  and information he had compiled for the lectures . 
in 1858 he sent an article outlining his theory to darwin; it was published ,  along with a description of darwin's own theory ,  in the same year . 
to remain financially solvent ,  wallace worked grading government examinations ,  wrote 25 papers for publication between 1872 and 1876 for various modest sums ,  and was paid by lyell and darwin to help edit some of their own works . 
the paper shook charles lyell's belief that species were immutable . 
accounts of his studies and adventures there were eventually published in 1869 as `` the malay archipelago '' ,  which became one of the most popular books of scientific exploration of the 19th century ,  and has never been out of print . 
wallace collected more than 126,000 specimens in the malay archipelago  -lrb-  more than 80,000 beetles alone  -rrb-  . 
although it contained no mention of any possible mechanisms for evolution ,  this paper foreshadowed the momentous paper he would write three years later . 
he was also one of the first scientists to write a serious exploration of the subject of whether there was life on mars . 
another commentator in the same edition said `` no apology need be made for the few literary or scientific follies of the author of that great book on the 'malay archipelago' . `` 
john stuart mill was impressed by remarks criticising english society that wallace had included in `` the malay archipelago '' . 
wallace continued his scientific work in parallel with his social commentary . 
in the 1890 article `` human selection '' he wrote ,  `` those who succeed in the race for wealth are by no means the best or the most intelligent  .  .  . ``  in 1898, wallace wrote a paper advocating a pure paper money system ,  not backed by silver or gold ,  which impressed the economist irving fisher so much that he dedicated his 1920 book `` stabilizing the dollar '' to wallace . 
the australian labor party national executive is the chief administrative authority of the australian labor party ,  subject only to labor's national conference . 
australian young labor is the youth wing of the australian labor party ,  where all members under age 26 are automatically members . 
however labor lost the 2018 south australian state election after 16 years in government . 
the australian labor party  -lrb-  alp; known as labor ,  historically spelt labour  -rrb-  is a major centre-left political party in australia . 
labor commenced a 23-year period in opposition . 
the australian labor party has its origins in the labour parties founded in the 1890s in the australian colonies prior to federation . 
the australian labor party is a federal party ,  consisting of eight branches from each state and territory . 
some trade unions are affiliated with the labor party and are also factionally aligned . 
john verran led labor to form the state's first of many majority governments at the 1910 election . 
for a list of alp federal parliamentary leaders and deputy leaders see leaders of the australian labor party . 
between the 2007 federal election and the 2008 western australian state election ,  labor was in government nationally ,  as well as in all eight state and territory legislatures . 
further sections of the platform stress labor's support for equality and human rights ,  labour rights and democracy . 
the policy of the australian labor party is contained in its national platform ,  which is approved by delegates to labor's national conference ,  held every three years . 
the federal parliament in 1901 was contested by each state labour party . 
at the conference of the new south wales labor party in june 1949, chifley sought to define the labour movement as having:
the tasmanian branch of the australian labor party recently gave these groups voting and speaking rights at their state conference . 
the elected members of the labor party in both houses of the national parliament meet as the federal parliamentary labor party ,  also known as the caucus . 
the first election contested by labour candidates was the 1891 new south wales election ,  when labour candidates  -lrb-  then called the labor electoral league of new south wales  -rrb-  won 35 of 141 seats . 
dodo is first seen as alice is floating on the sea in a bottle . 
in the disney film ,  the dodo plays a much greater role in the story . 
the dodo later appears briefly at the end of the film ,  conducting another caucus race . 
the dodo is voiced by bill thompson and animated by milt kahl . 
albert ii  -lrb-  ; 28 march 15228 january 1557 -rrb- was the margrave of brandenburg-kulmbach  -lrb-  brandenburg-bayreuth  -rrb-  from 1527 to 1553.
sharing in the attack on the electorate of saxony ,  albert was taken prisoner at rochlitz in march 1547 by elector john frederick of saxony ,  but was released as a result of the emperor's victory at the battle of mühlberg in the succeeding april . 
when charles left germany a few weeks later ,  albert renewed his depredations in franconia . 
albert the bear  -lrb-  ; ; 1100 – 18 november 1170 -rrb- was the first margrave of brandenburg  -lrb-  as albert i  -rrb-  from 1157 to his death and was briefly duke of saxony between 1138 and 1142.
albert was married in 1124 to sophie of winzenburg  -lrb-  died 25 march 1160 -rrb- and they had the following children:
in 1164 albert joined a league of princes formed against henry the lion ,  and peace being made in 1169, albert divided his territories among his six sons . 
in 1138 conrad iii ,  the hohenstaufen king of the germans ,  deprived albert's cousin and nemesis ,  henry the proud of his saxon duchy ,  which was awarded to albert if he could take it . 
cardinal albert of brandenburg  -lrb-  ; 28 june 149024 september 1545 -rrb- was elector and archbishop of mainz from 1514 to 1545, and archbishop of magdeburg from 1513 to 1545.
born in kölln on the spree ,  albert was the younger son of john cicero ,  elector of brandenburg and of margaret of thuringia . 
after their father's funeral ,  albert and his older brother joachim i nestor became margraves of brandenburg in 1499, but only his older brother held the title of an elector of brandenburg . 
in 1514 he obtained the electorate of mainz ,  and in 1518, at the age of 28, was made a cardinal . 
his son ,  albert frederick ,  succeeded him as duke of prussia . 
albert's rule in prussia was fairly prosperous . 
albert was oft-honored in the quarter maraunenhof in northern königsberg . 
king's gate contains a statue of albert . 
albert was granted a four-year truce early in 1521.
in imperial politics albert was fairly active . 
albert married first ,  to dorothea  -lrb-  1 august 150411 april 1547 -rrb- ,  daughter of king frederick i of denmark ,  in 1526.
albert was born in ansbach in franconia as the third son of frederick i ,  margrave of brandenburg-ansbach . 
albert pledged a personal oath to the king and in return was invested with the duchy for himself and his heirs . 
there is a shuttle-service between aachen and the airport . 
maastricht aachen airport is the main airport of aachen and maastricht . 
there are four smaller stations in aachen: `` aachen west '' ,  `` aachen schanz '' ,  `` aachen-rothe erde '' and `` eilendorf '' . 
aachen west has gained in importance with the expansion of rwth aachen university . 
fh aachen ,  aachen university of applied sciences  -lrb-  acuas  -rrb-  was founded in 1971.
st .  michael's church ,  aachen was built as a church of the aachen jesuit collegium in 1628.
the `` elisenbrunnen '' is one of the most famous sights of aachen . 
there are two stations for intercity bus services in aachen: aachen west station ,  in the north-west of the city ,  and aachen wilmersdorfer straße ,  in the north-east . 
the decline of aachen culminated in 1794, when the french ,  led by general charles dumouriez ,  occupied aachen . 
in 1789, there was a constitutional crisis in the aachen government ,  and in 1794 aachen lost its status as a free imperial city . 
aachen  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as bad aachen  -lrb-  `` aachen spa ''  -rrb-  ,  and in french and traditional english as aix-la-chapelle ,  is a spa and border city in north rhine-westphalia ,  germany . 
aachen has 245,885 inhabitants  -lrb-  as of 31 december 2015 -rrb- ,  of whom 118,272 are female ,  and 127,613 are male . 
aachen's name in french and german evolved in parallel . 
aachen was heavily damaged during world war ii . 
the districts of aachen ,  including their constituent statistical districts ,  are:
aachen hosted the 2006 fei world equestrian games . 
the aachen rathaus ,   -lrb-  english: aachen city hall or aachen town hall  -rrb-  dated from 1330, lies between two central squares ,  the `` markt ''  -lrb-  marketplace  -rrb-  and the `` katschhof ''  -lrb-  between city hall and cathedral  -rrb-  . 
during the roman period ,  aachen was the site of a flourishing jewish community . 
the first horse tram line in aachen opened in december 1880.
it also maintains a botanical garden  -lrb-  the botanischer garten aachen  -rrb-  . 
the scotch-club in aachen was the first discothèque; it has been open since 19 october 1959.
this however marked the end of the period of manuscript production at aachen . 
aachen cathedral has been designated as a unesco world heritage site . 
aachen's local dialect is called and belongs to the ripuarian language . 
aachen has proved an important site for the production of historical manuscripts . 
in 2009, aachen was ranked eighth among cities in germany for innovation . 
there are plans to eliminate traffic jams at the aachen road interchange . 
aachen was chosen as the site of several important congresses and peace treaties: the first congress of aachen  -lrb-  often referred to as the congress of aix-la-chapelle in english  -rrb-  on 2 may 1668, leading to the first treaty of aachen in the same year which ended the war of devolution . 
agates can also be found in sedimentary rocks . 
 ''blue lace agate '' is found in africa and is especially hard . 
other quartz classes like amethyst or opal may then form the inner-most band inside the geode . 
although agates may be found in various kinds of host rock ,  they are classically associated with volcanic rocks and can be common in certain metamorphic rocks . 
 ''greek agate '' is a name given to pale white to tan colored agate found in sicily back to 400 bc . 
agatized coral is often referred to as petoskey stone or agate . 
 ''brazilian agate '' is found as sizable geodes of layered nodules . 
other agates include: lake superior ,  crazy lace ,  blue lace ,  purple lace ,  pink lace ,  moss ,   fire ,  onyx ,  botswana pink ,  apricot ,   light pink ,  condor ,  polyhedroid ,  enhydro ,  dendritic ,  iris ,  fairburn ,  thunder egg ,  plume ,  coyamito ,  sagenite ,  fortification . 
