on 8 november ,  arago wrote to fresnel:
such were the circumstances in which arago first heard of fresnel's interest in optics . 
but young was alone in such efforts until fresnel entered the field . 
in 1802, mme fresnel wrote to louis concerning augustin:
the fresnel brothers were initially home-schooled by their mother . 
on 24 may 1816, fresnel wrote to young  -lrb-  in french  -rrb-  ,  acknowledging how little of his own memoir was new . 
according to arago , 
accordingly ,  in the same memoir ,  fresnel offered his first attempt at a wave theory of chromatic polarization . 
we may infer that the committee had only two options: award the prize to fresnel  -lrb-  `` no . 2 ''  -rrb-  ,  or withhold it . 
fresnel was troubled ,  wanting to know more precisely where he had collided with young . 
fresnel would not have ready access to these works outside paris ,  and could not read english . 
fresnel was initially posted to the western département of vendée . 
on 12 july 1815, as fresnel was about to leave paris ,  arago left him a note on a new topic:
fresnel's letters from december 1816 reveal his consequent anxiety . 
these equations were included in an undated note that fresnel gave to biot ,  to which biot added a few lines of his own . 
near the end of the memoir ,  fresnel summed up the difference between huygens' use of secondary waves and his own: whereas huygens says there is light only where the secondary waves exactly agree ,  fresnel says there is complete darkness only where the secondary waves exactly cancel out . 
arago tried to explain his observations in `` corpuscular '' terms . 
but on 19 december ,  mérimée dined with ampère and arago ,  with whom he was acquainted through the école polytechnique; and arago promised to look at fresnel's essay . 
fresnel ,  in contrast ,  decided to introduce polarization into interference experiments . 
fresnel's letters from later in 1814 reveal his interest in the wave theory ,  including his awareness that it explained the constancy of the speed of light and was at least compatible with stellar aberration . 
an `` emission '' theory of light was one that regarded the propagation of light as the transport of some kind of matter . 
but young was then the only public defender of the wave theory . 
as fresnel was not a member of the institute ,  the fate of his memoir depended heavily on the report of a single member . 
augustin-jean fresnel  -lrb-  also called augustin jean or simply augustin  -rrb-  ,  born in broglie ,  normandy ,  on 10 may 1788, was the second of four sons of the architect jacques fresnel  -lrb-  1755–1805 -rrb- and his wife augustine ,  `` née '' mérimée  -lrb-  1755–1833 -rrb- . 
in a memoir drafted on 30 august 1816 and revised on 6 october ,  fresnel reported an experiment in which he placed two matching thin laminae in a double-slit apparatus — one over each slit ,  with their optic axes perpendicular — and obtained two interference patterns offset in opposite directions ,  with perpendicular polarizations . 
in mid 1815, on his way home to mathieu to serve his suspension ,  fresnel met arago in paris and spoke of the wave theory and stellar aberration . 
in a memoir sent to the institute on 15 october 1815, fresnel mapped the external and internal fringes in the shadow of a wire . 
for the experimental testing of his calculations ,  fresnel used red light with a wavelength of 638nm ,  which he deduced from the diffraction pattern in the simple case in which light incident on a single slit was focused by a cylindrical lens . 
most of them have mitred abbots . 
lay abbots  -lrb-  m .  lat . 
monks ,  as a rule ,  were laymen ,  nor at the outset was the abbot any exception . 
in the eastern orthodox and eastern catholic churches ,  the abbot is referred to as the `` hegumen '' . 
thus at the first council of constantinople ,  ad 448, 23 archimandrites or abbots sign ,  with 30 bishops . 
the abbots of cluny and vendôme were ,  by virtue of their office ,  cardinals of the roman church . 
in the 12th century ,  the abbots of fulda claimed precedence of the archbishop of cologne . 
these `` abbots '' are appointed by the brothers and sisters of redwall to serve as a superior and provide paternal care ,  much like real abbots . 
in the church of england ,  the bishop of norwich ,  by royal decree given by henry viii ,  also holds the honorary title of `` abbot of st . 
in some monastic families ,  there is a hierarchy of precedence or authority among abbots . 
the governing body of the abbey consists of the abbot ,  prior and the `` convent '' of `` stiftsherren ''  -lrb-  canons  -rrb-  . 
the power of the abbot was paternal but absolute ,  limited ,  however ,  by the canon law . 
when a vacancy occurred ,  the bishop of the diocese chose the abbot out of the monks of the convent ,  but the right of election was transferred by jurisdiction to the monks themselves ,  reserving to the bishop the confirmation of the election and the benediction of the new abbot . 
the teeth suggest omnivory ,  and are more generalised than those of modern apes . 
the fossils were dated to between 4.35 and 4.45 million years old . 
like common chimpanzees ,  `` a .  ramidus '' was much more prognathic than modern humans . 
like later hominins ,  `` ardipithecus '' had reduced canine teeth . 
 ''ardipithecus kadabba '' is `` known only from teeth and bits and pieces of skeletal bones '' ,  and is dated to approximately 5.6 million years ago . 
by mechanically moving the parts to the assembly work and moving the semi-finished assembly from work station to work station ,  a finished product can be assembled faster and with less labor than by having workers carry parts to a stationary piece for assembly . 
adelaide  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the capital city of the state of south australia ,  and the fifth-most populous city of australia . 
adelaide is a planned city ,  designed by the first surveyor-general of south australia ,  colonel william light . 
adelaide is home to more than 75 percent of the south australian population ,  making it the most centralised population of any state in australia . 
today ,  flinders medical centre is one of the largest teaching hospitals in south australia . 
it was also ranked the most liveable city in australia by the property council of australia in 2011, 2012 and 2013.
the south australian government in this period built on former wartime manufacturing industries . 
as south australia's seat of government and commercial centre ,  adelaide is the site of many governmental and financial institutions . 
the site of the colony's capital was surveyed and laid out by colonel william light ,  the first surveyor-general of south australia ,  through the design made by the architect george strickland kingston . 
adelaide and its surrounding area is one of the most seismically active regions in australia . 
by 1860, wheat farms had been established from encounter bay in the south to clare in the north . 
south australia was officially proclaimed a british colony on 28 december 1836, near the old gum tree in what is now the suburb of glenelg north . 
garner's novel `` thursbitch '' was published in 2003.
in 1996, garner's novel `` strandloper '' was published . 
garner was the sole runner-up for the writing award in 1978.
garner himself however would later denounce this novel as `` a fairly bad book '' in 1968.
he also expressed the opinion that `` time is garner's most consistent theme '' . 
garner has spent much time investigating the areas that he deals with in his books; writing in the `` times literary supplement '' in 1968, garner commented that in preparation for writing his book `` elidor '':
garner had begun writing his first novel ,  `` the weirdstone of brisingamen: a tale of alderley '' ,  in september 1956.
it took garner six years to write his next novel ,  `` red shift '' . 
in 1962 garner began work on a radio play named `` elidor '' ,  which would result in the completion of a novel of the same name . 
although garner's early work is often labelled as `` children's literature '' ,  garner himself rejects such a description ,  informing one interviewer that `` i certainly have never written for children '' but that instead he has always written purely for himself . 
robert garner and his other relatives had all been craftsmen ,  and ,  according to garner ,  each successive generation had tried to `` improve on ,  or do something different from ,  the previous generation '' . 
while the set of complex numbers is uncountable ,  the set of algebraic numbers is countable and has measure zero in the lebesgue measure as a subset of the complex numbers ,  and in this sense almost all complex numbers are transcendental . 
this group is called the automorphism group of  . 
it is ,  loosely speaking ,  the symmetry group of the object . 
in the case of groups ,  the inner automorphisms are the conjugations by the elements of the group itself . 
category theory deals with abstract objects and morphisms between those objects . 
in the context of abstract algebra ,  a mathematical object is an algebraic structure such as a group ,  ring ,  or vector space . 
the accordion is an aerophone . 
the accordion appeared in popular music from the 1900s to the 1960s . 
the accordion is a traditional instrument in bosnia and herzegovina . 
accordions have many configurations and types . 
the instrument was very popular at 1950, where was common to find 2 accordions in the same house . 
inside the accordion are the reeds that generate the instrument tones . 
yankovic was trained in the accordion as a child . 
the accordion was particularly favoured by buskers . 
the earliest mention of the novel accordion instrument in australian music occurs in the 1830s . 
the accordion is widely spread across the world . 
the first instrument brought had a name of `` concertina ''  -lrb-  a 120 button chromatic accordion  -rrb-  . 
other accordions ,  such as the diatonic button accordion ,  have only a single shoulder strap and a right hand thumb strap . 
the accordion was introduced from germany into britain in about the year 1828.
the larger and more expensive accordions often also have bass switches . 
this is the world's largest competitive accordion festival . 
all but the smallest accordions usually have treble switches . 
the manufacture of an accordion is only a partly automated process . 
they are also used to define one accordion or another as a different `` type '':
various hybrid accordions have been created between instruments of different buttonboards and actions . 
she was influenced by her fellow chicanos los lobos who also use the music of the accordion . 
ai often revolves around the use of algorithms . 
knowledge representation and knowledge engineering are central to classical ai research . 
the scope of ai is disputed: as machines become increasingly capable ,  tasks considered as requiring `` intelligence '' are often removed from the definition ,  a phenomenon known as the ai effect ,  leading to the quip in tesler's theorem ,  `` ai is whatever hasn't been done yet . `` 
many ai algorithms are capable of learning from data; they can enhance themselves by learning new heuristics  -lrb-  strategies ,  or `` rules of thumb '' ,  that have worked well in the past  -rrb-  ,  or can themselves write other algorithms . 
the earliest  -lrb-  and easiest to understand  -rrb-  approach to ai was symbolism  -lrb-  such as formal logic  -rrb- : `` if an otherwise healthy adult has a fever ,  then they may have influenza '' . 
by the late 1980s and 1990s ,  ai research had developed methods for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information ,  employing concepts from probability and economics . 
emmerson's version of the band released the album `` the source '' in 2016.
emmerson's version of the band released the album the source in 2016.
this album ,  ``  '' ,  was released by real world records in 1996, and marked the debut of the afro celt sound system . 
following the split  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  emmerson's version of the band released the album the source in 2016.
on 20 may 2014 afro celt sound system announced the upcoming release of a new album ,  `` born '' . 
they reverted to the longer band name for their subsequent albums ,  `` pod '' ,  a compilation of new mixes of songs from the first four albums ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  their fifth studio album  -rrb-  ,  and `` capture - afro celt sound system 1995-2010 '' . 
the divided grouping of the band into two versions ,  both operating under the name afro celt sound system ,  began in january 2016 and was resolved in december 2016 after mcnally and russell agreed to work under a different name from emmerson . 
the hundred schools of thought were philosophers and schools that flourished from the 6th century to 221 bce ,  an era of great cultural and intellectual expansion in china . 
the book of han lists ten major schools ,  they are:
but probably the most influential and original of these schools was the chan sect ,  which had an even stronger impact in japan as the zen sect . 
he saw the sea as a remnant of the mass of humidity that once surrounded earth . 
anaximander explains how the four elements of ancient physics  -lrb-  air ,  earth ,  water and fire  -rrb-  are formed ,  and how earth and terrestrial beings are formed through their interactions . 
anaximander was the first to conceive a mechanical model of the world . 
such a model allowed the concept that celestial bodies could pass under the earth ,  opening the way to greek astronomy . 
both strabo and agathemerus  -lrb-  later greek geographers  -rrb-  claim that ,  according to the geographer eratosthenes ,  anaximander was the first to publish a map of the world . 
strabo viewed both as the first geographers after homer . 
such an accomplishment is more significant than it at first appears . 
at the origin ,  after the separation of hot and cold ,  a ball of flame appeared that surrounded earth like bark on a tree . 
anaximander was the first astronomer to consider the sun as a huge mass ,  and consequently ,  to realize how far from earth it might be ,  and the first to present a system where the celestial bodies turned at different distances . 
as the `` suda '' seems to suggest ,  it is very likely that with his knowledge of geometry ,  he became the first greek to accurately determine the equinoxes . 
maps were produced in ancient times ,  also notably in egypt ,  lydia ,  the middle east ,  and babylon . 
some scholars see a gap between the existing mythical and the new rational way of thought which is the main characteristic of the archaic period  -lrb-  8th to 6th century bc  -rrb-  in the greek city-states . 
according to apollodorus of athens ,  greek grammarian of the 2nd century bc ,  he was sixty-four years old during the second year of the 58th olympiad  -lrb-  547–546 bc  -rrb-  ,  and died shortly afterwards . 
he thought that ,  considering humans' extended infancy ,  we could not have survived in the primeval world in the same manner we do presently . 
his greek peers echoed this sentiment with their belief in natural boundaries beyond which not even the gods could operate . 
this then is a guide for the architect in creating the design concept . 
at all times in the design ,  the architect reports back to the client who may have reservations or recommendations ,  introducing a further variable into the design . 
an architect is a person who plans ,  designs and reviews the construction of buildings . 
previously ,  architects employed drawings to illustrate and generate design proposals . 
as the design becomes more advanced and detailed ,  specifications and detail designs are made of all the elements and components of the building . 
in the architectural profession ,  technical and environmental knowledge ,  design and construction management ,  and an understanding of business are as important as design . 
design proposal -lrb-  s  -rrb-  are generally expected to be both imaginative and pragmatic . 
the architect ,  once hired by a client ,  is responsible for creating a design concept that both meets the requirements of that client and provides a facility suitable to the required use . 
structural ,  mechanical ,  and electrical engineers and other specialists ,  are hired by the client or the architect ,  who must ensure that the work is co-ordinated to construct the design . 
a key part of the design is that the architect often consults with engineers ,  surveyors and other specialists throughout the design ,  ensuring that aspects such as the structural supports and air conditioning elements are coordinated in the scheme as a whole . 
in many places ,  independent ,  non-licensed individuals may perform design services outside the professional restrictions ,  such design houses and other smaller structures . 
they are abbreviations that consist of the initial letters or parts of words . 
abbreviations in english were frequently used from its earliest days . 
the early modern english period ,  between the 15th and 17th centuries ,  had abbreviations like `` y '' for `` þ '' ,  used for the word `` the '': `` hence ,  by later misunderstanding ,  ye olde tea shoppe . `` 
today ,  spaces are generally not used between single-letter abbreviations of words in the same phrase ,  so one almost never encounters `` u .  s . `` 
a period  -lrb-  full stop  -rrb-  is often used to signify an abbreviation ,  but opinion is divided as to when and if this should happen . 
many british publications have gradually done away with the use of periods in abbreviations . 
acronyms that were originally capitalized  -lrb-  with or without periods  -rrb-  but have since entered the vocabulary as generic words are no longer written with capital letters nor with any periods . 
in american english ,  the period is usually included regardless of whether or not it is a contraction ,  e . g . 
aphrodite is an ancient greek goddess associated with love ,  beauty ,  pleasure ,  and procreation . 
the other two goddesses were enraged and ,  as a direct result ,  sided with the greeks in the trojan war . 
in greek art ,  aphrodite is often also accompanied by dolphins and nereids . 
during the hellenistic period ,  the greeks identified aphrodite with the ancient egyptian goddesses hathor and isis . 
the cult of aphrodite was largely derived from that of the phoenician goddess astarte ,  a cognate of the east semitic goddess ishtar ,  whose cult was based on the sumerian cult of inanna . 
the ancient romans identified aphrodite with their goddess venus ,  who was originally a goddess of agricultural fertility ,  vegetation ,  and springtime . 
the goddesses chose to place the matter before zeus ,  who ,  not wanting to favor one of the goddesses ,  put the choice into the hands of paris ,  a trojan prince . 
this syncretism greatly impacted greek worship of aphrodite . 
aphrodite lies and tells him that she is not a goddess ,  but the daughter of one of the noble families of phrygia . 
the myth of pygmalion is first mentioned by the third-century bc greek writer philostephanus of cyrene ,  but is first recounted in detail in ovid's `` metamorphoses '' . 
such `` strophia '' were commonly used in depictions of the near eastern goddesses ishtar and atargatis . 
some early comparative mythologists opposed to the idea of a near eastern origin argued that aphrodite originated as an aspect of the greek dawn goddess eos and that she was therefore ultimately derived from the proto-indo-european dawn goddess * ''héusōs ''  -lrb-  properly greek eos ,  latin aurora ,  sanskrit ushas  -rrb-  . 
appearances of aphrodite in greek literature also vastly proliferated ,  usually showing aphrodite in a characteristically roman manner . 
the cult of aphrodite in greece was imported from ,  or at least influenced by ,  the cult of astarte in phoenicia ,  which ,  in turn ,  was influenced by the cult of the mesopotamian goddess known as `` ishtar '' to the east semitic peoples and as `` inanna '' to the sumerians . 
this narrative probably originated as a greek folk tale ,  originally independent of the `` odyssey '' . 
in book v ,  aphrodite charges into battle to rescue her son aeneas from the greek hero diomedes . 
the myth of adonis is associated with the festival of the adonia ,  which was celebrated by greek women every year in midsummer . 
in greek mythology ,  aphrodite was married to hephaestus ,  the god of blacksmiths and metalworking . 
across the greek world ,  she was known under epithets such as `` melainis '' `` black one '' ,  `` skotia '' `` dark one '' ,  `` androphonos '' `` killer of men '' ,  `` anosia '' `` unholy '' ,  and `` tymborychos '' `` gravedigger '' ,  all of which indicate her darker ,  more violent nature . 
the story of aeneas's conception is also mentioned in hesiod's `` theogony '' and in book ii of homer's `` iliad '' . 
later ,  the romans ,  who saw venus as a mother goddess ,  seized on this idea of eros as aphrodite's son and popularized it ,  making it the predominant portrayal in works on mythology until the present day . 
a number of improbable non-greek etymologies have also been suggested . 
thus she was also known as cytherea  -lrb-  `` lady of cythera ''  -rrb-  and cypris  -lrb-  `` lady of cyprus ''  -rrb-  ,  due to the fact that both locations claimed to be the place of her birth . 
all three goddesses were ideally beautiful and paris could not decide between them ,  so they resorted to bribes . 
the alteration from `` b '' to `` ph '' is explained as a `` familiar '' characteristic of greek `` obvious from the macedonians '' . 
another key similarity between aphrodite and the indo-european dawn goddess is her close kinship to the greek sky deity ,  since both of the main claimants to her paternity  -lrb-  zeus and uranus  -rrb-  are sky deities . 
the usual order relation ≤ on the real numbers is anti-symmetric: if for two real numbers `` x '' and `` y '' both inequalities `` x '' ≤ `` y '' and `` y '' ≤ `` x '' hold then `` x '' and `` y '' must be equal . 
more formally ,  `` r '' is anti-symmetric precisely if for all `` a '' and `` b '' in `` x '' or ,  equivalently , 
crowley's inheritance was running out . 
crowley's theological beliefs were not clear . 
hirsig later distanced herself from crowley ,  who then denounced her . 
in february 1904, crowley and rose arrived in cairo . 
following the paris working ,  neuburg began to distance himself from crowley ,  resulting in an argument in which crowley cursed him . 
fuller broke off his friendship and involvement with crowley over the scandal ,  and crowley and neuburg returned to algeria for further magical workings . 
crowley considered himself to be one of the outstanding figures of his time . 
according to crowley ,  reuss had named him head of the o . t . o . 
crowley also had a wider influence in british popular culture . 
in march 1887, when crowley was 11, his father died of tongue cancer . 
crowley was born as edward alexander crowley at 30 clarendon square in royal leamington spa ,  warwickshire ,  on 12 october 1875.
thelema continued to develop and spread following crowley's death . 
new followers continued to arrive at the abbey to be taught by crowley . 
both during his life and after it ,  crowley has been widely described as a satanist ,  usually by detractors . 
crowley began to receive scholarly attention from academics in the late 1990s . 
in december 1928 crowley met the nicaraguan maria teresa sanchez . 
they broke apart because pollitt did not share crowley's increasing interest in western esotericism ,  a break-up that crowley would regret for many years . 
several western esoteric traditions other than thelema were also influenced by crowley ,  with djurdjevic observing that `` crowley's influence on twentieth-century and contemporary esotericism has been enormous '' . 
crowley had his first significant mystical experience while on holiday in stockholm in december 1896.
in 1918, crowley went on a magical retreat in the wilderness of esopus island on the hudson river . 
aleister crowley  -lrb-  ; born edward alexander crowley; 12 october 1875 – 1 december 1947 -rrb- was an english occultist ,  ceremonial magician ,  poet ,  painter ,  novelist ,  and mountaineer . 
during the hearing ,  it was revealed that crowley had been spending three times his income for several years . 
crowley left busch and returned to london ,  where he took pearl brooksmith as his new scarlet woman . 
and imprisoned germer ,  who fled to the us ,  crowley then lambasted hitler as a black magician . 
in april 1930, crowley moved to berlin ,  where he took hanni jaegar as his magical partner; the relationship was troubled . 
finally ,  the seventh level ,  the goal of each soul ,  is where the soul transcends its own sense of `` soulfulness '' and reunites with the world soul and the universe . 
the life dies in which life condition it reborn in the same life condition . `` 
jainism also believes in the after life . 
your soul is a part of god and hence lives forever . 
it has been called the dream world in which the dreamer is in both life and death . 
the greek god hades is known in greek mythology as the king of the underworld ,  a place where souls live after death . 
hermes would leave the soul on the banks of the river styx ,  the river between life and death . 
belief in an afterlife is in contrast to the belief in oblivion after death . 
any place of existence ,  either of humans ,  souls or deities ,  outside the tangible world  -lrb-  heaven ,  hell ,  or other  -rrb-  is referred to as otherworld . 
21:1–7; 22:1–5; 11:15.  -rrb- 
charon ,  also known as the ferry-man ,  would take the soul across the river to hades ,  if the soul had gold: upon burial ,  the family of the dead soul would put coins under the deceased's tongue . 
some believe in the possibility of a heaven on earth in a world to come . 
also ,  in the baha'i view ,  souls will be able to recognize the accomplishments of the souls that have reached the same level as themselves ,  but not those that have achieved a rank higher than them . 
some belief systems ,  such as those in the abrahamic tradition ,  hold that the dead go to a specific plane of existence after death ,  as determined by god ,  or other divine judgment ,  based on their actions or beliefs during life . 
the zohar describes gehenna not as a place of punishment for the wicked but as a place of spiritual purification for souls . 
she'ol ,  in the hebrew bible ,  is a place of darkness to which all the dead go ,  both the righteous and the unrighteous ,  regardless of the moral choices made in life ,  a place of stillness and darkness cut off from life and from god . 
the afterlife  -lrb-  also referred to as life after death  -rrb-  is the belief that the essential part of an individual's identity or the stream of consciousness continues after the death of the physical body . 
the bahá'í scriptures also state there are distinctions between souls in the afterlife ,  and that souls will recognize the worth of their own deeds and understand the consequences of their actions . 
until the day of judgment ,  deceased souls remain in their graves awaiting the resurrection . 
gregory of nyssa discusses the long-before believed possibility of purification of souls after death . 
it is not a place of reward ,  but rather the end of a life journey at an end point of incarnations . 
in such a state a person finds contentment and peace at heart and at this stage ,  according to ahmadiyya beliefs ,  it can be said that a soul within the soul has begun to take shape . 
this afterlife realm is a transient place where souls can choose to travel to other realms or other solar systems ,  it is the souls liberation into eternity ,  and is the realm that opens the doorway from our solar system into the cosmos . 
buddhists maintain that rebirth takes place without an unchanging self or soul passing from one form to another . 
 ''life is cosmic energy of the universe and after death it merges in universe again and as the time comes to find the suitable place for the entity died in the life condition it gets born . 
some unitarian universalists believe in universalism: that all souls will ultimately be saved and that there are no torments of hell . 
in tibetan buddhism the tibetan book of the dead explains the intermediate state of humans between death and reincarnation . 
his report of life there covers a wide range of topics ,  such as marriage in heaven  -lrb-  where all angels are married  -rrb-  ,  children in heaven  -lrb-  where they are raised by angel parents  -rrb-  ,  time and space in heaven  -lrb-  there are none  -rrb-  ,  the after-death awakening process in the world of spirits  -lrb-  a place halfway between heaven and hell and where people first wake up after death  -rrb-  ,  the allowance of a free will choice between heaven or hell  -lrb-  as opposed to being sent to either one by god  -rrb-  ,  the eternity of hell  -lrb-  one could leave but would never want to  -rrb-  ,  and that all angels or devils were once people on earth . 
misvan gatu is the `` place of the mixed ones '' where the souls lead a gray existence ,  lacking both joy and sorrow . 
according to maimonides ,  an afterlife continues for the soul of every human being ,  a soul now separated from the body in which it was `` housed '' during its earthly existence . 
perhaps the most famous would be emperor ojin who was enshrined as hachiman the god of war after his death . 
those bound for hell will suffer in their graves ,  while those bound for heaven will be in peace until that time . 
jesus also maintained that the time would come when the dead would hear the voice of the son of god ,  and all who were in the tombs would come out ,  who have done good deeds to the resurrection of life ,  but those who have done wicked deeds to the resurrection of condemnation . 
but if one analyses the sikh scriptures carefully ,  one may find that on many occasions the afterlife and the existence of heaven and hell are mentioned in `` guru granth sahib '' and in `` dasam granth '' ,  so from that it can be concluded that sikhism does believe in the existence of heaven and hell; however ,  heaven and hell are created to temporarily reward and punish ,  and one will then take birth again until one merges in god . 
human or one of the many heavenly realms ,  can be expected . 
the resurrection that will take place on the last day is physical ,  and is explained by suggesting that god will re-create the decayed body  -lrb-  17:100: `` could they not see that god who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them ? 
hindus also believe in `` karma '' . 
sikhism may have a belief in the afterlife . 
most unitarian universalists believe that heaven and hell are symbolic places of consciousness and the faith is largely focused on the worldly life rather than any possible afterlife . 
rosicrucians speak of a life review period occurring immediately after death and before entering the afterlife's planes of existence  -lrb-  before the silver cord is broken  -rrb-  ,  followed by a judgment ,  more akin to a final review or end report over one's life . 
he made the first measurement of stellar parallax: 0.3 arcsec for the binary star 61 cygni . 
james bradley first tried to measure stellar parallaxes in 1729.
being very difficult to measure ,  only about 60 stellar parallaxes had been obtained by the end of the 19th century ,  mostly by use of the filar micrometer . 
in addition to the detection of exoplanets ,  it can also be used to determine their mass . 
during the past 50 years ,  7,435 schmidt camera plates were used to complete several sky surveys that make the data in usno-b1.0 accurate to within 0.2 arcsec . 
additional catalogues were compiled for the 23,882 double/multiple stars and 11,597 variable stars also analyzed during the hipparcos mission . 
athena is associated with the city of athens . 
in her aspect of `` athena polias '' ,  athena was venerated as the goddess of the city and the protectress of the citadel . 
the `` mourning athena '' or `` athena meditating '' is a famous relief sculpture dating to around 470-460 bc that has been interpreted to represent athena polias . 
when the trojan women go to the temple of athena on the acropolis to plead her for protection from diomedes ,  athena ignores them . 
many of the surviving sculptures of athena show this serpent . 
in some accounts ,  athena was described as the mother of the corybantes by helios . 
in ovid's `` metamorphoses '' ,  athena is occasionally referred to as `` tritonia '' . 
as `` athena promachos '' ,  she was believed to lead soldiers into battle . 
in greek mythology ,  athena was believed to have been born from the head of her father zeus . 
from her origin as an aegean palace goddess ,  athena was closely associated with the city . 
in one version of the myth ,  pallas was the daughter of the sea-god triton; she and athena were childhood friends ,  but athena accidentally killed her during a friendly sparring match . 
in the years following the revolution ,  artistic representations of athena proliferated . 
in an alternative variation of the same myth ,  pallas was instead athena's father ,  who attempted to assault his own daughter ,  causing athena to kill him and take his skin as a trophy . 
in ancient greek art ,  athena is frequently shown aiding the hero heracles . 
it is generally agreed that the cult of athena preserves some aspects of the proto-indo-european transfunctional goddess . 
the `` palladion '' was a statue of athena that was said to have stood in her temple on the trojan acropolis . 
athena wove the scene of her victory over poseidon in the contest for the patronage of athens . 
during the renaissance ,  athena donned the mantle of patron of the arts and human endeavor; allegorical paintings involving athena were a favorite of the italian renaissance painters . 
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ,  athena was used as a symbol for female rulers . 
in a founding myth reported by pseudo-apollodorus ,  athena competed with poseidon for the patronage of athens . 
western artists and allegorists have often used athena as a symbol of freedom and democracy . 
athena was known as `` atrytone ''  -lrb-   `` the unwearying ''  -rrb-  ,  `` parthenos ''  -lrb-   `` virgin ''  -rrb-  ,  and `` promachos ''  -lrb-   `` she who fights in front ''  -rrb-  . 
the game is set in the multiverse described in zelazny's `` chronicles of amber '' . 
characters in `` amber drpg '' have access to the powers seen in the `` chronicles of amber '': `` pattern '' ,  `` logrus '' ,  `` shape-shifting '' ,  `` trump '' ,  and `` magic '' . 
 ''amber drpg '' was created in the 1980s ,  and is much more focused on relationships and roleplaying than most of the roleplaying games of that era . 
the amber diceless roleplaying game is a role-playing game created and written by erick wujcik ,  set in the fictional universe created by author roger zelazny for his `` chronicles of amber '' . 
a third book ,  `` rebma '' ,  was promised . 
it is assumed that players will portray the children of the main characters from the books – the ruling family of amber ,  known as the elder amberites – or a resident of the courts . 
the use of alloys by humans started with the use of meteoric iron ,  a naturally occurring alloy of nickel and iron . 
although steel is an alloy of iron and carbon ,  the term `` alloy steel '' usually only refers to those steels which contain other elements like vanadium ,  molybdenum ,  or cobalt in amounts sufficient to alter the properties of the base steel . 
an alloy is a combination of metals or of a metal and another element . 
afterward ,  he created silicon steel ,  launching the search for other possible alloys of steel . 
brass is an alloy made from copper and zinc . 
alloying a metal is done by combining it with one or more other elements . 
some alloys ,  such as electrum which is an alloy consisting of silver and gold ,  occur naturally . 
in this respect ,  all of the various forms of an alloy containing only two constituents ,  like iron and carbon ,  is called a `` binary system , ``  while all of the alloy combinations possible with a ternary alloy ,  such as alloys of iron ,  carbon and chromium ,  is called a `` ternary system '' . 
the term `` alloy '' is sometimes used in everyday speech as a synonym for a particular alloy . 
examples of alloys are steel ,  solder ,  brass ,  pewter ,  duralumin ,  bronze and amalgams . 
while the high strength of steel results when diffusion and precipitation is prevented  -lrb-  forming martinsite  -rrb-  ,  most heat-treatable alloys are precipitation hardening alloys ,  that depend on the diffusion of alloying elements to achieve their strength . 
in practice ,  some alloys are used so predominantly with respect to their base metals that the name of the primary constituent is also used as the name of the alloy . 
see also cultural movements . 
no art owes quite as much to state power as french painting does . 
it stresses the superiority of a simpler rural life as opposed to the complexity of city life . 
otherwise ,  a convention may be adopted so that ∠bac always refers to the anticlockwise  -lrb-  positive  -rrb-  angle from b to c ,  and ∠cab to the anticlockwise  -lrb-  positive  -rrb-  angle from c to b . 
potentially ,  an angle denoted ,  say ,  ∠bac might refer to any of four angles: the clockwise angle from b to c ,  the anticlockwise angle from b to c ,  the clockwise angle from c to b ,  or the anticlockwise angle from c to b ,  where the direction in which the angle is measured determines its sign  -lrb-  see positive and negative angles  -rrb-  . 
in the case of a rotation ,  the arc is centered at the center of the rotation and delimited by any other point and its image by the rotation . 
acoustics looks first at the pressure levels and frequencies in the sound wave and how the wave interacts with the environment . 
in fluids such as air and water ,  sound waves propagate as disturbances in the ambient pressure level . 
in solids ,  mechanical waves can take many forms including longitudinal waves ,  transverse waves and surface waves . 
physicists and acoustic engineers tend to discuss sound pressure levels in terms of frequencies ,  partly because this is how our ears interpret sound . 
both of these popular methods are used to analyze sound and better understand the acoustic phenomenon . 
aristotle  -lrb-  384–322 bc  -rrb-  understood that sound consisted of compressions and rarefactions of air which `` falls upon and strikes the air which is next to it .  .  . ``  ,  a very good expression of the nature of wave motion . 
the central stage in the acoustical process is wave propagation . 
the eighteenth century saw major advances in acoustics as mathematicians applied the new techniques of calculus to elaborate theories of sound wave propagation . 
atomic physics is the field of physics that studies atoms as an isolated system of electrons and an atomic nucleus . 
physicists distinguish between atomic physics — which deals with the atom as a system consisting of a nucleus and electrons — and nuclear physics ,  which considers atomic nuclei alone . 
one of the earliest steps towards atomic physics was the recognition that matter was composed of `` atoms '' . 
the term `` atomic physics '' can be associated with nuclear power and nuclear weapons ,  due to the synonymous use of `` atomic '' and `` nuclear '' in standard english . 
atomic physics primarily considers atoms in isolation . 
asl is used throughout anglo-america . 
the survey did not distinguish between asl and other forms of signing; in fact ,  the name `` asl '' was not yet in widespread use . 
asl was influenced by its forerunners but distinct from all of them . 
the asl wikipedia request was marked as eligible in 2008 and the test asl wikipedia has 50 articles written in asl using signwriting . 
the basic word order of asl is disputed . 
the influence of french sign language  -lrb-  lsf  -rrb-  on asl is readily apparent; for example ,  it has been found that about 58% of signs in modern asl are cognate to old french sign language signs . 
asl has a rich system of verbal inflection . 
varieties of asl are found throughout the world . 
tactile asl  -lrb-  tasl  -rrb-  is a variety of asl used throughout the united states by and with the deaf-blind . 
there is also a distinct variety of asl used by the black deaf community . 
the unique situation of asl seems to have been caused by the proliferation of asl through schools influenced by the american school for the deaf ,  wherein asl originated ,  and the rise of community organizations for the deaf . 
asl emerged as a language in the american school for the deaf  -lrb-  asd  -rrb-  ,  founded in 1817.
tasl differs from asl in that signs are produced by touching the palms ,  and there are some grammatical differences from standard asl in order to compensate for the lack of non-manual signing . 
a common misconception is that asl consists only of fingerspelling; although such a method  -lrb-  rochester method  -rrb-  has been used ,  it is not asl . 
for some imported asl varieties ,  such as those used in west africa ,  it is still an open question how similar they are to american asl . 
counting the number of asl signers is difficult because asl users have never been counted by the american census . 
asl ,  with its significant inventory of iconic signs ,  directly challenges this theory . 
for english-speaking audiences ,  asl is often glossed using english words . 
asl is used internationally as a lingua franca ,  and a number of closely related sign languages derived from asl are used in many different countries . 
each sign in asl is composed of a number of distinctive components ,  generally referred to as parameters . 
applet is an event driven program  . 
in some cases ,  an applet does not run independently . 
html pages could embed parameters that were passed to the applet . 
perhaps the most incessantly explored theme in popular alternate history focuses on worlds in which the nazis won world war two . 
many fantasies and science fantasies are set in a world that has a history somewhat similar to our own world ,  but with magic added . 
 '' '' is set in an alternate 1960 in which the nazis won the second world war ,  also thanks to their acquisition of high technology . 
the `` fallout '' series of computer role-playing games is set in a divergent america ,  where history after world war ii diverges from the real world to follow a retro-futuristic timeline . 
besides our world ,  laumer describes a world ruled by a ruthless dictatorship in britain ,  in which the american revolution never happened . 
the period around world war ii also saw the publication of the time travel novel `` lest darkness fall '' by l .  sprague de camp ,  in which an american academic travels to italy at the time of the byzantine invasion of the ostrogoths . 
similarly ,  the 2007 video game `` world in conflict '' is set in 1989, with the soviet union on the verge of collapse . 
philip k .  dick's novel ,  `` the man in the high castle ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- ,  is an alternate history in which nazi germany and imperial japan won world war ii . 
 ''thief of time '' presents them functioning as a full-scale time patrol ,  ensuring that history occurs at all . 
some of the worlds they visit are mundane ,  some very odd; others follow science fiction or fantasy conventions . 
world war ii produced alternate history for propaganda: both british and american authors wrote works depicting nazi invasions of their respective countries as cautionary tales . 
many ambiguous alternate/secret histories are set in renaissance or pre-renaissance times ,  and may explicitly include a `` retreat '' from the world ,  which would explain the current absence of such phenomena . 
the most prominent game with this setting is `` crusader kings ii '' . 
in ward moore's `` bring the jubilee '' ,  the protagonist lives in an alternate history in which the confederacy has won the american civil war; he travels backward through time ,  and brings about a union victory in the battle of gettysburg . 
michael chabon ,  occasionally an author of speculative fiction ,  contributed to the genre with his novel `` the yiddish policemen's union ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- ,  which explores a world in which the state of israel was destroyed in its infancy and many of the world's jews instead live in a small strip of alaska set aside by the us government for jewish settlement . 
in jo walton's `` small change '' series ,  the united kingdom made peace with hitler before the involvement of the united states in world war ii ,  and fascism slowly strangled the uk . 
the concept of a cross-time version of a world war ,  involving rival paratime empires ,  was developed in fritz leiber's change war series ,  starting with the hugo award winning `` the big time ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb-; followed by richard c .  meredith's `` timeliner '' trilogy in the 1970s ,  michael mccollum's `` a greater infinity ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- and john barnes' `` timeline wars '' trilogy in the 1990s . 
among the novels in this series ,  `` witch week '' stands out for its vivid depiction of a history alternate to that of chrestomanci's own world rather than our own  -lrb-  and yet with a specific pod that turned it away from the `` normal '' history of most worlds visited by the wizard  -rrb-  . 
while many justifications for alternate histories involve a multiverse ,  the `` many world '' theory would naturally involve many worlds ,  in fact a continually exploding array of universes . 
this idea can also be found in asimov's novel `` the end of eternity ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- ,  in which the `` eternals '' can change the realities of the world ,  without people being aware of it . 
when a story's assumptions about the nature of time travel lead to the complete replacement of the visited time's future rather than just the creation of an additional time line ,  the device of a `` time patrol '' is often used ,  most notably in poul anderson's `` time patrol '' collection—where guardians race uptime and downtime to preserve the `` correct '' history . 
according to steven h silver ,  an american science fiction editor ,  alternate history requires three things: a point of divergence from the history of our world prior to the time at which the author is writing ,  a change that would alter history as it is known ,  and an examination of the ramifications of that change . 
popular examples in `` sid meier's civilization iv '' include `` desert war '' ,  set in the mediterranean theatre of world war ii and featuring scripted events tied to possible outcomes of battles; `` broken star '' ,  set in a hypothetical russian civil war in 2010; and `` rhye's and fall of civilization '' ,  an 'earth simulator' designed to mirror a history as closely as possible but incorporating unpredictable elements to provide realistic alternate settings . 
since the 1950s ,  this type of fiction has ,  to a large extent ,  merged with science fiction tropes involving time travel between alternate histories ,  psychic awareness of the existence of one universe by the people in another ,  or time travel that results in history splitting into two or more timelines . 
in any case ,  even if it is true that every possible outcome occurs in some world ,  it can still be argued that traits such as bravery and intelligence might still affect the relative frequency of worlds in which better or worse outcomes occurred  -lrb-  even if the total number of worlds with each type of outcome is infinite ,  it is still possible to assign a different measure to different infinite sets  -rrb-  . 
keith laumer's `` worlds of the imperium '' is one of the earliest alternate history novels; it was published by `` fantastic stories of the imagination '' in 1961, in magazine form ,  and reprinted by ace books in 1962 as one half of an ace double . 
when the magical version of our world's history is set in contemporary times ,  the distinction becomes clear between alternate history on the one hand and contemporary fantasy ,  using in effect a form of secret history  -lrb-  as when josepha sherman's `` son of darkness '' has an elf living in new york city ,  in disguise  -rrb-  on the other . 
time travel as the cause of a point of divergence  -lrb-  pod  -rrb-  ,  which can denote either the bifurcation of a historical timeline or a simple replacement of the future that existed before the time traveling event ,  has continued to be a popular theme . 
the two-part play `` harry potter and the cursed child '' contains alternate timelines set within the world of harry potter . 
in atomic theory and quantum mechanics ,  an atomic orbital is a mathematical function that describes the wave-like behavior of either one electron or a pair of electrons in an atom . 
each orbital in an atom is characterized by a unique set of values of the three quantum numbers  ,   ,  and  ,  which respectively correspond to the electron's energy ,  angular momentum ,  and an angular momentum vector component  -lrb-  the magnetic quantum number  -rrb-  . 
nonstandard amino acids are usually formed through modifications to standard amino acids . 
only 837 -amino acids were found in swiss-prot database  -lrb-  187 million amino acids analysed  -rrb-  . 
aside from the 22 proteinogenic amino acids ,  many `` non-proteinogenic '' amino acids are known . 
some non-proteinogenic amino acids are not found in proteins . 
amino acids are important as low-cost feedstocks . 
twenty-two amino acids are naturally incorporated into polypeptides and are called proteinogenic or natural amino acids . 
other organisms use transaminases for amino acid synthesis ,  too . 
several methods exist to synthesize amino acids . 
there are different hydrophobicity scales of amino acid residues . 
in some amino acids ,  the amine group is attached to the β or γ-carbon ,  and these are therefore referred to as `` beta '' or `` gamma amino acids '' . 
the 20 amino acids that are encoded directly by the codons of the universal genetic code are called `` standard '' or `` canonical '' amino acids . 
essential amino acids may also differ between species . 
the variation in titration curves when the amino acids can be grouped by category . 
amino acids are the structural units  -lrb-  monomers  -rrb-  that make up proteins . 
twenty of the proteinogenic amino acids are encoded directly by triplet codons in the genetic code and are known as `` standard '' amino acids . 
some non-standard amino acids are used as defenses against herbivores in plants . 
the phrase `` branched-chain amino acids '' or bcaa refers to the amino acids having aliphatic side chains that are non-linear; these are leucine ,  isoleucine ,  and valine . 
the first few amino acids were discovered in the early 19th century . 
many amino acids are used to synthesize other molecules ,  for example:
similarly ,  some amino acids derivatives are used in pharmaceutical industry . 
on 17 may 2014, the world's first work of public art to recognise turing as gay was commissioned in bletchley ,  close by to bletchley park where his war-time work was carried out . 
turing had a reputation for eccentricity at bletchley park . 
turing was never accused of espionage but ,  in common with all who had worked at bletchley park ,  he was prevented by the official secrets act from discussing his war work . 
during the second world war ,  turing was a leading participant in the breaking of german ciphers at bletchley park . 
in a later letter ,  also written to morcom's mother ,  turing said:
later papers were not available until `` collected works of a .  m .  turing '' was published in 1992.
during the second world war ,  turing worked for the government code and cypher school  -lrb-  gc&cs  -rrb-  at bletchley park ,  britain's codebreaking centre that produced ultra intelligence . 
after the war ,  turing worked at the national physical laboratory ,  where he designed the ace ,  among the first designs for a stored-program computer . 
turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at bletchley park . 
on 4 september 1939, the day after the uk declared war on germany ,  turing reported to bletchley park ,  the wartime station of gc&cs . 
the location is also marked with a blue plaque . 
in a letter to morcom's mother turing said:
the bletchley park trust collaborated with winning moves to publish an alan turing edition of the board game monopoly . 
in february 2011, turing's papers from the second world war were bought for the nation with an 11th-hour bid by the national heritage memorial fund ,  allowing them to stay at bletchley park . 
alan mathison turing  -lrb-  ; 23 june 1912 – 7 june 1954 -rrb- was an english mathematician ,  computer scientist ,  logician ,  cryptanalyst ,  philosopher and theoretical biologist . 
the first bombe was installed on 18 march 1940.
turing also consulted with bell labs on the development of sigsaly ,  a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war . 
tatchell also called for a new investigation into turing's death:
following his work at bell labs in the us ,  turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system ,  and in the latter part of the war ,  he moved to work for the secret service's radio security service  -lrb-  later hmgcc  -rrb-  at hanslope park . 
turing decided to tackle the particularly difficult problem of german naval enigma `` because no one else was doing anything about it and i could have it to myself '' . 
on 8 june 1954, turing's housekeeper found him dead . 
more than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war . 
in 1948 turing ,  working with his former undergraduate colleague ,  d . g . 
according to historian ronald lewin ,  jack good ,  a cryptanalyst who worked with turing ,  said of his colleague:
julius' work with the ics brought the family to british india ,  where his grandfather had been a general in the bengal army . 
a biography published by the royal society shortly after turing's death ,  while his wartime work was still subject to the official secrets act ,  recorded:
the plaque was unveiled on 23 june 2012, the centenary of turing's birth . 
within weeks of arriving at bletchley park ,  turing had specified an electromechanical machine called the bombe ,  which could break enigma more effectively than the polish `` bomba kryptologiczna '' ,  from which its name was derived . 
that same night ,  he also conceived of the idea of `` banburismus '' ,  a sequential statistical technique  -lrb-  what abraham wald later called sequential analysis  -rrb-  to assist in breaking the naval enigma ,  `` though i was not sure that it would work in practice ,  and was not ,  in fact ,  sure until some days had actually broken . `` 
counterfactual history is difficult with respect to the effect ultra intelligence had on the length of the war ,  but at the upper end it has been estimated that this work shortened the war in europe by more than two years and saved over 14 million lives . 
for a solid shape such as a sphere ,  cone ,  or cylinder ,  the area of its boundary surface is called the surface area . 
in mathematics ,  the unit square is defined to have area one ,  and the area of any other shape or surface is a dimensionless real number . 
the area of a shape can be measured by comparing the shape to squares of a fixed size . 
the astronomical unit  -lrb-  symbol: au ,  ua ,  or au  -rrb-  is a unit of length ,  roughly the distance from earth to the sun . 
the solar parallax is related to the earth–sun distance as measured in earth radii by the smaller the solar parallax ,  the greater the distance between the sun and earth: a solar parallax of 15 '' is equivalent to an earth–sun distance of earth radii . 
a variety of unit symbols and abbreviations have been in use for the astronomical unit . 
earth's orbit around the sun is an ellipse . 
this has led to calls to abandon the astronomical unit as a unit of measurement . 
as the speed of light has an exact defined value in si units and the gaussian gravitational constant `` k '' is fixed in the astronomical system of units ,  measuring the light time per unit distance is exactly equivalent to measuring the product `` g '' in si units . 
in the 2014 revision of the si brochure ,  the bipm used the unit symbol `` au '' . 
in 2006, the bipm reported a value of the astronomical unit as  . 
with the definitions used before 2012, the astronomical unit was dependent on the heliocentric gravitational constant ,  that is the product of the gravitational constant `` g '' and the solar mass  . 
the name `` astronomical unit '' appears first to have been used in 1903.
another colleague ,  ole rømer ,  discovered the finite speed of light in 1676: the speed was so great that it was usually quoted as the time required for light to travel from the sun to the earth ,  or `` light time per unit distance '' ,  a convention that is still followed by astronomers today . 
the unit distance `` a ''  -lrb-  the value of the astronomical unit in metres  -rrb-  can be expressed in terms of other astronomical constants: where `` g '' is the newtonian gravitational constant ,  is the solar mass ,  `` k '' is the numerical value of gaussian gravitational constant and `` d '' is the time period of one day . 
use of the word `` artiste '' can also be a pejorative term . 
the english word 'artiste' has thus a narrower range of meaning than the word 'artiste' in french . 
an artist is a person engaged in an activity related to creating art ,  practicing the arts ,  or demonstrating an art . 
the us bureau of labor statistics classifies many visual artists as either `` craft artists '' or `` fine artists '' . 
the main source of skill for both craft artists and fine artists is long-term repetition and practice . 
often ,  discussions on the subject focus on the differences among `` artist '' and `` technician '' ,  `` entertainer '' and `` artisan '' ,  `` fine art '' and `` applied art '' ,  or what constitutes art and what does not . 
many artists work part-time as artists and hold a second job . 
in an embroidered extension of the myth ,  the hounds were so upset with their master's death ,  that chiron made a statue so lifelike that the hounds thought it was actaeon . 
the literary testimony of actaeon's myth is largely lost ,  but lamar ronald lacy ,  deconstructing the myth elements in what survives and supplementing it by iconographic evidence in late vase-painting ,  made a plausible reconstruction of an ancient actaeon myth that greek poets may have inherited and subjected to expansion and dismemberment . 
this is the iconic motif by which actaeon is recognized ,  both in ancient art and in renaissance and post-renaissance depictions . 
