rutgers was first to extend the reach of the game . 
after the first game against harvard ,  tufts took its squad to bates college in lewiston ,  maine for the first football game played in maine . 
the first of these happened on november 11, 1876, in philadelphia and was the first intercollegiate game in the state of pennsylvania . 
harvard quickly took a liking to the rugby game ,  and its use of the try which ,  until that time ,  was not used in american football . 
camp's new scrimmage rules revolutionized the game ,  though not always as intended . 
on november 23, 1876, representatives from harvard ,  yale ,  princeton ,  and columbia met at the massasoit house in springfield ,  massachusetts to standardize a new code of rules based on the rugby game first introduced to harvard by mcgill university in 1874.
the game was taken to canada by british soldiers stationed there and was soon being played at canadian colleges . 
penn's athletic association was looking to pick `` a twenty '' to play a game of football against columbia . 
it was through college football play that american football rules first gained popularity in the united states . 
old `` football fightum '' had been resurrected at harvard in 1872, when harvard resumed playing football . 
yale wins 3-0, tommy sherman scoring the first goal and lew irwin the other two . 
similarly ,  ciprofloxacin is not recommended as a first-line treatment for acute sinusitis . 
ciprofloxacin is an antibiotic used to treat a number of bacterial infections . 
ciprofloxacin only treats bacterial infections; it does not treat viral infections such as the common cold . 
oral and intravenous ciprofloxacin are approved by the fda for use in children for only two indications due to the risk of permanent injury to the musculoskeletal system:
in the early church it was common for the bread to be regarded as bread yet also as the body of christ ,  and the wine regarded as wine yet also as the blood of christ; indeed ,  some argued that to deny that both bread and wine ,  and body and blood ,  were present was to deny the incarnation:
in about 150, justin martyr ,  referring to the eucharist ,  wrote: `` not as common bread and common drink do we receive these; but in like manner as jesus christ our savior ,  having been made flesh by the word of god ,  had both flesh and blood for our salvation ,  so likewise have we been taught that the food which is blessed by the prayer of his word ,  and from which our blood and flesh by transmutation are nourished ,  is the flesh and blood of that jesus who was made flesh . `` 
…for as the bread from the earth ,  receiving the invocation of god ,  is no longer common bread but the eucharist ,  consisting of two elements ,  earthly and heavenly…”
simplified phylogeny of the chlorophyta ,  according to leliaert `` et al '' . 
chlorophyta or prasinophyta is a taxon of green algae informally called chlorophytes . 
the chlorophyta contains both unicellular and multicellular species . 
the capybara and the lesser capybara belong to the subfamily hydrochoerinae along with the rock cavies . 
the capybara  -lrb-  `` hydrochoerus hydrochaeris ''  -rrb-  is a mammal native to south america . 
capybaras were called several times `` cuartins '' in colombia in 2018: in eje cafetero  -lrb-  alcalà  -rrb-  and near barranquilla where the meat was offered as `` cuartin asado '' . 
for 3d animations ,  all frames must be rendered after the modeling is complete . 
the realistic modeling of human facial features is both one of the most challenging and sought after elements in computer-generated imagery . 
each method has its advantages and as of 2007, games and films are using either or both of these methods in productions . 
this groundbreaking film was also the first of many fully computer-animated movies . 
in contrast ,  a newer method called `` motion capture '' makes use of live action footage . 
for high resolution ,  adapters are used . 
for 3d animations ,  objects  -lrb-  models  -rrb-  are built on the computer monitor  -lrb-  modeled  -rrb-  and 3d figures are rigged with a virtual skeleton . 
animation data can be created using motion capture ,  or keyframing by a human animator ,  or a combination of the two . 
films seen in theaters in the united states run at 24 frames per second ,  which is sufficient to create the illusion of continuous movement . 
thus by changing the values of avars over time ,  the animator creates motion by making the character move from frame to frame . 
cgi short films have been produced as independent animation since 1976.
ceawlin is the second king in bede's list . 
ceawlin lost the throne of wessex in 592.
ceawlin's last recorded victory is in 584.
the west saxon genealogical regnal list is a list of rulers of wessex ,  including the lengths of their reigns . 
the sources also are inconsistent on the length of ceawlin's reign . 
the first battle ceawlin fought as king is dated by the `` chronicle '' to 568, when he and cutha fought with æthelberht ,  the king of kent . 
cynric would have been king of wessex at this time . 
it may be that ceawlin's overlordship of the southern britons came to an end with this battle . 
æthelberht's rise may have been earlier: the 584 annal ,  even if it records a victory ,  is the last victory of ceawlin's in the `` chronicle '' ,  and the period after that may have been one of æthelberht's ascent and ceawlin's decline . 
the two main written sources for early west saxon history are the `` anglo-saxon chronicle '' and the west saxon genealogical regnal list . 
ceawlin's reign belongs to the period of anglo-saxon expansion at the end of the sixth century . 
ceawlin is also named as one of the eight ``  ''bretwaldas '' '' ,  a title given in the `` chronicle '' to eight rulers who had overlordship over southern britain ,  although the extent of ceawlin's control is not known . 
the chronology of ceawlin's life is highly uncertain . 
a cd-r disc is a compact disc that can be written once and read arbitrarily many times . 
the blank disc has a pre-groove track onto which the data are written . 
the dye materials developed by taiyo yuden made it possible for cd-r discs to be compatible with audio cd and cd-rom discs . 
nothing in the red ,  yellow or orange book standards prohibits disc reading/writing devices from having the capacity to read or write discs beyond the compact disc standards . 
cd-r discs  -lrb-  cd-rs  -rrb-  are readable by most plain cd readers ,  i . e .  ,  cd readers manufactured prior to the introduction of cd-r . 
cd-r  -lrb-  compact disc-recordable  -rrb-  is a digital optical disc storage format . 
to the extent that cd hardware can read extended-length discs or cd-rw discs ,  it is because that hardware has capability beyond the minimum required by the red book and yellow book standards  -lrb-  the hardware is more capable than it needs to be to bear the compact disc logo  -rrb-  . 
a standard cd-r is a thick disc made of polycarbonate about 120 mm  -lrb-  4.7 in  -rrb-  or 80 mm  -lrb-  3.150 in  -rrb-  diameter . 
in cd-r media ,  the dye itself can degrade ,  causing data to become unreadable . 
these times only include the actual optical writing pass over the disc . 
most of the cytosol is water ,  which makes up about 70% of the total volume of a typical cell . 
the cytosol is a complex mixture of substances dissolved in water . 
protein molecules that do not bind to cell membranes or the cytoskeleton are dissolved in the cytosol . 
the term `` cytosol '' is now used to refer to the liquid phase of the cytoplasm in an intact cell . 
the cytosol has no single function and is instead the site of multiple cell processes . 
in prokaryotes the cytosol contains the cell's genome ,  within a structure known as a nucleoid . 
the cytosol ,  also known as intracellular fluid  -lrb-  icf  -rrb-  or cytoplasmic matrix ,  is the liquid found inside cells . 
in the eukaryotic cell ,  the cytosol is surrounded by the cell membrane and is part of the cytoplasm ,  which also comprises the mitochondria ,  plastids ,  and other organelles  -lrb-  but not their internal fluids and structures  -rrb- ; the cell nucleus is separate . 
the classic view of water in cells is that about 5% of this water is strongly bound in by solutes or macromolecules as water of solvation ,  while the majority has the same structure as pure water . 
although the cytoskeleton is not part of the cytosol ,  the presence of this network of filaments restricts the diffusion of large particles in the cell . 
citizenship is a status in society . 
citizenship of the union shall be additional to and not replace national citizenship . 
a person may have multiple citizenships . 
citizenship at this level is a secondary concept ,  with rights deriving from national citizenship . 
native americans were not granted full us citizenship until the passage of the indian citizenship act in 1924.
how citizenship is understood depends on the person making the determination . 
the reich citizenship law of 1935 established racial criteria for citizenship in the german reich ,  and because of this law jews and others who could not prove `` german '' racial heritage were stripped of their citizenship . 
the united states ,  the united kingdom ,  nationality and citizenship can have different meanings  -lrb-  for more information ,  see nationality versus citizenship
under early u . s .  laws ,  african americans were not eligible for citizenship . 
the maastricht treaty introduced the concept of citizenship of the european union . 
their vote  -rrb-  affect collective citizenship and thus in turn them . 
there are two kinds of criticism of citizenship education in schools . 
each country has its own policies ,  regulations and criteria as to who is entitled to its citizenship . 
this form of citizenship offers certain privileges within some commonwealth countries:
the concept of `` commonwealth citizenship '' has been in place ever since the establishment of the commonwealth of nations . 
modern citizenship has often been looked at as two competing underlying ideas:
the central depression is in the center of the state . 
however ,  chiapas remains one of the poorest states in mexico . 
the official name of the state is chiapas . 
as of 2010, the population is 4,796,580, the eighth most populous state in mexico . 
there are a number of people in the state with african features . 
the state has thirty-six protected areas at the state and federal levels along with 67 areas protected by various municipalities . 
it is one of the most elaborately decorated in mexico . 
chiapas  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the free and sovereign state of chiapas  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is one of the 31 states that along with the federal district of mexico city make up the 32 federal entities of mexico . 
the most important instrument in the state is the marimba . 
the current state constitution was written in 1921.
the universidad pontificia y literaria de chiapas was founded in 1826, with mexico's second teacher's college founded in the state in 1828.
chiapas is one of the states that produces a wide variety of handcrafts and folk art in mexico . 
ciudad real was renamed san cristóbal de las casas in 1828.
san cristóbal de las casas and san juan chamula maintain a strong indigenous identity . 
however ,  they had enough influence so that the name of this area and of the state would come from nahuatl . 
tourism brings large numbers of visitors to the state each year . 
the state has a large number of ecological attractions most of which are connected to water . 
the lacandons are one of the smallest native indigenous groups of the state with a population estimated between 600 and 1000.
the national presbyterian church in mexico is particularly strong in chiapas ,  the state can be described as one of the strongholds of the denomination . 
initially ,  `` chiapas '' referred to the first two cities established by the spanish in what is now the center of the state and the area surrounding them . 
most of this area belongs to the lacandon jungle . 
chiapas accounts for 1.73% of mexico's gdp . 
major cities include tuxtla gutiérrez ,  san cristóbal de las casas ,  tapachula ,  palenque ,  comitán ,  and chiapa de corzo . 
there are also a number of notable steles . 
while this coming event would affect the state ,  chiapas did not follow the uprisings in other areas that would end the porfirian era . 
the state has about 13.5% of all of mexico's indigenous population ,  and it has been ranked among the ten `` most indianized '' states ,  with only campeche ,  oaxaca ,  quintana roo and yucatán having been ranked above it between 1930 and the present . 
the mapaches continued to fight against socialists and communists in mexico from 1920 to 1936, to maintain their control over the state . 
other communities that produce ceramics include chiapa de corzo ,  tonalá ,  ocuilpa ,  suchiapa and san cristóbal de las casas . 
they also are responsible for some cloud-covered rainforest areas in the sierra madre . 
chiapas is located in the south east of mexico ,  bordering the states of tabasco ,  veracruz and oaxaca with the pacific ocean to the south and guatemala to the east . 
one of the main minerals of the state is amber ,  much of which is 25 million years old ,  with quality comparable to that found in the dominican republic . 
the state's cattle production ,  along with timber from the lacandon jungle and energy output gives it a certain amount of economic clouts compared to other states in the region . 
while the mayan sites are the best-known ,  there are a number of other important sites in the state ,  including many older than the maya civilization . 
the only other insurgent activity was the publication of a newspaper called `` el pararrayos '' by matías de córdova in san cristóbal de las casas . 
liberal land reforms would have negative effects on the state's indigenous population unlike in other areas of the country . 
in the 1980s ,  the politization of the indigenous and rural populations of the state that began in the 1960s and 1970s continued . 
eventually ,  this production of coffee would become the state's most important crop . 
coffee is the state's most important cash crop with a history from the 19th century . 
today ,  palenque is a world heritage site and one of the best-known sites in mexico . 
this practice would lead to a kind of indentured servitude and uprisings in areas of the state ,  although they never led to large rebel armies as in other parts of mexico . 
in the decades after the official end of the war ,  the provinces of chiapas and soconusco unified ,  with power concentrated in san cristóbal de las casas . 
hunter gatherers began to occupy the central valley of the state around 7000 bce ,  but little is known about them . 
after the spanish subdued the area ,  the building of spanish style cities began ,  especially in the highland areas . 
chiapas has about thirty percent of mexico's fresh water resources . 
the main colonial structures are the cathedral and santo domingo church of san cristóbal ,  the santo domingo monastery and la pila in chiapa de corzo . 
many of these sites are in mazatan ,  chiapas area . 
more migrate out of chiapas than migrate in ,  with emigrants leaving for tabasco ,  oaxaca ,  veracruz ,  state of mexico and the federal district primarily . 
in addition to the sites on the mayan route ,  there are others within the state away from the border such as toniná ,  near the city of ocosingo . 
this allowed the mapaches to gain political power in the state and effectively stop many of the social reforms occurring in other parts of mexico . 
marimbas are constructed in venustiano carranza ,  chiapas de corzo and tuxtla gutiérrez . 
a small war broke out between tuxtla gutiérrez and san cristobal in 1911.
the sierra madre de chiapas runs parallel to the pacific coastline of the state ,  northwest to southeast as a continuation of the sierra madre del sur . 
the state's rich indigenous tradition along with its associated political uprisings ,  especially that of 1994, has great interest from other parts of mexico and abroad . 
the zoques are found in 3,000 square kilometers the center and west of the state scattered among hundreds of communities . 
chrysler center is the name of the building complex consisting of the chrysler building ,  chrysler building east ,  and the commercial pavilion located between the two ,  called chrysler trylons . 
the chrysler building project was shaped by these circumstances . 
johnson designed chrysler trylons as `` a monument for 42nd street  .  .  .  to give you the top of the chrysler building at street level . `` 
the chrysler family inherited the property after the death of walter chrysler in 1940, with the property being under the ownership of w . p . 
the chrysler building is frequently the subject of photographers . 
the chrysler building is widely heralded as an art deco icon . 
the chrysler building's height and legally mandated setbacks influenced van alen in his design . 
 ,  the chrysler is the eighth-tallest building in the city ,  tied with the new york times building . 
the chrysler building's distinction as the world's tallest building was short-lived . 
the chrysler building annex at 666 third avenue ,  also known as the kent building at the time ,  was renovated and renamed chrysler building east . 
originally ,  walter chrysler had a two-story apartment on the 69th and 70th floors with a fireplace and a private office . 
the steel tip brought the chrysler building to a height of  ,  greatly exceeding 40 wall street's height . 
the following year ,  chrysler was named `` time '' magazine's `` person of the year '' . 
the chrysler building is considered a leading example of art deco architecture . 
presently ,  the lobby is the only publicly accessible part of the chrysler building . 
the chrysler building also had three of the longest elevator shafts in the world at the time of completion . 
chrysler realized that his tower's height would exceed the empire state building's as well ,  having ordered van alen to change the chrysler's original roof from a stubby romanesque dome to the narrow steel spire . 
the completed chrysler building garnered mixed reviews in the press . 
in his autobiography ,  chrysler says he suggested that his building be taller than the eiffel tower . 
on the 42nd street side of the chrysler building ,  a staircase from the street leads directly under the building to the new york city subway station at grand central–42nd street . 
contrary to popular belief ,  the chrysler corporation was never involved in the construction or ownership of the chrysler building ,  although it was built and designed for the corporation and served as its headquarters until the mid-1950s . 
although the chrysler building was built and designed specifically for the car manufacturer ,  the corporation did not pay for its construction and never owned it ,  as walter chrysler decided to pay for it himself ,  so that his children could inherit it . 
the chrysler building is renowned for ,  and recognized by ,  its terraced crown ,  which is an extension of the main tower . 
the chrysler building fared better commercially than the empire state building did: by 1935, the chrysler had already rented 70% of its floor area ,  while the empire state had only leased 23% of its area and was popularly derided as the `` empty state building '' . 
work on the new entrance started in march 1930 and it opened along with the chrysler building two months later . 
the added height of the spire allowed the chrysler building to surpass 40 wall street as the tallest building in the world and the eiffel tower as the tallest structure . 
the land on which the chrysler building stands was donated to the cooper union for the advancement of science and art in 1902.
originally a project of real estate developer and former new york state senator william h .  reynolds ,  the building was constructed by walter chrysler ,  the head of the chrysler corporation ,  and served as the corporation's headquarters from 1930 until the mid-1950s . 
in 2009, it was shown that the presence of a smaller planet at jupiter's position in the solar system might increase the impact rate of comets on the earth significantly . 
tracing back the comet's orbital motion revealed that it had been orbiting jupiter for some time . 
comet shoemaker–levy 9 was the ninth periodic comet  -lrb-  a comet whose orbital period is 200 years or less  -rrb-  discovered by the shoemakers and levy ,  hence its name . 
orbital studies of the new comet soon revealed that it was orbiting jupiter rather than the sun ,  unlike all other comets known at the time . 
the planet's strong gravitational influence leads to many small comets and asteroids colliding with the planet ,  and the rate of cometary impacts on jupiter is thought to be between 2,000–8,000 times higher than the rate on earth . 
two impacts 12 hours apart on july 19 created impact marks of similar size to that caused by fragment g ,  and impacts continued until july 22, when fragment w struck the planet . 
it was the first comet observed to be orbiting a planet ,  and had probably been captured by jupiter around 20–30 years earlier . 
each fragment of the comet was denoted by a letter of the alphabet ,  from `` fragment a '' through to `` fragment w '' ,  a practice already established from previously observed broken-up comets . 
before the comet was captured by jupiter ,  it was probably a short-period comet with an aphelion just inside jupiter's orbit ,  and a perihelion interior to the asteroid belt . 
there is very strong evidence that comets have previously been fragmented and collided with jupiter and its satellites . 
its orbit around the planet was highly eccentric  -lrb-  `` e '' = 0.9986 -rrb- . 
sl9 is not unique in having orbited jupiter for a time; five comets ,   -lrb-  including 82p/gehrels ,  147p/kushida–muramatsu ,  and 111p/helin–roman–crockett  -rrb-  are known to have been temporarily captured by the planet . 
one of the surprises of the impacts was the small amount of water revealed compared to prior predictions . 
by far the most massive planet in the solar system ,  jupiter can capture objects relatively frequently ,  but the size of sl9 makes it a rarity: one post-impact study estimated that comets in diameter impact the planet once in approximately 500 years and those in diameter do so just once in every 6,000 years . 
despite published predictions ,  astronomers had not expected to see the fireballs from the impacts and did not have any idea in advance how visible the other atmospheric effects of the impacts would be from earth . 
the brewery gained more esteem in 1914, when it was made `` purveyor to the royal danish court '' . 
in 2008 the factory closed because the brewery could not live up to the expectations from its owner royal unibrew . 
in june 1978, work began on revising cobol-74.
the name `` cobol '' was suggested by bob bemer . 
efforts began to standardize cobol to overcome incompatibilities between versions . 
early cobol compilers were primitive and slow . 
cobol 2002 suffered from poor support: no compilers completely supported the standard . 
there were many other new features ,  many of which had been in the `` codasyl cobol journal of development '' since 1978 and had missed the opportunity to be included in cobol-85.
most programming in cobol is now purely to maintain existing applications . 
the cobol specification was revised three times in the five years after its publication . 
cobol was designed in 1959 by codasyl and was partly based on previous programming language design work by grace hopper ,  commonly referred to as `` the  -lrb-  grand  -rrb- mother of cobol '' . 
this version was known as american national standard  -lrb-  ans  -rrb-  cobol and was adopted by iso in 1972.
by 1970, cobol had become the most widely used programming language in the world . 
meanwhile ,  rca and sperry rand worked on creating cobol compilers . 
cobol statements have an english-like syntax ,  which was designed to be self-documenting and highly readable . 
the programming language committee also liaised with ecma and the japanese cobol standard committee . 
during 1960, the list of manufacturers planning to build cobol compilers grew . 
in late 1962, ibm announced that cobol would be their primary development language and that development of comtran would cease . 
in the early 1990s ,  work began on adding object-orientation in the next full revision of cobol . 
another version of ccd is called a peristaltic ccd . 
the photoactive region of a ccd is ,  generally ,  an epitaxial layer of silicon . 
a frame transfer ccd solves both problems: it has a shielded ,  not light sensitive ,  area containing as many cells as the area exposed to light . 
the frame transfer ccd imager was the first imaging structure proposed for ccd imaging by michael tompsett at bell laboratories . 
emccds show a similar sensitivity to intensified ccds  -lrb-  iccds  -rrb-  . 
a frame transfer ccd is a specialized ccd ,  often used in astronomy and some professional video cameras ,  designed for high exposure efficiency and correctness . 
in a ccd for capturing images ,  there is a photoactive region  -lrb-  an epitaxial layer of silicon  -rrb-  ,  and a transmission region made out of a shift register  -lrb-  the ccd ,  properly speaking  -rrb-  . 
at the same time ,  the exposed part of the ccd is collecting light again ,  so no delay occurs between successive exposures . 
an intensified charge-coupled device  -lrb-  iccd  -rrb-  is a ccd that is optically connected to an image intensifier that is mounted in front of the ccd . 
the first patent  -lrb-    -rrb-  on the application of ccds to imaging was assigned to michael tompsett . 
ccd manufacturing and operation can be optimized for different uses . 
with a frame-transfer ccd ,  half of the silicon area is covered by an opaque mask  -lrb-  typically aluminum  -rrb-  . 
the ccd image sensors can be implemented in several different architectures . 
the disadvantage of such a ccd is the higher cost: the cell area is basically doubled ,  and more complex control electronics are needed . 
also ,  as most such systems were single-task ,  sophisticated systems were not required as much . 
virtual memory is a system where all physical memory is controlled by the operating system . 
in early computer systems ,  programs typically specified the location to write memory and what data to put there . 
or ,  a battery-backed volatile memory ,  and if external power is lost there is some known period where the battery can continue to power the volatile memory ,  but if power is off for an extended time ,  the battery runs down and data is lost . 
as a second example ,  an stt-ram can be made non-volatile by building large cells ,  but the cost per bit and write power go up ,  while the write speed goes down . 
without protected memory ,  it is possible that a bug in one program will alter the memory used by another program . 
sram is not worthwhile for desktop system memory ,  where dram dominates ,  but is used for their cache memories . 
two alternatives to the delay line ,  the williams tube and selectron tube ,  originated in 1946, both using electron beams in glass tubes as means of storage . 
most semiconductor memory is organized into memory cells or bistable flip-flops ,  each storing one bit  -lrb-  0 or 1 -rrb- . 
it may also be used benignly by desirable programs which are intended to modify other programs; in the modern age ,  this is generally considered bad programming practice for application programs ,  but it may be used by system development tools such as debuggers ,  for example to insert breakpoints or hooks . 
protected memory is a system where each program is given an area of memory to use and is not permitted to go outside that range . 
the centers for disease control and prevention  -lrb-  cdc  -rrb-  is the leading national public health institute of the united states . 
shortly thereafter ,  tuberculosis control was transferred  -lrb-  in 1960 -rrb- to the cdc from phs ,  and then in 1963 the immunization program was established . 
the mission of cdc expanded beyond its original focus on malaria to include sexually transmitted diseases when the venereal disease division of the u . s .  public health service  -lrb-  phs  -rrb-  was transferred to the cdc in 1957.
the cdc is a united states federal agency under the department of health and human services and is headquartered in atlanta ,  georgia . 
the communicable disease center was founded july 1, 1946, as the successor to the world war ii malaria control in war areas program of the office of national defense malaria control activities . 
however ,  congress directed that the initialism `` cdc '' be retained because of its name recognition . 
the chandrasekhar limit  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the maximum mass of a stable white dwarf star . 
the limiting value for neutron star mass ,  analogous to the chandrasekhar limit ,  is known as the tolman–oppenheimer–volkoff limit . 
those with masses under the limit remain stable as white dwarfs . 
after a talk by chandrasekhar on the limit in 1935, he replied:
if a main-sequence star is not too massive  -lrb-  less than approximately 8 solar masses  -rrb-  ,  it eventually sheds enough mass to form a white dwarf having mass below the chandrasekhar limit ,  which consists of the former core of the star . 
the currently accepted value of the chandrasekhar limit is about  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
since the observation of the champagne supernova in 2003, more very bright type ia supernovae have been observed that are thought to have originated from white dwarfs whose masses exceeded the chandrasekhar limit . 
calculated values for the limit vary depending on the nuclear composition of the mass . 
most baptists hold that no church or ecclesiastical organization has inherent authority over a baptist church . 
churches of christ hold to the priesthood of all believers . 
congregationalism is not limited only to organization of christian church congregations . 
independent baptist churches have no formal organizational structure above the level of the local congregation . 
many do not see these voluntary associations as `` denominations '' ,  because they `` believe that there is no church other than the local church ,  and denominations are in variance to scripture . `` 
in congregationalism ,  rather uniquely ,  the church is understood to be a truly voluntary association . 
the term `` congregationalist polity '' describes a form of church governance that is based on the local congregation . 
exceptions to this local form of local governance include a few churches that submit to the leadership of a body of elders ,  as well as the episcopal baptists that have an episcopal system . 
herodotus  -lrb-  c 484 – c 425 bc  -rrb-  attests that the gandarian mercenaries  -lrb-  i . e . 
the ancient japanese of the kofun period also adopted cavalry and equine culture by the 5th century ad . 
as late as mediaeval era ,  the kamboja cavalry had also formed part of the gurjara-pratihara armed forces from the eighth to the 10th centuries ad . 
the sanskrit drama `` mudra-rakashas '' by `` visakha dutta '' and the jaina work `` parishishtaparvan '' refer to chandragupta's  -lrb-  c 320 bc – c 298 bc  -rrb-  alliance with himalayan king `` parvataka '' . 
the decline of the roman infrastructure made it more difficult to field large infantry forces ,  and during the 4th and 5th centuries cavalry began to take a more dominant role on the european battlefield ,  also in part made possible by the appearance of new ,  larger breeds of horses . 
it is also performed in samukawa and on the beach at zushi ,  as well as other locations . 
india has also the oldest evidence for the introduction of toe-stirrups . 
although experiencing some defeats early on in the campaign ,  emperor wu's war from 104 bc to 102 bc succeeded in gathering the prized tribute of horses from fergana . 
the kamboja  -rrb-  ,  the indian epic mahabharata speaks among the finest horsemen '' . 
the kambojas were famous for their horses ,  as well as cavalrymen  -lrb-  `` asva-yuddha-kushalah ''  -rrb-  . 
before the iron age ,  the role of cavalry on the battlefield was largely performed by light chariots . 
the spanish tercio and later formations relegated cavalry to a supporting role . 
outside of mainland europe ,  the southern britons met julius caesar with chariots in 55 and 54 bc ,  but by the time of the roman conquest of britain a century later chariots were obsolete ,  even in britannia . 
in the indian subcontinent ,  cavalry played a major role from the gupta dynasty  -lrb-  320–600 -rrb- period onwards . 
qizilbash ,  were a class of safavid militant warriors in iran during the 15th to 18th centuries ,  who often fought as elite cavalry . 
mahabharata  -lrb-  c 950 bc  -rrb-  speaks of the esteemed cavalry of the kambojas ,  sakas ,  yavanas and tusharas ,  all of whom had participated in the kurukshetra war under the supreme command of kamboja ruler sudakshin kamboj . 
the cavalry of hunas and the kambojas is also attested in the raghu vamsa epic poem of sanskrit poet kalidasa . 
the last mention of chariot use in britain was by the caledonians at the mons graupius ,  in 84 ad . 
raghu of kalidasa is believed to be chandragupta ii  -lrb-  `` vikaramaditya ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  375–413/15 ad  -rrb-  ,  of the well-known gupta dynasty . 
tibetans also had a tradition of cavalry warfare ,  in several military engagements with the chinese tang dynasty  -lrb-  618–907 ad  -rrb-  . 
infantry who moved on horseback ,  but dismounted to fight on foot ,  were known in the 17th and early 18th centuries as dragoons ,  a class of mounted infantry which later evolved into cavalry proper while retaining their historic title . 
in many modern armies ,  the term `` cavalry '' is still often used to refer to units that are a combat arm of the armed forces which in the past filled the traditional horse-borne land combat light cavalry roles . 
the horse warfare of korea was first started during the ancient korean kingdom gojoseon . 
in the citric acid cycle all the intermediates  -lrb-  e . g . 
the product of this reaction ,  acetyl-coa ,  is the starting point for the citric acid cycle . 
the carbon skeletons of many non-essential amino acids are made from citric acid cycle intermediates . 
calcium is also used as a regulator in the citric acid cycle . 
several catabolic pathways converge on the citric acid cycle . 
the citric acid cycle is continuously supplied with new carbon in the form of acetyl-coa ,  entering at step 0 below . 
in eukaryotic cells ,  the citric acid cycle occurs in the matrix of the mitochondrion . 
 ''acetyl-coa '' ,  on the other hand ,  derived from pyruvate oxidation ,  or from the beta-oxidation of fatty acids ,  is the only fuel to enter the citric acid cycle . 
the nadh and fadh generated by the citric acid cycle are ,  in turn ,  used by the oxidative phosphorylation pathway to generate energy-rich atp . 
products of the first turn of the cycle are one gtp  -lrb-  or atp  -rrb-  ,  three nadh ,  one qhand two co . 
the theoretical maximum yield of atp through oxidation of one molecule of glucose in glycolysis ,  citric acid cycle ,  and oxidative phosphorylation is 38  -lrb-  assuming 3 molar equivalents of atp per equivalent nadh and 2 atp per fadh  -rrb-  . 
the majority of the carbon atoms in the porphyrins come from the citric acid cycle intermediate ,  `` succinyl-coa '' . 
because the citric acid cycle is involved in both catabolic and anabolic processes ,  it is known as an amphibolic pathway . 
the total number of atp molecules obtained after complete oxidation of one glucose in glycolysis ,  citric acid cycle ,  and oxidative phosphorylation is estimated to be between 30 and 38.
this in turn increases or decreases the rate of atp production by the mitochondrion ,  and thus the availability of atp to the cell . 
the citric acid cycle is a key metabolic pathway that connects carbohydrate ,  fat ,  and protein metabolism . 
for mine clearance the tanks were equipped with 2 ton rollers . 
a heavy re tank was developed shortly after world war i by major giffard lequesne martel re . 
this system had to be abandoned due to lack of success in getting it to work ,  however the idea was later used successfully on the beaver bridge laying tank . 
the official languages are catalan ,  spanish ,  and the aranese dialect of occitan . 
in the 2010s there has been growing support for catalan independence . 
in the 19th century ,  catalonia was severely affected by the napoleonic and carlist wars . 
the turkish fleet captured psara on june 21, 1824.
he was born and grew up on the island of psara ,  close to the island of chios ,  in the aegean . 
constantine gained his fame during the greek war of independence  -lrb-  1821–1829 -rrb- . 
constantine kanaris or canaris  -lrb-  ; 1793 or 1795september 2, 1877 -rrb- was a greek prime minister ,  admiral and politician who in his youth was a freedom fighter in the greek war of independence . 
he returned to psara in haste and was there when the island joined the revolution on april 10, 1821.
under george i ,  he served as a prime minister for a third term  -lrb-  march 17april 28, 1864 -rrb- ,  fourth term  -lrb-  august 7, 1864february 9, 1865 -rrb- and fifth and last term  -lrb-  june 7september 14, 1877 -rrb- . 
the island formed its own fleet of ships and the famed seamen of psara ,  already known for their successful naval combats against pirates and their well-equipped ships ,  proved to be effective at full naval war . 
sagan was married three times . 
in 1968, sagan was denied tenure at harvard . 
sagan was a user and advocate of marijuana . 
sagan was a proponent of the search for extraterrestrial life . 
asteroid 2709 sagan is named in his honor ,  as is the carl sagan institute for the search of habitable planets . 
carl sagan was born in brooklyn ,  new york . 
sagan's son ,  nick sagan ,  wrote several episodes in the `` star trek '' franchise . 
dr .  sagan belongs in the latter group . `` 
sagan was associated with the u . s .  space program from its inception . 
in 1997 the sagan planet walk was opened in ithaca ,  new york . 
sagan warned against humans' tendency towards anthropocentrism . 
from 1960 to 1962 sagan was a miller fellow at the university of california ,  berkeley . 
on november 9, 2001, on what would have been sagan's 67th birthday ,  the ames research center dedicated the site for the carl sagan center for the study of life in the cosmos . 
carson ,  however ,  would sometimes use the phrase during his parodies of sagan . 
the book ,  `` cosmos '' ,  written by sagan ,  was published to accompany the series . 
professor sagan had been a founding member of the museum's advisory board . 
 ,  sagan is the most cited seti scientist and one of the most cited planetary scientists . 
one of sagan's harshest critics ,  harold urey ,  felt that sagan was getting too much publicity for a scientist and was treating some scientific theories too casually . 
late in his life ,  sagan's books elaborated on his skeptical ,  naturalistic view of the world . 
after suffering from myelodysplasia ,  sagan died of pneumonia at the age of 62, on december 20, 1996.
sagan again revealed his views on interstellar travel in his 1980 `` cosmos '' series . 
sagan briefly served as an adviser on stanley kubrick's film ``  '' . 
to mark the tenth anniversary of sagan's death ,  david morrison ,  a former student of sagan ,  recalled `` sagan's immense contributions to planetary research ,  the public understanding of science ,  and the skeptical movement '' in `` skeptical inquirer '' . 
biographers of sagan would also comment that from a scientific viewpoint ,  nuclear winter was a low point for sagan ,  although ,  politically speaking ,  it popularized his image amongst the public . 
in reply to a question in 1996 about his religious beliefs ,  sagan answered ,  `` i'm agnostic . `` 
fred whipple wanted harvard to keep sagan there ,  but learned that because urey was a nobel laureate ,  his opinion was an important factor in harvard denying sagan tenure . 
sagan had lived in bensonhurst ,  where he went to david a .  boody junior high school . 
sagan proposed that the film suggest ,  rather than depict ,  extraterrestrial superintelligence . 
sagan is also widely regarded as a freethinker or skeptic; one of his most famous quotations ,  in `` cosmos '' ,  was ,  `` extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence ''  -lrb-  called the `` sagan standard '' by some  -rrb-  . 
during world war ii sagan's family worried about the fate of their european relatives . 
sagan published more than 600 scientific papers and articles and was author ,  co-author or editor of more than 20 books . 
sagan was made president of the school's chemistry club ,  and at home he set up his own laboratory . 
while sagan was widely adored by the general public ,  his reputation in the scientific community was more polarized . 
the missiles in cuba allowed the soviets to target effectively most of the continental us . 
the us had no plan in place because its intelligence had been convinced that the soviets would never install nuclear missiles in cuba . 
as early as august 1962, the us suspected the soviets of building missile facilities in cuba . 
the us announced it would not permit offensive weapons to be delivered to cuba and demanded that the weapons already in cuba be dismantled and returned to the soviet union . 
thirdly ,  from the perspective of the soviet union and of cuba ,  it seemed that the united states wanted to increase its presence in cuba . 
kennedy concluded that attacking cuba by air would signal the soviets to presume `` a clear line '' to conquer berlin . 
an indirect reason why khrushchev placed missiles on cuba would be to try to establish the extent to which the soviet union could threaten the united states . 
by placing missiles in cuba ,  on the u . s . 's doorstep ,  the extent to which the united states would react would be clear . 
us covert operations against cuba continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful operation mongoose . 
on the same day ,  the us announced a major military exercise in the caribbean ,  phibriglex-62, which cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation and proof that the us planned to invade cuba . 
according to khrushchev ,  the soviet union's motives were `` aimed at allowing cuba to live peacefully and develop as its people desire '' . 
by may ,  khrushchev and castro agreed to place strategic nuclear missiles secretly in cuba . 
a second reason that soviet missiles were deployed to cuba was because khrushchev wanted to bring west berlin ,  controlled by the american ,  british and french within communist east germany ,  into the soviet orbit . 
he also told his son sergei that on cuba ,  kennedy `` would make a fuss ,  make more of a fuss ,  and then agree . `` 
on august 10, he wrote a memo to kennedy in which he guessed that the soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into cuba . 
another major reason why khrushchev placed missiles on cuba was to level the playing field . 
the us ,  on the other hand ,  had 170 icbms and was quickly building more . 
it would ,  for example ,  defy the monroe doctrine ,  a us policy limiting us involvement in european colonies and european affairs but holding that the western hemisphere was in the us sphere of influence . 
in may 1961, soviet premier nikita khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of countering the us's growing lead in developing and deploying strategic missiles by placing soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles in cuba ,  despite the misgivings of the soviet ambassador in havana ,  alexandr ivanovich alexeyev ,  who argued that castro would not accept the deployment of the missiles . 
the leaves of this plant are compound and the flowers contain five sepals ,  five petals and five pistils . 
the bees do not show any preference in color of the flowers . 
the genus name `` aquilegia '' is derived from the latin word for eagle  -lrb-  `` aquila ''  -rrb-  ,  because of the shape of the flower petals ,  which are said to resemble an eagle's claw . 
they are used as food plants by some lepidoptera  -lrb-  butterfly and moth  -rrb-  caterpillars . 
in computing ,  a cache  -lrb-    ,  or in aue  -rrb-  is a hardware or software component that stores data so that future requests for that data can be served faster; the data stored in a cache might be the result of an earlier computation or a copy of data stored elsewhere . 
the median age in the city was 37.1 years . 
the first railroad in indiana was constructed to columbus from madison ,  indiana in 1844.
the irwin union bank building was built in 1954.
in the city ,  the population was spread out with 25.7% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24 years ,  29.5% from 25 to 44 years ,  23.0% from 45 to 64 years ,  and 13.7% over the age of 65.
about 6.5% of families and 8.1% of the population were below the poverty line ,  including 9.7% of those under age 18 and 8.8% of those age 65 or over . 
columbus is host to the oldest theater in indiana ,  the crump theatre ,  which was built in 1889 by john crump . 
the driftwood and flatrock rivers converge at columbus to form the east fork of the white river . 
but in 2003, historic columbus indiana acquired a deed showing that general tipton sold the land . 
the railroad fostered the growth of the community into one of the largest in indiana ,  and three more railroads reached the city by 1850.
a ferry was established below the confluence of the flatrock and driftwood rivers ,  which form the white river . 
dante was a great poet ,  the societa dantesca italiana did great work in editing and publishing a usable and affordable text ,  but the `` divine comedy '' was certainly used by the newly unified italian government  -lrb-  see history of italy  -rrb-  to encourage a more homogeneous ,  tuscan-influenced dialect for the whole peninsula  -lrb-  see italian language  -rrb-  . 
much as 19th century science is often treated as the inventor of conceptions of evolution and race which had serious negative political and social consequences ,  many 19th century historians pursued what they intended as reasonably objective research projects in the history of their own and other regions either to end by themselves using the results to support nationalistic goals or to see their work used that way by others . 
reaction kinetics in uniform supersonic flow  -lrb-   ,  cresu   -rrb-  is an experiment investigating chemical reactions taking place at very low temperatures . 
reactions studied by the cresu technique typically have no significant activation energy barrier . 
by studying how quickly the reagent species disappears in the presence of differing concentrations of a  -lrb-  usually stable  -rrb-  co-reagent species the reaction rate constant at the low temperature of the cresu flow can be determined . 
the cygwin ports project provides many additional packages that are not available in the cygwin distribution itself . 
cygwin  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a posix-compatible environment that runs natively on microsoft windows . 
cygwin programs are installed by running cygwin's `` setup '' program ,  which downloads the necessary program and feature package files from repositories on the internet . 
initially ,  cygwin was called gnuwin32  -lrb-  not to be confused with the current gnuwin32 project  -rrb-  . 
cygwin ships with a fairly small number of x applications ,  for example:
when microsoft registered the trademark win32, the 32 was dropped to simply become cygwin . 
thus it is possible to launch windows applications from the cygwin environment ,  as well as to use cygwin tools and applications within the windows operating context . 
cygwin was originally developed by cygnus solutions ,  which was later acquired by red hat . 
winelib ,  a part of the wine project ,  is the inverse of cygwin – it is a free and open-source compatibility layer for unix-like operating systems on the x86 or x86-64 architecture that can allow programs written for microsoft windows to run on unix-like operating systems . 
corinth derives its name from ancient corinth ,  a city-state of antiquity . 
corinth is a major road hub . 
it was founded as nea korinthos or new corinth  -lrb-  νέα κόρινθος  -rrb-  in 1858 after an earthquake destroyed the existing settlement of corinth ,  which had developed in and around the site of ancient corinth . 
the municipal unit of corinth had 38,132 inhabitants ,  of which corinth itself had 30,176 inhabitants ,  placing it in third place behind kalamata and tripoli among the cities of the peloponnese region . 
nearly a century later ,  in 146 bc ,  corinth was captured and destroyed by roman armies . 
cypselus overthrew the bacchiad family ,  and between 657 and 550 bc ,  he and his son periander ruled corinth as the tyrants . 
colossae was located in phrygia ,  in asia minor . 
the city was later overrun by the saracens in the 7th and 8th centuries ad . 
the first historically documented bishop is epiphanius ,  who was not personally at the council of chalcedon ,  but whose metropolitan bishop nunechius of laodicea ,  the capital of the roman province of phrygia pacatiana signed the acts on his behalf . 
judging from the letter to the colossians ,  epaphras was a person of some importance in the christian community there  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  and tradition presents him as its first bishop . 
the third paragraph is largely written by doreen valiente ,  with a significant content of phrases loosely from `` the book of the law '' and `` the book of the heart girt with the serpent '' by aleister crowley . 
included a copy of crowley's the blue equinox ''  -lrb-  1919 -rrb- which includes all of the crowley quotations transferred by gardner to the charge of the goddess . 
the second was a prose version which is contained within the traditional gardnerian book of shadows and more closely resembles gardner's `` leviter veslis '' version of 1949.
in 1956, about one year after young's death ,  the cy young award was created . 
young's career started in 1890 with the cleveland spiders . 
during young's one year with the canton team ,  he won 15 games and lost 15.
in 1921, johnson broke young's career record for strikeouts . 
by the time of his retirement ,  young's control had faltered . 
one year after young's death ,  the cy young award was created to honor each previous season's best pitcher . 
beginning in 1912, young lived and worked on his farm . 
early on ,  young established himself as one of the harder-throwing pitchers in the game . 
after the season ,  young received an offer to play for the minor league canton team ,  which started young's professional career . 
young retired with 511 career wins ,  which remains the record for most career wins by a pitcher . 
cy young was the oldest child born to mckinzie young ,  jr .  and german american nancy mottmiller . 
on september 22, 1911, young shut out the pittsburgh pirates ,  1–0, for his last career victory . 
in march 1961, `` coronation street '' reached no . 
on 23 september 2015, `` coronation street '' was broadcast live to mark itv's sixtieth anniversary . 
between 9 december 1960 and 3 march 1961, `` coronation street '' was broadcast twice weekly ,  on wednesday and friday . 
on 12 march 2018, the extension of the ``  victoria street '' set was officially unveiled . 
 ''coronation street '' returned to itv screens with a regular scheduled time closer to the end of 1979.
for years ,  `` coronation street '' has remained at the centre of itv's prime time schedule . 
in 2014 kal nazir's family ,  the street's first muslim family ,  was introduced . 
from 23 july 2009 `` coronation street '' started to be broadcast in five instalments a week ,  at 7:30  and 8:30 pm on mondays and fridays ,  and at 8:30 pm on thursdays . 
 ''coronation street '' is made by granada television at mediacityuk and shown in all itv regions ,  as well as internationally . 
from 22 march 2010, `` coronation street '' was produced in 1080/50i for transmission on hdtv platforms on itv hd . 
the show airs six times a week: monday ,  wednesday and friday 7:30-8 pm and 8:30-9 pm . 
he left again and then returned 42 years later in 2008.
in 1982, the arrival of channel 4, and its edgy new soap opera `` brookside '' ,  was one of the biggest changes for `` coronation street '' . 
coronation street  -lrb-  also known as corrie  -rrb-  is a british soap opera created by granada television and shown on itv since 9 december 1960.
some viewers were alienated by the new `` coronation street '' ,  and sections of the media voiced their disapproval . 
it is the hundreds of programmes that have followed which have copied `` coronation street '' . `` 
tina o'brien revealed in the british press on 4 april 2007 that she would be leaving `` coronation street '' . 
episode 5191, originally broadcast on 7 january 2002, was the first to be broadcast in widescreen format . 
on 30 june 2011 it was confirmed that `` coronation street '' would return to its traditional 7:30 pm timeslot on a wednesday evening in september 2012.
he had retained links with `` coronation street '' up to his death in 2016, often advising on storylines . 
on 5 april 2014, the staff began to allow booked public visits to the old quay street set . 
between 1980 and 1989, `` coronation street '' underwent some of the biggest changes since its launch . 
on the morning of 1 march 2016, coronation street creator ,  tony warren ,  died ,  aged 79, after a `` short illness '' as confirmed by coronation street's twitter account . 
in 1995, julie goodyear  -lrb-  bet lynch  -rrb-  left the show . 
from january 2012 the omnibus was no longer broadcast on itv after four years ,  however it remains on itv2.
in the show's fictional history ,  the street was built in 1902 and named in honour of the coronation of king edward vii . 
adele rose was the longest-serving `` coronation street '' writer ,  completing 455 scripts between 1961 and 1998.
the set was updated in 1989 with the construction of a new factory ,  two shop units and three modern town houses on the south side of the street . 
in 1982, a permanent full-street set was built in the granada backlot ,  an area between quay street and liverpool road in manchester . 
the episode of `` eastenders '' broadcast on the same day as `` coronation street '' 50th anniversary episode included a tribute ,  with the character dot branning saying that she never missed `` coronation street '' . 
 ''coronation street '' was the last british soap to make the switch to 16:9  -lrb-  `` take the high road '' remained in until it finished in 2003 -rrb- . 
the show began broadcasting in high-definition in may 2010, and on 17 september that year ,  `` coronation street '' entered `` guinness world records '' as the world's longest-running television soap opera after the american soap opera `` as the world turns '' concluded . 
on 8 december 2000, the show celebrated its fortieth year by broadcasting a live ,  hour-long  . 
