boron is introduced into semiconductors as boron compounds ,  by ion implantation . 
the largest known boron deposits are in turkey ,  the largest producer of boron minerals . 
boron carbide and cubic boron nitride powders are widely used as abrasives . 
boron is primarily used in chemical compounds . 
depleted boron is a byproduct of the nuclear industry . 
the average cost of crystalline boron is $5/g . 
the word `` boron '' was coined from `` borax '' ,  the mineral from which it was isolated ,  by analogy with `` carbon '' ,  which boron resembles chemically . 
estimated global consumption of boron  -lrb-  almost entirely as boron compounds  -rrb-  was about 4 million tonnes of bo in 2012.
the primary use of elemental boron is as boron filaments with applications similar to carbon fibers in some high-strength materials . 
the form in which boron is consumed has changed in recent years . 
the production of boron compounds does not involve the formation of elemental boron ,  but exploits the convenient availability of borates . 
natural boron is composed of two stable isotopes ,  one of which  -lrb-  boron-10 -rrb- has a number of uses as a neutron-capturing agent . 
boron is a chemical element with symbol b and atomic number 5.
almost a quarter  -lrb-  23%  -rrb-  of global boron production comes from the single rio tinto borax mine  -lrb-  also known as the u . s .  borax boron mine  -rrb-  near boron ,  california . 
the less-valuable by-product ,  depleted boron ,  is nearly pure b . 
boron has two naturally occurring and stable isotopes ,  b  -lrb-  80.1%  -rrb-  and b  -lrb-  19.9%  -rrb-  . 
boron fibers and sub-millimeter sized crystalline boron springs are produced by laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition . 
the boron nitrides are notable for the variety of structures that they adopt . 
not all fiberglasses contain boron ,  but on a global scale ,  most of the fiberglass used does contain it . 
elemental boron is a metalloid that is found in small amounts in meteoroids but chemically uncombined boron is not otherwise found naturally on earth . 
in these compounds the oxidation state of boron is often not a whole number . 
several boron compounds are known for their extreme hardness and toughness . 
in the most familiar compounds ,  boron has the formal oxidation state iii . 
turkey and the united states are the largest producers of boron products . 
agriculture consumes 11% of global boron production ,  and bleaches and detergents about 6% . 
boron is a useful dopant for such semiconductors as silicon ,  germanium ,  and silicon carbide . 
from the structural perspective ,  the most distinctive chemical compounds of boron are the hydrides . 
characteristically such compounds contain boron with coordination numbers greater than four . 
boron does not react with air at room temperature ,  but at higher temperatures it burns to form boron trioxide: boron undergoes halogenation to give trihalides; for example ,  the trichloride in practice is usually made from the oxide . 
boranes are chemical compounds of boron and hydrogen ,  with the generic formula of bh . 
heterodiamond  -lrb-  also called bcn  -rrb-  is another diamond-like boron compound . 
extremely small traces of elemental boron were detected in lunar regolith
bromine has two stable isotopes ,  br and br . 
at room temperature ,  hydrogen bromide is a colourless gas ,  like all the hydrogen halides apart from hydrogen fluoride ,  since hydrogen cannot form strong hydrogen bonds to the large and only mildly electronegative bromine atom; however ,  weak hydrogen bonding is present in solid crystalline hydrogen bromide at low temperatures ,  similar to the hydrogen fluoride structure ,  before disorder begins to prevail as the temperature is raised . 
bromine is a chemical element with symbol br and atomic number 35.
the primary decay mode of isotopes lighter than br is electron capture to isotopes of selenium; that of isotopes heavier than br is beta decay to isotopes of krypton; and br may decay by either mode to stable se or kr . 
the simplest compound of bromine is hydrogen bromide ,  hbr . 
some are prepared from bromine and others are prepared from hydrogen bromide ,  which is obtained by burning hydrogen in bromine . 
the four oxoacids ,  hypobromous acid  -lrb-  hobr  -rrb-  ,  bromous acid  -lrb-  hobro  -rrb-  ,  bromic acid  -lrb-  hobro  -rrb-  ,  and perbromic acid  -lrb-  hobro  -rrb-  ,  are better studied due to their greater stability ,  though they are only so in aqueous solution . 
hypobromous acid is unstable to disproportionation . 
hydrobromic acid forms an azeotrope with boiling point 124.3 °c at 47.63 g hbr per 100 g solution; thus hydrobromic acid cannot be concentrated beyond this point by distillation . 
unlike hydrogen fluoride ,  anhydrous liquid hydrogen bromide is difficult to work with as a solvent ,  because its boiling point is low ,  it has a small liquid range ,  its dielectric constant is low and it does not dissociate appreciably into hbr and ions – the latter ,  in any case ,  are much less stable than the bifluoride ions  -lrb-    -rrb-  due to the very weak hydrogen bonding between hydrogen and bromine ,  though its salts with very large and weakly polarising cations such as cs and  -lrb-  r = me ,  et ,  bu  -rrb-  may still be isolated . 
the colour fades at low temperatures ,  so that solid bromine at −195 °c is pale yellow . 
another method is halogen exchange in the presence of excess `` halogenating reagent '' ,  for example: when a lower bromide is wanted ,  either a higher halide may be reduced using hydrogen or a metal as a reducing agent ,  or thermal decomposition or disproportionation may be used ,  as follows:
this is an example of a halogen addition reaction . 
bromous acids and bromites are very unstable ,  although the strontium and barium bromites are known . 
bromine pentafluoride explodes on reaction with water and fluorinates silicates at 450 °c . 
like solid chlorine and iodine ,  solid bromine crystallises in the orthorhombic crystal system ,  in a layered lattice of br molecules . 
although dibromine is a strong oxidising agent with a high first ionisation energy ,  very strong oxidisers such as peroxydisulfuryl fluoride  -lrb-  sof  -rrb-  can oxidise it to form the cherry-red cation . 
like the other carbon–halogen bonds ,  the c–br bond is a common functional group that forms part of core organic chemistry . 
bromine monofluoride in ethanol readily leads to the monobromination of the aromatic compounds phx  -lrb-  `` para ''-bromination occurs for x = me ,  bu ,  ome ,  br; `` meta ''-bromination occurs for the deactivating x = –coet ,  –cho ,  –no  -rrb- ; this is due to heterolytic fission of the br–f bond ,  leading to rapid electrophilic bromination by br . 
bromination of metals with br tends to yield lower oxidation states than chlorination with cl when a variety of oxidation states is available . 
barium has few industrial applications . 
the most common naturally occurring minerals of barium are barite  -lrb-  now called baryte  -rrb-   -lrb-  barium sulfate ,  baso  -rrb-  and witherite  -lrb-  barium carbonate ,  baco  -rrb-  ,  both insoluble in water . 
barium was identified as a new element in 1774, but not reduced to a metal until 1808 with the advent of electrolysis . 
nuclear reactors produce mostly ,  among the berkelium isotopes ,  berkelium-249.
two oxides of berkelium are known ,  with the berkelium oxidation state of +3  -lrb-  bko  -rrb-  and +4  -lrb-  bko  -rrb-  . 
therefore ,  any primordial berkelium ,  that is ,  berkelium present on the earth during its formation ,  has decayed by now . 
the second important berkelium isotope ,  berkelium-247, is an alpha-emitter ,  as are most actinide isotopes . 
in halides ,  berkelium assumes the oxidation states +3 and +4.
berkelium is a soft ,  silvery-white ,  radioactive metal . 
berkelium is a soft ,  silvery-white ,  radioactive actinide metal . 
the nuclear fission properties of berkelium are different from those of the neighboring actinides curium and californium ,  and they suggest berkelium to perform poorly as a fuel in a nuclear reactor . 
berkelium-247 was produced during the same year by irradiating cm with alpha-particles:
just over one gram of berkelium has been produced in the united states since 1967.
all berkelium isotopes have a half-life far too short to be primordial . 
berkelium was the fifth transuranium element discovered after neptunium ,  plutonium ,  curium and americium . 
berkelium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol bk and atomic number 97.
most available berkelium toxicity data originate from research on animals . 
in total ,  just over one gram of berkelium-249 has been produced at oak ridge since 1967.
berkelium and cerium are then separated with another round of ion-exchange treatment . 
the maximum permissible amount of berkelium-249 in the human skeleton is 0.4 nanograms . 
two forms of berkelium -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  bromide are known: one with berkelium having coordination 6, and one with coordination 8.
this emission can be observed ,  for example ,  after dispersing berkelium ions in a silicate glass ,  by melting the glass in presence of berkelium oxide or halide . 
bauxite is a sedimentary rock with a relatively high aluminium content . 
bavaria  -lrb-  ; german and bavarian: `` bayern ''   -rrb-  ,  officially the free state of bavaria  -lrb-  german and bavarian: `` freistaat bayern ''   -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked federal state of germany ,  occupying its southeastern corner . 
the duchy of bavaria dates back to the year 555.
in 1946, the free state of bavaria re-organised itself on democratic lines after the second world war . 
the first of several divisions of the duchy of bavaria occurred in 1255.
although the idea of bavarian separatism was popular in the late 19th and early 20th century ,  apart from a small minority such as the bavaria party ,  most bavarians have accepted that bavaria is part of germany . 
the rhenish palatinate was detached from bavaria in 1946 and made part of the new state rhineland-palatinate . 
modern bavaria also includes parts of the historical regions of franconia and swabia . 
in 1506 with the landshut war of succession ,  the other parts of bavaria were reunited ,  and munich became the sole capital . 
bavaria's capital and largest city ,  munich ,  is the third-largest city in germany . 
bavaria has a unique culture ,  largely because of the state's catholic majority and conservative traditions . 
the bundestag  -lrb-   ,  `` federal diet ''  -rrb-  is the german federal parliament . 
at least 598 members of the bundestag are elected in this way . 
accordingly ,  each voter has two votes in the elections to the bundestag . 
with the new constitution of 1949, the bundestag was established as the new west german parliament . 
prior to 1976, there could be a period where one bundestag had been dissolved and the next bundestag could not be convened; during this period ,  the rights of the bundestag were exercised by a so-called `` permanent committee '' . 
together with the bundesrat ,  the bundestag is the legislative branch of the german political system . 
as is the case with some other parliaments ,  the bundestag is subject to the `` principle of discontinuation '' ,  meaning that a newly elected bundestag is legally regarded to be a body and entity completely different from the previous bundestag . 
any bundestag is considered dissolved only once a newly elected bundestag has actually gathered in order to constitute itself  -lrb-  article 39 sec . 
the `` fraktion '' meets every tuesday afternoon in the weeks in which the bundestag is in session to consider legislation before the bundestag and formulate the party's position on it . 
the bundestag's executive bodies include the council of elders and the presidium . 
the system was formally launched on 1 september 2005, and in 2008 the bundestag moved to a new system based on its evaluation . 
for example ,  elections to the 16th bundestag took place on 18 september 2005, but the 15th bundestag still convened after election day to make some decisions on german military engagement abroad ,  and was entitled to do so ,  as the newly elected 16th bundestag did not convene for the first time until 18 october 2005.
in 1932, the bmw 3/20 became the first bmw automobile designed entirely by bmw . 
in 1959, the bmw 600 was replaced by the larger bmw 700 coupe/sedan . 
bmw's first automotive straight-six engine was released in 1933, in the bmw 303.
the 1986 e32 750i was bmw's first v12 model . 
following the takeover ,  the dixi 3/15 became the bmw 3/15, bmw's first production car . 
in 1983, bmw introduced its first diesel engine ,  the m21.
the 1978 bmw m1 was bmw's first mid-engined sports car and was developed in conjunction with lamborghini . 
by 1959, bmw was in debt and losing money . 
towards the end of the third reich ,  bmw developed some military aircraft projects for the `` luftwaffe '' ,  the bmw strahlbomber ,  the bmw schnellbomber and the bmw strahljäger ,  but none of them were built . 
bornholm  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a danish island in the baltic sea ,  to the east of the rest of denmark ,  south of sweden ,  northeast of germany and north of the westernmost part of poland . 
the island is known as `` solskinsøen ''  -lrb-  `` sunshine island ''  -rrb-  because of its weather and `` klippeøen ''  -lrb-  `` rock island ''  -rrb-  because of its geology ,  which consists of granite ,  except along the southern coast . 
but the intellectual content in a physical book need not be a composition ,  or can be called a book . 
modern bound books are organized according to a particular format called the book's `` layout '' . 
isidore of seville  -lrb-  d .  636 -rrb- explained the then-current relation between codex ,  book and scroll in his etymologiae  -lrb-  vi . 13 -rrb-: `` a codex is composed of many books; a book is of one scroll . 
the first books used parchment or vellum  -lrb-  calfskin  -rrb-  for the pages . 
some books ,  particularly those with shorter runs  -lrb-  i . e . 
these chained books are called `` libri catenati '' . 
at first ,  books were copied mostly in monasteries ,  one at a time . 
today ,  the majority of books are printed by offset lithography . 
books may be distributed in electronic form as e-books and other formats . 
in the unrestricted sense ,  a book is the compositional whole of which such sections ,  whether called books or chapters or parts ,  are parts . 
mergers in the book manufacturing industry mean that it is now unusual to find a bindery which is not also involved in book printing  -lrb-  and vice versa  -rrb-  . 
sewn and notch bound books can be bound as either hardbacks or paperbacks . 
book design is the art of incorporating the content ,  style ,  format ,  design ,  and sequence of the various components of a book into a coherent whole . 
the size of a modern book is based on the printing area of a common flatbed press . 
also here often appear plot summaries ,  barcodes ,  and excerpted reviews of the book . 
this invention gradually made books less expensive to produce ,  and more widely available . 
in 2006, thackeray's nephew raj thackeray broke away from shiv sena to form the maharashtra navnirman sena  -lrb-  mns  -rrb-  during thackeray's retirement and appointment of his son ,  uddhav rather than raj as the leader of shiv sena . 
thackeray was born in pune on 23 january 1926 to ramabai and keshav sitaram thackeray  -lrb-  also known as 'prabodhankar'  -rrb-  . 
thackeray and the shiv sena remained opposed to it ,  although they indicated support for an `` indian alternative . `` 
keshav's political philosophy inspired thackeray . 
thackeray declared himself to be the `` remote control '' chief minister . 
thackeray began his career as a cartoonist in the `` free press journal '' in mumbai . 
like the maharashtra navnirman sena ,  the shiv sena too has demeaned north indians and treated them inhumanely . `` 
bal keshav thackeray also known as balasaheb thackeray  -lrb-  ; 23 january 1926 – 17 november 2012 -rrb- was an indian politician who founded the shiv sena ,  a right-wing marathi nationalist party active mainly in the western state of maharashtra . 
thackeray was married to meena thackeray  -lrb-  née sarla vaidya  -rrb-  on 13 june 1948 and had three sons ,  bindumadhav ,  jaidev and uddhav . 
thackeray defended savarkar against criticism and praised him as a great leader . 
thackeray died on 17 november 2012 as a consequence of a cardiac arrest . 
the success of `` marmik '' prompted him to form the shiv sena on 19 june 1966.
thackeray publicly supported indira gandhi during the 1975 emergency to avoid getting arrested; thackeray supported the congress party numerous times . 
on 23 september 2011, bille august announced that he had opened his studio in hangzhou ,  china and taken a position as tianpeng media's art director ,  aiming to produce chinese films for tianpeng media over the next few years . 
bille august  -lrb-  born 9 november 1948 -rrb- is a danish academy award-winning film and television director . 
bitola is also the seat of the bitola municipality . 
from 1382 to 1912, manastır  -lrb-  now bitola  -rrb-  was part of the ottoman empire . 
it is unknown when bitola's clock tower was built . 
bitola is located in the southwestern part of macedonia . 
during world war i bitola was on the salonica front . 
in the 10th century ,  bitola was under the rule of the bulgarian tsar samuil . 
bitola’s population itself was very various . 
bitola is very rich in monuments from the prehistoric period . 
the bitola region was a stronghold of the ilinden uprising . 
bitola  -lrb-  ; is a city in the southwestern part of the republic of macedonia . 
bitola is the economic and industrial center of southwestern macedonia . 
caravans of various goods moved to and from bitola . 
in the 6th and 7th centuries ,  the region around bitola experienced a demographic shift as more and more slavic tribes settled in the area . 
initially its county town was bitola and later it was ohrid ,  so it was initially sometimes referred to as sanjak of monastir or sanjak of bitola . 
today ,  its ruins fall in the southern part of bitola ,  from the city center . 
bitola became one of the major cities of the vardarska banovina . 
bitola also has significant capacity in the textile and food industries . 
bitola was also the headquarters of many cultural organizations that were established at that time . 
richard's reign began in 1483.
richard's vanguard commanded by the duke of norfolk was on the right  -lrb-  north  -rrb-  side of richard's battle line ,  with the earl of northumberland on richard's left  -lrb-  south  -rrb-  side . 
lord stanley's relations with the king's brother ,  the eventual richard iii ,  were not cordial . 
the king's trusted advisor richard ratcliffe was also slain . 
william shakespeare gives prominence to the battle of bosworth in his play ,  `` richard iii '' . 
richard's forces disintegrated as news of his death spread . 
richard's lieutenant in south wales ,  sir walter herbert ,  failed to move against henry ,  and two of his officers ,  richard griffith and evan morgan ,  abandoned richard iii to join henry tudor with their men . 
henry percy ,  4th earl of northumberland ,  also supported richard's seizure of the throne of england . 
richard's most loyal subject was john howard ,  1st duke of norfolk . 
without buckingham or henry ,  the rebellion was easily crushed by richard . 
henry had no choice but to confront richard's forces alone . 
oxford's presence raised morale in henry's camp and troubled richard iii . 
northwest of ambion hill ,  just across the northern tributary of the  ,  a flag and memorial stone mark richard's field . 
three groups ,  each with its own agenda ,  stood on bosworth field: richard iii and his yorkist army; his challenger ,  henry tudor ,  who championed the lancastrian cause; and the fence-sitting stanleys . 
richard divided his army ,  which outnumbered henry's ,  into three groups  -lrb-  or `` battles ''  -rrb-  . 
it was here ,  on what came to be known as crown hill  -lrb-  the closest elevated ground to the fighting  -rrb-  ,  that lord stanley crowned henry tudor after richard was killed . 
northumberland and his men fled north on seeing the king's fate ,  and norfolk was killed . 
coursen agrees that ,  in this version ,  the battle and richard's end are trite and underwhelming . 
immediately before the battle of bosworth ,  being wary of stanley ,  richard took his son ,  lord strange ,  as hostage to discourage him from joining henry . 
the lancastrians were harassed by richard's cannon as they manoeuvred around the marsh ,  seeking firmer ground . 
analysis of king richard's skeletal remains found 11 wounds ,  nine of them to the head; a blade consistent with a halberd had sliced off part of the rear of richard's skull ,  suggesting he had lost his helmet . 
at this juncture richard saw henry at some distance behind his main force . 
the adaptation of the setting for `` richard iii '' to a 1930s fascist england in ian mckellen's 1995 film ,  however ,  did not sit well with historians . 
small and slender ,  richard iii did not have the robust physique associated with many of his plantagenet predecessors . 
cruciferae is one of eight plant family names ,  not derived from a genus name and without the suffix `` -aceae '' that are authorized alternative names . 
carl linnaeus in 1753 regarded the brassicaceae as a natural group ,  naming them `` klass '' tetradynamia . 
most quotations of the old testament in the new testament ,  differing by varying degrees from the masoretic text ,  are taken from the septuagint . 
most of the quotations  -lrb-  300 of 400 -rrb- of the old testament in the new testament ,  while differing more or less from the version presented by the masoretic text ,  align with that of the septuagint . 
the catholic church and eastern christian churches hold that certain deuterocanonical books and passages are part of the old testament canon . 
it is composed mainly in biblical hebrew ,  and its masoretic text is the main textual source for the christian greek old testament . 
christian bibles range from the 73 books of the catholic church canon ,  the 66 books of the canon of some denominations or the 80 books of the canon of other denominations of the protestant church ,  to the 81 books of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church canon . 
ops is also useful when determining a pitcher's level of success . 
all of the above statistics may be used in certain game situations . 
scouts will use stats when they are looking at a player who they may end up drafting or signing them to a contract . 
when analyzing a pitcher's statistics ,  some useful categories to consider include k/9ip  -lrb-  strikeouts per nine innings  -rrb-  ,  k/bb  -lrb-  strikeouts per walk  -rrb-  ,  hr/9  -lrb-  home runs per nine innings  -rrb-  ,  whip  -lrb-  walks plus hits per inning pitched  -rrb-  ,  and oops  -lrb-  opponent on-base plus slugging  -rrb-  . 
baseball statistics play an important role in evaluating the progress of a player or team . 
in baseball ,  an at bat  -lrb-  ab  -rrb-  or time at bat is a batter's turn batting against a pitcher . 
both total runs and earned runs are tabulated as part of a pitcher's statistics . 
conversely ,  an unearned run is a run that would not have been scored without the aid of an error or a passed ball committed by the defense . 
a batter who draws a base on balls is commonly said to have been `` walked '' by the pitcher . 
a subset of the base on balls ,  an intentional base on balls  -lrb-  ibb  -rrb-  or intentional walk is when the pitcher deliberately pitches the ball away from the batter in order to issue a base on balls . 
receiving a base on balls does not count as a hit or an at bat for a batter but does count as a time on base and a plate appearance . 
the term `` base on balls '' distinguishes a walk from the other manners in which a batter can be awarded first base without liability to be put out  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  hit by pitch  -lrb-  hbp  -rrb-  ,  catcher's interference  -rrb-  . 
an attempt to advance an additional base beyond the base awarded might occur when ball four is a passed ball or a wild pitch . 
a base on balls  -lrb-  bb  -rrb-  ,  also known as a walk ,  occurs in baseball when a batter receives four pitches that the umpire calls `` balls '' ,  and is in turn awarded first base without the possibility of being called out . 
the all-time record for a player being hit by a pitch is held by hughie jennings ,  who was hit by 287 pitches between 1891 and 1903.
rule 5.09-lrb- a  -rrb-  further clarifies that a hit by pitch is also called when a pitch touches a batter's clothing . 
the rule awarding first base to a batter hit by a pitch was instituted in 1887.
twice has a perfect game been busted by the 27th batter being hit by pitch . 
a hit-by-pitch can also be called on a pitch that has first touched the ground before hitting the batter . 
in baseball ,  hit by pitch  -lrb-  hbp  -rrb-  is a situation in which a batter or his clothing or equipment  -lrb-  other than his bat  -rrb-  is struck directly by a pitch from the pitcher; the batter is called a hit batsman  -lrb-  hb  -rrb-  . 
an `` infield hit '' is a hit where the ball does not leave the infield . 
a hit for one base is called a single ,  for two bases a double ,  and for three bases a triple . 
in 1887, major league baseball counted bases on balls  -lrb-  walks  -rrb-  as hits . 
in baseball statistics ,  a hit  -lrb-  denoted by h  -rrb-  ,  also called a base hit ,  is credited to a batter when the batter safely reaches first base after hitting the ball into fair territory ,  without the benefit of an error or a fielder's choice . 
the lowest is by bill bergen ,  who had an obp of  . 194.
by factoring in only hits ,  walks and times hit by pitch ,  obp does not credit the batter for reaching base due to fielding errors or decisions ,  as it does not increase when the batter reaches base due to fielding error ,  fielder's choice ,  dropped/uncaught third strike ,  fielder's obstruction ,  or catcher's interference . 
on any fly ball ,  a runner can attempt to advance bases right as soon as a fielder touches the ball by tagging up ,  even before the fielder has full control of the ball . 
the sacrifice fly is credited on a dropped ball even if another runner is forced out by reason of the batter becoming a runner . 
as addressed within rule 9.02-lrb- a  -rrb-  -lrb-  1 -rrb- of the official baseball rules a sacrifice fly is not counted as a time at bat for the batter ,  though the batter is credited with a run batted in . 
steve yerkes tagged up and scored from third base to win game 8 in the tenth inning and take the series for the red sox . 
a player on a hitting streak will have the hit streak end if he has no official at-bats but has a sacrifice fly . 
typically ,  the league leader in ops will score near ,  and sometimes above ,  the 1.000 mark . 
a stolen base most often occurs when a base runner advances to the next base while the pitcher is pitching the ball to home plate . 
the pitcher may ,  without limit ,  throw the ball to the runner's base . 
if the runner breaks too soon  -lrb-  before the pitcher is obliged to complete a pitch  -rrb-  ,  the pitcher may throw to a base rather than pitch ,  and the runner is usually `` picked off '' by being tagged out between the bases . 
in more recent years ,  most steals of home involve a `` delayed double steal '' ,  in which a runner on first attempts to steal second ,  while the runner on third breaks for home as soon as the catcher throws to second base . 
the runner must return to that base or risk being tagged out; but the underlying strategy is thereby to dissuade the runner from too big a lead-off; that is ,  to `` hold the runner on '' his original base . 
in baseball ,  a stolen base occurs when a runner advances to a base to which he is not entitled and the official scorer rules that the advance should be credited to the action of the runner . 
if a player:
however ,  terms such as `` turn at bat '' or `` time at bat '' are synonymous with `` plate appearance '' . 
in the example above ,  player b is 12 plate appearances short of the required 502, but were he be charged with 12 additional at bats ,  he would go 110-for-412 for a batting average of  . 267.
in baseball statistics ,  a player is credited with a plate appearance  -lrb-  denoted by pa  -rrb-  each time he completes a turn batting . 
section 10 of the official rules states that an at bat is not counted when the player:
see also: krs-one ,  scott la rock ,  and d-nice
in the liner notes on bdp's 1992 album `` sex and violence '' ,  krs-one writes: `` bdp in 1992 is krs-one ,  willie d ,  and kenny parker ! 
boogie down productions was a hip hop group ,  originally composed of krs-one ,  d-nice ,  and dj scott la rock . 
the music of bdp became significantly more politically astute after the death of disc jockey scott la rock ,  krs-one's mentor and partner . 
for example ,  the bcd digit 6, '0110'b in 8421 notation ,  is '1100'b in 4221  -lrb-  two encodings are possible  -rrb-  ,  '0110'b in 7421, and '1001'b  -lrb-  6+3=9 -rrb- in excess-3.
bcd takes advantage of the fact that any one decimal numeral can be represented by a four bit pattern . 
as most computers deal with data in 8-bit bytes ,  it is possible to use one of the following methods to encode a bcd number:
in 551, bumin requested a western wei princess in marriage . 
he was married to princess changle of western wei . 
he was born in 683, just in early years of second khaganate . 
bilge khagan  -lrb-  old turkic: 𐰋𐰃𐰠𐰏𐰀 𐰴𐰍𐰣 ,  bilge qaγan;   -rrb-   -lrb-  683 – 25 november 734 -rrb- was the khagan of the second turkic khaganate . 
as was the custom ,  his personal name and the name after assuming the title khagan were different . 
later that year khitans ,  next year xi were also crushed . 
the school turned its first profit under his leadership in 1929.
the school was founded by walter gropius in weimar in 1919, as a merger of the weimar saxon grand ducal art school and the weimar academy of fine art . 
the school's philosophy stated that the artist should be trained to work with the industry . 
the school closed in 1968, but the `` ulm model '' concept continues to influence international design education . 
when it gained control of the dessau city council ,  it moved to close the school . 
the physical plant at dessau survived world war ii and was operated as a design school with some architectural facilities by the german democratic republic . 
the staatliches bauhaus  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  commonly known as the bauhaus ,  was a german art school operational from 1919 to 1933 that combined crafts and the fine arts ,  and was famous for the approach to design that it publicized and taught . 
for example ,  the pottery shop was discontinued when the school moved from weimar to dessau ,  even though it had been an important revenue source; when mies van der rohe took over the school in 1930, he transformed it into a private school ,  and would not allow any supporters of hannes meyer to attend it . 
the bauhaus had a profound influence upon subsequent developments in art ,  architecture ,  graphic design ,  interior design ,  industrial design ,  and typography . 
victor vasarely ,  a pioneer of op art ,  studied at this school before establishing in paris in 1930.
the founder of the school ,  phyllis shillito ,  which opened in 1962 and closed in 1980, firmly believed that `` a student who has mastered the basic principles of design ,  can design anything from a dress to a kitchen stove '' . 
the school existed in three german cities: weimar from 1919 to 1925, dessau from 1925 to 1932, and berlin from 1932 to 1933, under three different architect-directors: walter gropius from 1919 to 1928, hannes meyer from 1928 to 1930, and ludwig mies van der rohe from 1930 until 1933, when the school was closed by its own leadership under pressure from the nazi regime ,  having been painted as a centre of communist intellectualism . 
the vkhutemas ,  the russian state art and technical school founded in 1920 in moscow ,  has been compared to bauhaus . 
at the end of the poem when beowulf dies ,  there is also a massive funeral for beowulf  -lrb-  3140–3170 -rrb- . 
beowulf and his men spend the night in heorot . 
beowulf has been translated into at least 23 other languages . 
grendel's mother and beowulf engage in fierce combat . 
hrothgar ,  beowulf ,  and their men track grendel's mother to her lair under a lake . 
beowulf  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is an old english epic poem consisting of 3,182 alliterative lines . 
beowulf returns home and eventually becomes king of his own people . 
this exhaustive analysis is in itself sufficient to prove that beowulf was composed orally . `` 
 ''beowulf '' begins with the story of hrothgar ,  who constructed the great hall heorot for himself and his warriors . 
beowulf kills grendel with his bare hands and grendel's mother with a giant's sword that he found in her lair . 
the author was an anonymous anglo-saxon poet ,  referred to by scholars as the ``  ''beowulf '' poet '' . 
the `` beowulf '' manuscript was transcribed from an original by two scribes ,  one of whom wrote the prose at the beginning of the manuscript and the first 1939 lines before breaking off in mid sentence . 
 ''beowulf '' survives in a single manuscript dated on palaeographical grounds to the late 10th or early 11th century . 
 ''beowulf '' was written in england ,  but is set in scandinavia; its dating has attracted considerable scholarly attention . 
the film was almost not released . 
while the film is now considered a classic comedy ,  critical reaction was mixed when the film was released . 
6 on the american film institute's `` 100 years .  .  . 100 laughs '' list . 
the film grossed $119.5 million at the box office ,  becoming only the tenth film up to that time to pass the $100 million mark . 
blazing saddles is a 1974 american satirical western film directed by mel brooks . 
brooks said that lamarr `` never got the joke . `` 
the film also earned two bafta awards nominations ,  for best newcomer  -lrb-  cleavon little  -rrb-  and best screenplay . 
refers to w . c .  fields' film  -lrb-  and motto  -rrb-  ``  ''never give a sucker an even break '' '' . 
sterling is one of the founders of the cyberpunk movement in science fiction ,  along with william gibson ,  rudy rucker ,  john shirley ,  lewis shiner ,  and pat cadigan . 
michael bruce sterling  -lrb-  born april 14, 1954 -rrb- is an american science fiction author known for his novels and work on the `` mirrorshades '' anthology . 
fever ,  headache ,  and neurological problems ,  while classic ,  only occur in 20% of people with brain abscess . 
other symptoms and findings depend largely on the specific location of the abscess in the brain . 
the famous triad of fever ,  headache and focal neurologic findings are highly suggestive of brain abscess . 
bardot retired from the entertainment industry in 1973.
bardot is also a breast cancer survivor . 
bardot was born a brunette in paris ,  the daughter of louis bardot  -lrb-  1896–1975 -rrb- and anne-marie `` toty '' bardot  -lrb-  née mucel; 1912–1978 -rrb- . 
in 1973, before her 39th birthday ,  bardot announced her retirement . 
bardot was an aspiring ballerina in her early life . 
the australian pop group bardot was named after her . 
bardot's appearance was relatively brief and the film was not a big hit . 
 ''if `` don juan '' is not my last movie it will be my next to last , ``  said bardot during filming . 
bardot then appeared in four movies that made her a star . 
bardot wrote him a highly critical letter of protest . 
on 21 december 1952, aged 18, bardot married director roger vadim . 
in the mid-1960s bardot made films which seemed to be more aimed at the international market . 
the town hosts a bardot statue by christina motta . 
the other ballerinas nicknamed bardot `` bichette ''  -lrb-  `` little doe ''  -rrb-  . 
bardot was idolized by the young john lennon and paul mccartney . 
bardot expressed support for president charles de gaulle in the 1960s . 
in 1973, bardot announced she was retiring from acting as `` a way to get out elegantly '' . 
bardot finally appeared in a hollywood film in `` dear brigitte ''  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- ,  a comedy starring james stewart as an academic whose son develops a crush on bardot . 
bardot had a small role in a hollywood-financed film being shot in paris ,  `` act of love ''  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- ,  starring kirk douglas . 
in 1986, she established the brigitte bardot foundation for the welfare and protection of animals . 
bardot had a leading role in an italian melodrama ,  `` concert of intrigue ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- and in a french adventure film ,  `` caroline and the rebels ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- . 
on 13 august 2010, bardot lashed out at director kyle newman regarding his plan to make a biographical film on her life . 
the film was bardot's biggest ever commercial success in france ,  the third biggest hit of the year ,  and was nominated for a best foreign film oscar . 
historically ,  the banjo was played in the clawhammer style by the africans who brought their version of the banjo with them . 
modern banjos are typically strung with metal strings . 
open-back banjos generally have a mellower tone and weigh less than resonator banjos . 
these techniques are both idiomatic to the banjo in all styles ,  and their sound is characteristic of bluegrass . 
american old-time music typically uses the five-string ,  open-back banjo . 
several claims as to the etymology of the name `` banjo '' have been made . 
some players may string their banjos with nylon or gut strings to achieve a more mellow ,  old-time tone . 
the five-string banjo has been used in classical music since before the turn of the 20th century . 
they usually have a different setup than a resonator banjo ,  often with a higher string action . 
five-string banjo players use many tunings . 
the first objective of the batting team is to have a player reach first base safely . 
the team that scores the most runs by the end of the game is the winner . 
baseball is a bat-and-ball game played between two opposing teams who take turns batting and fielding . 
a pitch that is not hit into the field of play is called either a strike or a ball . 
a baseball game is played between two teams ,  each composed of nine players ,  that take turns playing offense  -lrb-  batting and baserunning  -rrb-  and defense  -lrb-  pitching and fielding  -rrb-  . 
at the beginning of each half-inning ,  the nine players on the fielding team arrange themselves around the field . 
runners may also attempt to advance to the next base while the pitcher is in the process of delivering the ball to home plate; a successful effort is a stolen base . 
an individual player's turn batting or plate appearance is complete when the player reaches base ,  hits a home run ,  makes an out ,  or hits a ball that results in the team's third out ,  even if it is recorded against a teammate . 
thus ,  even with the dh ,  each team still has a batting order of nine players and a fielding arrangement of nine players . 
several basic offensive tactics come into play with a runner on first base ,  including the fundamental choice of whether to attempt a steal of second base . 
any runners already on base may attempt to advance on batted balls that land ,  or contact the ground ,  in fair territory ,  before or after the ball lands . 
the game is played on a field whose primary boundaries ,  the foul lines ,  extend forward from home plate at 45-degree angles . 
any baseball game involves one or more umpires ,  who make rulings on the outcome of each play . 
stranded runners do not benefit the team in its next turn at bat as every half-inning begins with the bases empty . 
with a runner on third base ,  the infielders may play in ,  moving closer to home plate to improve the odds of throwing out the runner on a ground ball ,  though a sharply hit grounder is more likely to carry through a drawn-in infield . 
baseball has no game clock ,  although most games end in the ninth inning . 
in the playoffs ,  six umpires are used: one at each base and two in the outfield along the foul lines . 
in contrast to many other team sports ,  baseball managers and coaches generally wear their team's uniforms; coaches must be in uniform to be allowed on the field to confer with players during a game . 
all was not well with the game . 
his era in the major leagues was 3.29.
from the time of the formation of the major leagues to the 1960s ,  the team owners controlled the game . 
the 1990s also saw major league baseball expand into new markets as four new teams joined the league . 
in 1958 the new york market ripped apart . 
the first team to play baseball under modern rules was long believed to be the new york knickerbockers . 
nevertheless ,  the knickerbocker rules were rapidly adopted by teams in the new york area and their version of baseball became known as the `` new york game ''  -lrb-  as opposed to the `` massachusetts game '' ,  played by clubs in the boston area  -rrb-  . 
that same year ,  the new york yankees won a record 125 games ,  including going 11–2 in the postseason ,  to win the world series as what many consider to be one of the greatest teams of all time . 
writing the rules did not help the knickerbockers in the first known competitive game between two clubs under the new rules ,  played at elysian fields in hoboken ,  new jersey on june 19, 1846.
in 1901 the american league declared its intent to operate as a major league . 
in september 1994 major league baseball announced the cancellation of the world series for the first time since 1904.
it also gave the na great power . 
the first attempt at forming a `` major league '' produced the national association of professional base ball players ,  which lasted from 1871 to 1875.
moses fleetwood walker is considered the first african-american to play at the major league level ,  in 1884.
the first legal challenge came in 1970.
pitchers dominated the game in the 1960s and early 1970s . 
the games ,  which took place between the all stars of brooklyn ,  including players from the atlantic ,  excelsior ,  putnam and eckford clubs ,  and the all stars of new york  -lrb-  manhattan  -rrb-  ,  including players from the new york knickerbockers ,  gothams ,  eagles and empire ,  are commonly believed to the first all star baseball games . 
for the most part ,  the late 1990s were dominated by the new york yankees ,  who won four out of five world series championships from 1996–2000.
at the end of the 1919 season harry frazee ,  then owner of the boston red sox ,  sold a group of his star players to the new york yankees . 
in the fourteen years from 1947–1960, black players won one or more of the rookie of the year awards nine times . 
however ,  due to the 1994–95 major league baseball strike  -lrb-  which canceled the 1994 world series  -rrb-  ,  the new rules did not go into effect until the 1995 world series . 
in 1975, frank robinson  -lrb-  who had been the 1956 rookie of the year with the cincinnati reds  -rrb-  was named player-manager of the cleveland indians ,  making him the first african american manager in the major leagues . 
while never prohibited in the same fashion as african americans ,  latin american players also benefitted greatly from the integration era . 
while average attendances slipped to somewhat lower levels through the 1950s ,  1960s and the first half of the 1970s ,  they remained well above pre-war levels ,  and total seasonal attendance regularly hit new highs from 1962 onwards as the number of major league games increased . 
in 1857, sixteen new york area clubs ,  including the knickerbockers ,  formed the national association of base ball players  -lrb-  nabbp  -rrb-  . 
in 1858, in the corona neighborhood of queens  -lrb-  now part of new york city  -rrb-  ,  at the fashion race course ,  the first games of baseball to charge admission took place . 
1933 also saw the introduction of the all-star game ,  a mid-season break in which the greatest players in each league play against one another in a hard-fought but officially meaningless demonstration game . 
in the late 1990s ,  functions that had been administered separately by the two major leagues' administrations were united under the rubric of major league baseball . 
another major change that had been occurring during this time was the adoption of the pitch count . 
in 1998, the al and the nl each added a fifteenth team ,  for a total of thirty teams in major league baseball . 
he would add a record-breaking fifth in 1981 and two more before his retirement in 1993, by which time he had also accumulated 5,714 strikeouts ,  another record ,  in a 27-year career . 
it turned out that the cubs and giants ended the season tied for first place ,  so the game was indeed replayed ,  and the cubs won the game ,  the pennant ,  and subsequently the world series  -lrb-  the last cubs series victory until 2016 -rrb- . 
the white sox ,  meanwhile would not return to the world series until 1959 and it was not until their next appearance in 2005 they won the world series . 
the cancellation of the 1994 world series was a severe embarrassment for major league baseball . 
while the legal challenges were going on ,  the game continued . 
in 1997, the florida marlins won the world series in just their fifth season . 
while many of the players that made up the black baseball teams were african-americans ,  many more were latin americans from nations that deliver some of the greatest talents that make up the major league rosters of today . 
the logical first candidates for major league `` expansion '' were the same metropolitan areas that had just attracted the dodgers and giants . 
they had one thing that rowland did not: the financial power of the eastern major league baseball establishment . 
the negro american league of 1951 is considered the last major league season and the last professional club ,  the indianapolis clowns ,  operated amusingly rather than competitively from the mid-1960s to 1980s . 
in 1969 the `` miracle mets '' ,  just 7 years after their formation ,  recorded their first winning season ,  won the national league east and finally the world series . 
television and greater media coverage in magazines and newspapers trying to attract a new generation of non-readers also brought in the sponsors ,  and even more money ,  that would attract players to new financial opportunities and bring in other elements to the business of baseball that would impact the game . 
during the same season joe dimaggio hit successfully in 56 consecutive games ,  an accomplishment both unprecedented and unequaled . 
while this is disputed ,  landis was opposed to integration ,  and his death in 1944  -lrb-  and subsequent replacement as commissioner by happy chandler  -rrb-  removed a major obstacle for black players in the major leagues . 
after an excellent regular season  -lrb-  88–52,  . 629 w%  -rrb-  ,  the chicago white sox were heavy favorites to win the 1919 world series . 
as late as 1855, the new york press was still devoting more space to coverage of cricket than to baseball . 
however ,  it would be a decade until baseball would recover from the strike . 
the first professional black baseball club ,  the cuban giants ,  was organized in 1885.
hunter ,  and major league baseball players jason giambi and barry bonds . 
the first radio broadcast of a baseball game was on august 5, 1921 over westinghouse station kdka from forbes field in pittsburgh . 
the war between the american and national caused shock waves throughout the baseball world . 
before the civil war ,  baseball competed for public interest with cricket and regional variants of baseball ,  notably town ball played in philadelphia and the massachusetts game played in new england . 
in recent decades ,  pitchers have rarely won the award . 
frank robinson is the only player to win the award in both the american and national leagues . 
the bbwaa first awarded the modern mvp after the 1931 season ,  adopting the format the national league used to distribute its league award . 
the following season ,  chalmers created the chalmers award . 
the award was renamed the jackie robinson award in july 1987, 40 years after jackie robinson broke the baseball color line . 
the award has drawn criticism in recent years because several players with experience in nippon professional baseball  -lrb-  npb  -rrb-  have won the award ,  such as hideo nomo in 1995, kazuhiro sasaki in 2000, ichiro suzuki in 2001, and shohei ohtani in 2018.
from 1969 to 1993, home field advantage was alternated between divisions each year regardless of regular season record and from 1995 to 1997 home field advantage was predetermined before the season . 
the winners of that round advance to the best-of-seven nlcs . 
the nlcs and alcs ,  since the expansion to seven games ,  are always played in a 2–3–2 format: games 1, 2, 6, and 7 are played in the stadium of the team that has home field advantage ,  and games 3, 4, and 5 are played in the stadium of the team that does not . 
the mvp award has been given to a player on the losing team twice ,  in 1986 to mike scott of the houston astros and in 1987 to jeff leonard of the san francisco giants . 
from 1969 to 1993, home field advantage alternated between the two divisions ,  and from 1995 to 1997 home field advantage was determined before the season . 
the alcs and nlcs ,  since the expansion to best-of-seven ,  are always played in a 2–3–2 format: games 1, 2, 6, and 7 are played in the stadium of the team that has home field advantage ,  and games 3, 4, and 5 are played in the stadium of the team that does not . 
the milwaukee brewers ,  an american league team between 1969 and 1997, and the houston astros ,  a national league team between 1962 and 2012, are the only franchises to play in both the alcs and nlcs . 
no mvp award is given for division series play . 
home field advantage goes to the team with the better regular season record  -lrb-  or head-to-head record if there is a tie between two or more teams  -rrb-  ,  except for the wild card team ,  which never receives the home field advantage . 
initially ,  the best-of-5 series played in a 2-3 format ,  with the first two games set at home for the lower seed team and the last three for the higher seed . 
however ,  if the wild-card team and the division winner with the best record were from the same division ,  the wild-card team played the division winner with the second-best record ,  and the remaining two division leaders played each other . 
the nlds is a five-game series where the wild-card team is assigned to play the divisional winner with the best winning percentage in the regular season . 
initially ,  the best-of-5 series played in a 2-3 format ,  with the first two games set at home for the lower-seed team and the last three for the higher seed . 
in 2009, game 7 of the 2001 world series was chosen by `` sports illustrated '' as the best postseason game of the decade  -lrb-  2000–2009 -rrb- . 
all seven games are included on this set . 
it was the franchise's first appearance in a world series . 
2001 world series  -lrb-  4–3 -rrb-: arizona diamondbacks  -lrb-  n . l .   -rrb- 
they won the game with that score and led the series two games to none as it moved to new york city . 
with the game still tied entering the eighth ,  arizona struck . 
meanwhile ,  the diamondbacks tied the game on craig counsell's one-out home run in the first off of mike mussina . 
among several firsts ,  the 2001 world series was: the first world series championship for the diamondbacks; the first world series ever played in the state of arizona and the mountain time zone; the first championship for a far west state other than california; the first major professional sports team from the state of arizona to win a championship; and the earliest an mlb franchise had ever won a world series  -lrb-  the diamondbacks had only existed for four years  -rrb-  . 
the 15–2 win evened the series at three games apiece and set up a game 7 for the ages between roger clemens and curt schilling ,  again pitching on three days' rest . 
the yankees advanced to the world series by defeating the oakland athletics ,  three games to two ,  in the al division series ,  and then the seattle mariners in the al championship series ,  four games to one . 
this was the third world series to end in a bases-loaded ,  walk-off hit ,  following and  . 
kim was pulled from the game in favor of mike morgan who recorded the final out . 
 ,  this is the state of arizona's only world championship among the four major professional sports . 
after mlb games were postponed as a result of the september 11 attacks ,  the world series began on saturday ,  october 27, 2001, the latest start date ever for a world series until the 2009 world series ,  which started on october 28.
with arizona in a must-win situation ,  randy johnson pitched seven innings and struck out seven ,  giving up just two runs . 
game 6 was a rematch between the starters of game 2, boston's dinneen and pittsburgh's leever . 
boston wound up winning three out of four games in allegheny city . 
after losing three of the first four games of the world series ,  the underdog americans had tied the series at three games apiece . 
1903 world series  -lrb-  5–3 -rrb-: boston americans  -lrb-  a . l .   -rrb- 
in the series ,  boston came back from a three games to one deficit ,  winning the final four games to capture the title . 
game 5 was a pitcher's duel for the first five innings ,  with boston's cy young and pittsburgh's brickyard kennedy giving up no runs . 
the pirates started game 1 strong ,  scoring six runs in the first four innings ,  and held on to win the first world series game in baseball history . 
it matched the american league  -lrb-  al  -rrb-  champion boston americans against the national league  -lrb-  nl  -rrb-  champion pittsburgh pirates in a best-of-nine series ,  with boston prevailing five games to three ,  winning the last four . 
the fourth and final game in allegheny saw phillippe start his fourth game of the series for the pirates . 
as he did in game 2, dinneen threw a complete game shutout ,  striking out seven and leading his americans to victory ,  while phillippe pitched respectably but just couldn't match dinneen because his arm had been worn out with five starts in the eight games ,  giving up three runs to give the first 20th-century world championship to the boston americans ,  honus wagner striking out to end the series . 
phillippe ,  pitching after only a single day of rest ,  started game 3 for the pirates and didn't let them down ,  hurling his second complete game victory of the series to put pittsburgh up two games to one . 
in africa ,  local breeds of sheep may have no mortality ,  but in imported breeds it may be up to 90 percent . 
the two outer capsid proteins ,  vp2 and vp5, mediate attachment and penetration of btv into the target cell . 
in sheep ,  btv causes an acute disease with high morbidity and mortality . 
red deer are an exception ,  and in them the disease may be as acute as in sheep . 
the first confirmed outbreak outside of africa occurred in cyprus in 1943.
a puzzling aspect of btv is its survival between midge seasons in temperate regions . 
nasal signs may be prominent ,  with nasal discharge and stertorous respiration . 
it can kill the horses it infects and mortality may go as high as 90% of the infected horses during an epidemic . 
btv also infects goats ,  cattle and other domestic animals as well as wild ruminants  -lrb-  for example ,  blesbuck ,  white-tailed deer ,  elk ,  and pronghorn antelope  -rrb-  . 
but in the following 2000s he spoke about open source again . 
in 2018 perens founded the open research institute  -lrb-  ori  -rrb-  ,  a non-profit research and development organization to address technologies involving open source ,  open hardware ,  open standards ,  open content ,  and open access to research . 
perens modified the debian free software guidelines into the open source definition by removing debian references and replacing them with `` open source '' . 
it was the first book series to be published under an open license . 
he promotes open radio communications standards and open-source hardware . 
he co-founded the open source initiative  -lrb-  osi  -rrb-  with eric s .  raymond . 
in february 2008, for the 10th anniversary of the phrase `` open source '' ,  perens published a message to the community called `` state of open source message: a new decade for open source '' . 
concurrently ,  perens and raymond established the open source initiative ,  an organization intended to promote open source software . 
in 2014-2015, perens took a break from open source conferences ,  having spoken at them often since 1996.
this differs from raymond's theory in `` the cathedral and the bazaar '' ,  which having been written before there was much business involvement in open source ,  explains open source as a consequence of programmer motivation and leisure . 
from april 1996 to december 1997, while still working at pixar ,  perens served as debian project leader ,  the person who coordinates development of the debian open source operating system . 
from 2002 to 2006, prentice hall ptr published the bruce perens' open source series ,  a set of 24 books covering various open source software tools ,  for which perens served as the series editor . 
from december 2000 to september 2002, perens served as `` senior global strategist for linux and open source '' at hewlett-packard ,  internally evangelizing for the use of linux and other open-source software . 
perens poses `` open source '' as a means of marketing the free and open-source software idea to business people and mainstream who might be more interested in the practical benefits of an open source development model and ecosystem than abstract ethics . 
the original announcement of the open source definition was made on february 9, 1998 on slashdot and elsewhere; the definition was given in linux gazette on february 10, 1998.
whether a `` relation '' of an object is one of its properties may complicate such an argument . 
according to bundle theory ,  an object consists of its properties and nothing more: thus neither can there be an object without properties nor can one even `` conceive '' of such an object; for example ,  bundle theory claims that thinking of an apple compels one also to think of its color ,  its shape ,  the fact that it is a kind of fruit ,  its cells ,  its taste ,  or at least one other of its properties . 
critics also question how any two given properties are determined to be properties of the same object if there is no `` substance '' in which they both `` inhere '' . 
consequently ,  the idea of a self must be eliminated . 
the inability to comprehend any aspect of the thing other than its properties implies ,  this argument maintains ,  that one cannot conceive of a `` bare particular ''  -lrb-  a `` substance '' without properties  -rrb-  ,  an implication that directly opposes substance theory . 
on 18 june ,  montgomery ordered bradley to take cherbourg while the british were to take caen by 23 june . 
the german commander of the 5th panzer army ,  hasso von manteuffel said:
during the second world war he commanded the british eighth army from august 1942 in the western desert until the final allied victory in tunisia in may 1943.
after the war lord montgomery became the commander-in-chief  -lrb-  c-in-c  -rrb-  of the british army of the rhine  -lrb-  baor  -rrb-  ,  the name given to the british occupation forces ,  and was the british member of the allied control council . 
montgomery pulled away from the first canadian army  -lrb-  temporarily commanded now by simonds as crerar was ill  -rrb-  ,  the british 51st highland division ,  1st polish division ,  british 49th  -lrb-  west riding  -rrb-  division and 2nd canadian armoured brigade and sent all of these formations to help the 2nd british army hold the arnhem salient . 
general eisenhower took over ground forces command on 1 september ,  while continuing as supreme commander ,  with montgomery continuing to command the 21st army group ,  now consisting mainly of british and canadian units . 
after the first world war montgomery commanded the 17th  -lrb-  service  -rrb-  battalion of the royal fusiliers ,  a battalion in the british army of the rhine ,  before reverting to his substantive rank of captain  -lrb-  brevet major  -rrb-  in november 1919.
after the war he became commander-in-chief of the british army of the rhine  -lrb-  baor  -rrb-  in germany and then chief of the imperial general staff  -lrb-  1946–1948 -rrb- . 
epsom had forced further german forces into caen but all through june and the first half of july rommel ,  rundstedt ,  and hitler were engaged in planning for a great offensive to drive the british into the sea; it was never launched and would have required the commitment of a large number of german forces to the caen sector . 
the great war began in august 1914 and montgomery moved to france with his battalion that month ,  which was at the time part of the 10th brigade of the 4th division . 
in the inter-war years he commanded the 17th  -lrb-  service  -rrb-  battalion ,  royal fusiliers and ,  later ,  the 1st battalion ,  royal warwickshire regiment before becoming commander of 9th infantry brigade and then general officer commanding  -lrb-  goc  -rrb-  8th infantry division . 
despite montgomery's orders to try to press on ,  fierce german counter-attacks stopped the british offensive . 
the canadian historians terry copp and robert vogel wrote about the dispute between the `` american school '' and `` british school '' after having suffered several setbacks in june 1944:
an american break-out was achieved with operation cobra and the encirclement of german forces in the falaise pocket at the cost of british losses with the diversionary operation goodwood . 
field marshal bernard law montgomery ,  1st viscount montgomery of alamein ,   -lrb-  ; 17 november 1887 – 24 march 1976 -rrb- ,  nicknamed `` monty '' and `` the spartan general '' ,  was a senior british army officer who fought in both the first world war and the second world war . 
dempsey wrote on 13 june ,  that caen could only be taken by a `` set piece assault and we did not have the men or the ammunition for that at the time '' . 
he saw action in the first world war as a junior officer of the royal warwickshire regiment . 
if the british could take the borguebus ridge ,  the way to the plains of northern france would be wide open ,  and potentially paris could be taken ,  which explains the ferocity with which the germans defended the borguebus ridge . 
the british high command were not concerned only with winning the war by defeating germany ,  but also with ensuring that they were still considered to be a serious power after the war ,  able to influence global policy . 
it was only after several failed attempts to break out in the caen sector that montgomery devised what he later called his `` master plan '' of having the 21st army group hold the bulk of the german forces ,  thus allowing the americans to break out . 
he also took part in the battle of passchendaele in late 1917 before finishing the war as chief of staff of the 47th  -lrb-  2nd london  -rrb-  division . 
bradley recognised montgomery's plan to pin down german armour and allow us forces to break out:
on his return montgomery antagonised the war office with trenchant criticisms of the command of the bef and was briefly relegated back to divisional command of 3rd division . 
in 1942, a new field commander was required in the middle east ,  where auchinleck was fulfilling both the role of commander-in-chief  -lrb-  c-in-c  -rrb-  of middle east command and commander eighth army . 
initially ,  the three british armoured divisions assigned to lead the offensive ,  the 7th ,  11th and the guards ,  made rapid progress and were soon approaching the borguebus ridge ,  which dominated the landscape south of caen by noon . 
hampered by stormy weather and the bocage terrain ,  montgomery had to ensure rommel focused on the british in the east rather than the americans in the west ,  who had to take the cotentin peninsula and brittany before the germans could be trapped by a general swing east . 
when the surprise attack on the ardennes took place on 16 december 1944, starting the battle of the bulge ,  the front of the us 12th army group was split ,  with the bulk of the us first army being on the northern shoulder of the german 'bulge' . 
as the campaign progressed ,  montgomery altered his initial plan for the invasion and continued the strategy of attracting and holding german counter-attacks in the area north of caen rather than to the south ,  to allow the us first army in the west to take cherbourg . 
he eventually reached british lines on 5 december 1943, to the delight of his stepfather ,  who sent him home to britain to recuperate . 
on 4 may 1945 he took the german surrender at lüneburg heath in northern germany . 
the american life magazine quoted bradley in 1951: with goodwood drawing the wehrmacht towards the british sector ,  the first american army enjoyed a two to one numerical superiority with general omar bradley accepting montgomery's advice to begin the offensive by concentrating at one point instead of a `` broad front '' as eisenhower would have preferred . 
britain declared war on germany on 3 september 1939.
after recovering in early 1915, he was appointed brigade major first of 112th brigade and then with 104th brigade under training in lancashire . 
boerhaave was born at voorhout near leiden . 
herman boerhaave  -lrb-   ,  31 december 1668 – 23 september 1738 -rrb- was a dutch botanist ,  chemist ,  christian humanist ,  and physician of european fame . 
in 1701 he was appointed lecturer on the institutes of medicine at leiden; in his inaugural discourse ,  `` de commendando hippocratis studio '' ,  he recommended to his pupils that great physician as their model . 
he is often hailed as the `` dutch hippocrates '' . 
as a credible chemist and physician of european ,  the human body was a very inquisitive and compelling component in agreed with other physicians of his time – like borellis – and thus he devoted a diligent focus towards this subject matter . 
