color blindness ,  also known as color vision deficiency ,  is the decreased ability to see color or differences in color . 
protanopes ,  deuteranopes ,  and tritanopes are dichromats; that is ,  they can match any color they see with some mixture of just two primary colors  -lrb-  in contrast to those with normal sight  -lrb-  trichromats  -rrb-  who can distinguish three primary colors  -rrb-  . 
some may not even be aware that their color perception is in any way different from normal . 
color blindness very rarely refers to complete monochromatism . 
the gene for red-green color blindness is transmitted from a color blind male to all his daughters ,  who are usually heterozygote carriers and are thus unaffected . 
types of color blindness and the terms used based on clinical appearance ,  color blindness may be described as total or partial . 
there is also potential for attack from within an aircraft . 
the aviation industry is very reliant on a series of complex systems which could be attacked . 
the consequences of a successful attack range from loss of confidentiality to loss of system integrity ,  air traffic control outages ,  loss of aircraft ,  and even loss of life . 
a standard part of threat modelling for any particular system is to identify what might motivate an attack on that system ,  and who might be motivated to breach it . 
for example ,  a standard computer user may be able to fool the system into giving them access to restricted data; or even to `` become root '' and have full unrestricted access to a system . 
an `` exploitable '' vulnerability is one for which at least one working attack or `` exploit '' exists . 
wifi ,  bluetooth ,  and cell phone networks on any of these devices could be used as attack vectors ,  and sensors might be remotely activated after a successful breach . 
government and military computer systems are commonly attacked by activists and foreign powers . 
in-store payment systems and atms have also been tampered with in order to gather customer account data and pins . 
in distributed generation systems ,  the risk of cyber attacks is real ,  according to `` daily energy insider '' . 
to secure a computer system ,  it is important to understand the attacks that can be made against it ,  and these threats can typically be classified into one of these categories below:
the growth in the number of computer systems ,  and the increasing reliance upon them of individuals ,  businesses ,  industries and governments means that there are an increasing number of systems at risk . 
privilege escalation describes a situation where an attacker with some level of restricted access is able to ,  without authorization ,  elevate their privileges or access level . 
all of these systems carry some security risk ,  and such issues have gained wide attention . 
denial of service attacks  -lrb-  dos  -rrb-  are designed to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users . 
such attacks can originate from the zombie computers of a botnet ,  but a range of other techniques are possible including reflection and amplification attacks ,  where innocent systems are fooled into sending traffic to the victim . 
cunningham also came out of a seven-year hiatus from making music videos to direct the video for `` sheena is a parasite '' by the horrors . 
cunningham worked for over a year on the film before leaving to pursue a career as a director . 
chris cunningham  -lrb-  born 15 october 1970 -rrb- is a british video artist . 
during this period cunningham also made another short film for warp films ,  `` spectral musicians '' ,  which remains unreleased . 
the video collection `` the work of director chris cunningham '' was released in november 2004 as part of the directors label set . 
in 2004/2005, cunningham took a sabbatical from filmmaking to learn about music production and recording and to develop his own music projects . 
in 2000, cunningham and cyberpunk author william gibson began work on the script for gibson's 1984 novel `` neuromancer '' . 
development funding was in place for cunningham to direct and co-write his first feature film for warp films ,  to whom he was at the time committed `` for all future full-length film projects . `` 
after seeing cunningham's work on the 1995 film version of `` judge dredd '' ,  stanley kubrick head-hunted cunningham to design and supervise animatronic tests of the central robot child character in his version of the film `` a . i . 
centaurs were also frequently depicted in roman art . 
the myth of the centaur appears in john updike's novel `` the centaur '' . 
contemporaneous representations of hybrid centaurs can be found in archaic greek art . 
in greek art of the archaic period ,  centaurs are depicted in three different forms . 
it is shown as a horse with the torso of a man in place of where the horse's head has to be ,  that is similar to a greek centaur . 
another tribe of centaurs was said to have lived on cyprus . 
at a later period ,  paintings on some amphoras depict winged centaurs . 
though female centaurs ,  called centaurides or centauresses ,  are not mentioned in early greek literature and art ,  they do appear occasionally in later antiquity . 
the lapith tribe of thessaly ,  who were the kinsmen of the centaurs in myth ,  were described as the inventors of horse-back riding by greek writers . 
an often-published geometric period bronze of a warrior face-to-face with a centaur is at the metropolitan museum of art . 
the centaurs were usually said to have been born of ixion and nephele  -lrb-  the cloud made in the image of hera  -rrb-  . 
unlike those of mainland greece ,  the cyprian centaurs were horned . 
these bacteria move by spinning the whole cell ,  which is shaped like a corkscrew . 
in the presence of a chemical gradient bacteria will chemotax ,  or direct their overall motion based on the gradient . 
some bacteria ,  such as `` e .  coli '' ,  have several flagella per cell  -lrb-  4–10 typically  -rrb-  . 
leukocytes also move toward chemoattractants c5a ,  a complement component ,  and pathogen-specific ligands on bacteria . 
the proteins chew and chea bind to the receptor . 
it has also been shown that both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are capable of chemotactic memory . 
these can rotate in two ways: the directions of rotation are given for an observer outside the cell looking down the flagella toward the cell . 
the mechanism of chemotaxis that eukaryotic cells employ is quite different from that in bacteria; however ,  sensing of chemical gradients is still a crucial step in the process . 
chey-p can then control flagellar rotation influencing the direction of cell motility . 
as in many instances in biology ,  there are bacteria that do not follow this rule . 
chemoattractants in eukaryotes are well characterized for immune cells . 
eukaryotic cells are much larger than prokaryotes and have receptors embedded uniformly throughout the cell membrane . 
in this way cells are able to adapt to the immediate chemoattractant concentration and detect further changes to modulate cell motility . 
the helical nature of the individual flagellar filament is critical for this movement to occur ,  and the protein that makes up the flagellar filament ,  flagellin ,  is quite similar among all flagellated bacteria . 
cheshire contains portions of two green belt areas surrounding the large conurbations of merseyside and greater manchester  -lrb-  north cheshire green belt ,  part of the north west green belt  -rrb-  and stoke-on-trent  -lrb-  south cheshire green belt ,  part of the stoke-on-trent green belt  -rrb-  ,  these were first drawn up from the 1950s . 
cheshire's county town is chester; the largest town is warrington . 
cheshire  -lrb-   ; archaically the county palatine of chester  -rrb-  is a county in north west england ,  bordering merseyside and greater manchester to the north ,  derbyshire to the east ,  staffordshire and shropshire to the south and flintshire ,  wales and wrexham county borough to the west . 
the earldom was sufficiently independent from the kingdom of england that the 13th-century magna carta did not apply to the shire of chester ,  so the earl wrote up his own chester charter at the petition of his barons . 
through the local government act 1972, which came into effect on 1 april 1974, some areas in the north became part of the metropolitan counties of greater manchester and merseyside . 
as part of the local government restructuring in april 2009, cheshire county council and the cheshire districts were abolished and replaced by two new unitary authorities ,  cheshire east and cheshire west and chester . 
black hill is now the highest point in west yorkshire . 
early brick buildings include peover hall near macclesfield  -lrb-  1585 -rrb- ,  tattenhall hall  -lrb-  pre-1622 -rrb- ,  and the pied bull hotel in chester  -lrb-  17th-century  -rrb-  . 
in 1182 the land north of the mersey became administered as part of the new county of lancashire ,  thus resolving any uncertainty about the county in which the land `` inter ripam et mersam '' was . 
some county towns are no longer situated within the administrative county . 
this was an act of the british parliament ,  originally called the british north america act 1867.
in addition to enacting the constitution act ,  1982, the canada act 1982 provides that no further british acts of parliament will apply to canada as part of its law ,  finalizing canada's legislative independence . 
the act was enacted as a schedule to the canada act 1982, a british act of parliament which was introduced at the request of a joint address to the queen by the senate and house of commons of canada . 
this was reversed by the british north america act in 1867 which established the dominion of canada . 
the composition of the constitution of canada is defined in subsection 52-lrb- 2 -rrb- of the constitution act ,  1982, as consisting of the canada act 1982  -lrb-  including the constitution act ,  1982 -rrb- ,  all acts and orders referred to in the schedule  -lrb-  including the constitution act ,  1867, formerly the british north america act ,  1867 -rrb- ,  and any amendments to these documents . 
as noted above ,  this is part i of the constitution act ,  1982.
initially ,  on 1 july 1867, there were four provinces in confederation as `` one dominion under the name of canada '': canada west  -lrb-  former upper canada ,  now ontario  -rrb-  ,  canada east  -lrb-  former lower canada ,  now quebec  -rrb-  ,  nova scotia ,  and new brunswick . 
 -lrb-  variant forms such as tunisian crochet and broomstick lace keep multiple crochet stitches open at a time .   -rrb- 
crochet  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a process of creating fabric by interlocking loops of yarn ,  thread ,  or strands of other materials using a crochet hook . 
the word crochet is derived from the old french `` crochet '' ,  a diminutive of `` croche '' ,  in turn from the germanic `` croc '' ,  both meaning `` hook '' . 
an electromagnetic coil is an electrical conductor such as a wire in the shape of a coil ,  spiral or helix . 
the wire or conductor which constitutes the coil is called the winding . 
either an electric current is passed through the wire of the coil to generate a magnetic field ,  or conversely an external `` time-varying '' magnetic field through the interior of the coil generates an emf  -lrb-  voltage  -rrb-  in the conductor . 
from 1642, charles fought the armies of the english and scottish parliaments in the english civil war . 
the long parliament proved just as difficult for charles as had the short parliament . 
by charles's death ,  there were an estimated 1,760 paintings ,  most of which were sold and dispersed by parliament . 
bolstered by the failure of the english short parliament ,  the scottish parliament declared itself capable of governing without the king's consent ,  and in august 1640 the covenanter army moved into the english county of northumberland . 
parliament controlled london ,  the south-east and east anglia ,  as well as the english navy . 
after his succession ,  charles quarrelled with the parliament of england ,  which sought to curb his royal prerogative . 
with the encouragement of his protestant advisers ,  james summoned the english parliament in 1624 so that he could request subsidies for a war . 
despite parliament's protests ,  however ,  charles refused to dismiss his friend ,  dismissing parliament instead . 
additionally in early may ,  charles assented to an unprecedented act that forbade the dissolution of the english parliament without its consent . 
the official style of charles i as king in england was `` charles ,  by the grace of god ,  king of england ,  scotland ,  france and ireland ,  defender of the faith ,  etc . `` 
the authors of his death warrant referred to him as `` charles stuart ,  king of england '' . 
in ireland ,  the population was split into three main socio-political groups: the gaelic irish ,  who were catholic; the old english ,  who were descended from medieval normans and were also predominantly catholic; and the new english ,  who were protestant settlers from england and scotland aligned with the english parliament and the covenanters . 
charles assented to the petition on 7 june ,  but by the end of the month he had prorogued parliament and re-asserted his right to collect customs duties without authorisation from parliament . 
charles suspected ,  probably correctly ,  that some members of the english parliament had colluded with the invading scots . 
his attempts to force the church of scotland to adopt high anglican practices led to the bishops' wars ,  strengthened the position of the english and scottish parliaments ,  and helped precipitate his own downfall . 
when armed conflict arose between the gaelic irish and new english ,  in late october 1641, the old english sided with the gaelic irish while simultaneously professing their loyalty to the king . 
by 1624, james was growing ill ,  and as a result was finding it difficult to control parliament . 
in january 1629, charles opened the second session of the english parliament ,  which had been prorogued in june 1628, with a moderate speech on the tonnage and poundage issue . 
in scotland ,  the scottish arms were placed in the first and fourth quarters with the english and french arms in the second quarter . 
parliament was reinstated ,  and the monarchy was restored to charles i's eldest son ,  charles ii ,  in 1660.
rather than direct involvement in the european land war ,  the english parliament preferred a relatively inexpensive naval attack on spanish colonies in the new world ,  hoping for the capture of the spanish treasure fleets . 
strafford's fall from power weakened charles's influence in ireland . 
charles was born into the house of stuart as the second son of king james vi of scotland ,  but after his father inherited the english throne in 1603, he moved to england ,  where he spent much of the rest of his life . 
only parliament ,  however ,  could legally raise taxes ,  and without it charles's capacity to acquire funds for his treasury was limited to his customary rights and prerogatives . 
archbishop william laud ,  who was beheaded by parliament during the war ,  described charles as `` a mild and gracious prince who knew not how to be ,  or how to be made ,  great . `` 
charles i  -lrb-  19 november 1600 – 30 january 1649 -rrb- was the monarch over the three kingdoms of england ,  scotland ,  and ireland from 27 march 1625 until his execution in 1649.
fifty-nine of the commissioners signed charles's death warrant . 
buckingham's failure to protect the huguenots – and his retreat from saint-martin-de-ré – spurred louis xiii's siege of la rochelle and furthered the english parliament's and people's detestation of the duke . 
when rumours reached charles that parliament intended to impeach his wife for supposedly conspiring with the irish rebels ,  the king decided to take drastic action . 
shortly after the prorogation ,  without the means in the foreseeable future to raise funds from parliament for a european war ,  or the influence of buckingham ,  charles made peace with france and spain . 
the game is now being sold again in brazil . 
 ''counter-strike '' is a first-person shooter game in which players join either the terrorist team ,  the counter-terrorist team ,  or become spectators . 
once the round has ended ,  surviving players retain their equipment for use in the next round; players who were killed begin the next round with the basic default starting equipment . 
the game also spawned multiple spin-offs in the form of arcade games developed by nexon corporation and targeted primarily at asian gaming markets . 
following the success of the first `` counter-strike '' ,  valve went on to make multiple sequels to the game . 
all players have only one life by default and start with a pistol as well as a knife . 
counter-strike  -lrb-  also known as half-life: counter-strike  -rrb-  is a first-person shooter video game developed by valve corporation . 
during the period pissarro exhibited his works ,  art critic armand silvestre had called pissarro the `` most real and most naive member '' of the impressionist group . 
joachim pissarro states that pissarro thereby became the `` only artist who went from impressionism to neo-impressionism '' . 
pissarro is the only artist to have shown his work at all eight paris impressionist exhibitions ,  from 1874 to 1886.
during his lifetime ,  camille pissarro sold few of his paintings . 
this difference in style created disagreements between pissarro and corot . 
as joachim pissarro points out ,  `` once such a die-hard impressionist as pissarro had turned his back on impressionism ,  it was apparent that impressionism had no chance of surviving  .  .  . `` 
so it was that pissarro approached old age with an increased mastery . `` 
in 1906, a few years after pissarro's death ,  cézanne ,  then 67 and a role model for the new generation of artists ,  paid pissarro a debt of gratitude by having himself listed in an exhibition catalogue as `` paul cézanne ,  pupil of pissarro '' . 
in later years ,  cézanne also recalled this period and referred to pissarro as `` the first impressionist '' . 
camille's son lucien was an impressionist and neo-impressionist painter as were his second and third sons georges henri manzana pissarro and félix pissarro . 
pissarro later explained the technique of painting outdoors to a student:
jacob abraham camille pissarro was born on 10 july 1830 on the island of st .  thomas to frederick and rachel manzano de pissarro . 
his impressionist contemporaries ,  however ,  continued to view his independence as a `` mark of integrity '' ,  and they turned to him for advice ,  referring to him as `` père pissarro ''  -lrb-  father pissarro  -rrb-  . 
however ,  this period also marked the end of the impressionist period due to pissarro's leaving the movement . 
degas described pissarro's subjects as `` peasants working to make a living '' . 
cassatt had befriended degas and pissarro years earlier when she joined pissarro's newly formed french impressionist group and gave up opportunities to exhibit in the united states . 
as a part of the group ,  pissarro was comforted from knowing he was not alone ,  and that others similarly struggled with their art . 
pissarro met the paris art dealer paul durand-ruel ,  in london ,  who became the dealer who helped sell his art for most of his life . 
but the change also added to pissarro's continual financial hardship which he felt until his 60s . 
according to pissarro's son ,  lucien ,  his father painted regularly with cézanne beginning in 1872.
rhythm abnormalities can also be visualized as in slow heart rate bradycardia ,  or fast heart rate tachycardia . 
the diagnostic tests in cardiology are methods of identifying heart conditions associated with healthy vs .  unhealthy ,  pathologic heart function . 
the electrophysiology study or ep study is the end all of electrophysiological tests of the heart . 
 ''auscultation '' employs a stethoscope to more easily hear various normal and abnormal sounds ,  such as normal heart beat sounds and the usual heart beat sound changes associated with breathing versus heart murmurs . 
collodi was born in florence on 24 november 1826.
this is the text where lorenzini started using the collodi pseudonym ,  which was taken from his mother's hometown . 
during the italian wars of independence in 1848 and 1860 collodi served as a volunteer with the tuscan army . 
due to point  ,  0 and 1 are constructible numbers . 
as an example ,  the midpoint of constructed segment is a constructible point . 
let and be two given distinct points in the euclidean plane . 
a point in the euclidean plane is a constructible point if it is either endpoint of the given unit segment ,  or the point of intersection of two lines determined by previously obtained constructible points ,  or the intersection of such a line and a circle having a previously obtained constructible point as a center passing through another constructible point ,  or the intersection of two such circles . 
the carson river flows from douglas county through the southwestern edge of carson city . 
carson city is an independent city in and the capital of the us state of nevada ,  named after the mountain man kit carson . 
by 1851 the eagle station ranch along the carson river was a trading post and stopover for travelers on the california trail's carson branch which ran through eagle valley . 
when nevada became a state in 1864 during the american civil war ,  carson city was confirmed as nevada's permanent capital . 
carson city's population and transportation traffic decreased when the central pacific railroad built a line through donner pass ,  too far to the north to benefit carson city . 
clark kent has also been depicted without the superman alter ego . 
when crises arise ,  clark quickly changes into superman . 
superman's secret identity as clark kent is one of the dc universe's greatest secrets . 
there is debate as to which of the two identities  -lrb-  superman or clark kent  -rrb-  is the real person and which is the façade . 
the relationship between superman and kent came to actual physical blows in `` superman iii '' . 
lana lang on the other hand knows of clark's identity as superman but seems more interested in clark because she knew him as that first . 
in the pre-crisis superman comic book ,  clark appears in occasional back-up stories called `` the private life of clark kent '' ,  wherein he solves problems subtly as clark without changing into superman . 
henry cavill reprises his role as clark kent in the film ``  '' . 
in 1978, the first of four superman films was made in which clark kent and superman were portrayed by christopher reeve  -lrb-  with teenage kent played by jeff east in the first film  -rrb-  . 
various explanations over the decades have been offered for why people have never suspected superman and clark kent of being one and the same:
clark and lex remain entangled for most of the series . 
he is raised as the adoptive son of jonathan and martha kent ,  who name him clark . 
with the battle over ,  clark resumes his double life . 
clark kent's character is given one of its heaviest emphases in the 1990s series ``  '' . 
in the 1940s superman shorts ,  clark is shown to have a wisecracking sense of humor and he and lois are good friends . 
lois' affection for superman and her rejection of clark's clumsy advances have been a recurring theme in superman comics ,  as well as in movies and on television . 
cavill once again returns as clark in `` justice league '' . 
clayton `` bud '' collyer voiced both clark kent and superman ,  until michael fitzmaurice replaced him in the final episodes . 
further films in the series continued this tradition ,  with clark blurring into superman ,  changing at super-speed while he runs . 
in `` superman ii '' reeve's superman has to sacrifice his powers  -lrb-  effectively becoming just clark kent  -rrb-  in order to have a love relationship with lois lane ,  a choice he eventually abrogates to protect the world . 
in season eight of `` smallville '' ,  clark kent begins to work as a reporter at the `` daily planet '' . 
clark kent starts out best friends with lex luthor ,  whom he meets after saving the latter's life . 
the feature was later shown in the `` superman family '' title . 
clark kent ,  on the other hand ,  has no idea what he is going to do with his life while bewildered by his powers ,  and his uncertainty as to why he was sent to earth . 
all groups not of small 2 rank can be split into two major classes: groups of component type and groups of characteristic 2 type . 
 -lrb-  for groups of low 2-rank the proof of this breaks down ,  because theorems such as the signalizer functor theorem only work for groups with elementary abelian subgroups of rank at least 3.  -rrb- 
these correspond roughly to groups of lie type of ranks 1 or 2 over fields of characteristic 2.
groups of rank at least 3 are further subdivided into 3 classes by the trichotomy theorem ,  proved by aschbacher for rank 3 and by gorenstein and lyons for rank at least 4.
the general higher rank case consists mostly of the groups of lie type over fields of characteristic 2 of rank at least 3 or 4.
the rank 1 groups are the thin groups ,  classified by aschbacher ,  and the rank 2 ones are the notorious quasithin groups ,  classified by aschbacher and smith . 
their classification is divided into the small and large rank cases ,  where the rank is the largest rank of an odd abelian subgroup normalizing a nontrivial 2-subgroup ,  which is often  -lrb-  but not always  -rrb-  the same as the rank of a cartan subalgebra when the group is a group of lie type in characteristic 2.
in 1881, john evans recognized that use of copper often preceded the use of bronze ,  and distinguished between a `` transitional copper age '' and the `` bronze age proper '' . 
the transition from the european copper age to bronze age europe occurs about the same time ,  between the late 5th and the late 3rd millennia bc . 
in the chalcolithic period ,  copper predominated in metalworking technology . 
the copper age in the ancient near east began in the late 5th millennium bc and lasted for about a millennium before it gave rise to the early bronze age . 
the term `` chalcolithic '' is also applied to american civilizations that already used copper and copper alloys thousands of years before the european migration . 
in the region of the aïr mountains in niger ,  we have the development of independent copper smelting between 3000 and 2500 bc . 
laws banning circumcision are also ancient . 
the tasmania law reform institute released its recommendations for reform of tasmanian law relative to male circumcision on 21 august 2012.
the report makes fourteen recommendations for reform of tasmanian law relative to male circumcision . 
in 2009, the tasmanian law reform institute released its issues paper investigating the law relating to male circumcision in tasmania ,  it `` highlights the uncertainty in relation to whether doctors can legally perform circumcision on infant males '' . 
before glasnost ,  according to an article in the jewish press ,  jewish ritual circumcision was forbidden in the ussr . 
the hebrew bible commands jews to circumcise their male children on the eighth day of life ,  and to circumcise their male slaves  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
called to common mission  -lrb-  ccm  -rrb-  is an agreement between the episcopal church  -lrb-  ecusa  -rrb-  and the evangelical lutheran church in america  -lrb-  elca  -rrb-  in the united states ,  establishing full communion between them . 
context menus are opened via various forms of user interaction that target a region of the gui that supports context menus . 
from a technical point of view ,  such a context menu is a graphical control element . 
this view ,  however ,  did not preclude a belief that god has a relationship with other peoples—rather ,  judaism held that god had entered into a covenant with all humankind ,  and that jews and non-jews alike have a relationship with god . 
in judaism ,  `` chosenness '' is the belief that the jews ,  via descent from the ancient israelites ,  are the chosen people ,  i . e . 
chaparral  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a shrubland or heathland plant community found primarily in the us state of california and in the northern portion of the baja california peninsula ,  mexico . 
some of the indicator plants of the california chaparral and woodlands ecoregion include:
in central and southern california chaparral forms a dominant habitat . 
extreme clippers were built in the period 1845 to 1855.
during the time from 1859 british clipper ships continued to be built . 
from 1851 or earlier another type of clipper ship was also being built in american shipyards ,  the medium clipper . 
the first ships to which the term `` clipper '' seems to have been applied were the baltimore clippers . 
clipper ships largely ceased being built in american shipyards in 1859 when ,  unlike the earlier boom years ,  only 4 clipper ships were built . 
among the most notable clippers were the china clippers ,  also called tea clippers or opium clippers ,  designed to ply the trade routes between europe and the east indies . 
smaller clipper vessels also continued to be built predominantly for the china opium trade and known as `` opium clippers '' such as the 1842-built `` ariel '' ,  100 tons om . 
after 1854 extreme clippers were replaced in american shipbuilding yards by medium clippers . 
dutch clippers were built beginning in the 1850s for the tea trade and passenger service to java . 
clippers were built for seasonal trades such as tea ,  where an early cargo was more valuable ,  or for passenger routes . 
then followed the vast clipper trade of tea ,  opium ,  spices and other goods from the far east to europe ,  and the ships became known as `` tea clippers '' . 
 ''ann mckim '' is generally known as the original clipper ship . 
anderson also presents `` the guessing game  -lrb-  radio  -rrb- ``  on bbc radio scotland . 
anderson has also appeared on bbc radio 5 live's `` fighting talk '' . 
anderson hosted his own chat-show ,  `` clive anderson talks back '' ,  on channel 4, which ran for 10 series . 
anderson presents legal show `` unreliable evidence '' on radio 4.
in 2009, anderson was the television host of the bbc's `` last night of the proms '' . 
the most famous cold fusion claims were made by stanley pons and martin fleischmann in 1989.
on 30 april 1989 cold fusion was declared dead by the `` new york times '' . 
cold fusion is a hypothesized type of nuclear reaction that would occur at ,  or near ,  room temperature . 
there is currently no accepted theoretical model that would allow cold fusion to occur . 
the term `` cold fusion '' was used as early as 1956 in a `` new york times '' article about luis alvarez's work on muon-catalyzed fusion . 
on 1 may 1989 the american physical society held a session on cold fusion in baltimore ,  including many reports of experiments that failed to produce evidence of cold fusion . 
for the next six weeks ,  competing claims ,  counterclaims ,  and suggested explanations kept what was referred to as `` cold fusion '' or `` fusion confusion '' in the news . 
the `` times '' called it a circus the same day ,  and the `` boston herald '' attacked cold fusion the following day . 
coal tar is produced through thermal destruction  -lrb-  pyrolysis  -rrb-  of coal . 
coal tar is a thick dark liquid which is a by-product of the production of coke and coal gas from coal . 
coal tar may be used in two forms: crude coal tar  -lrb-    -rrb-  or a coal tar solution  -lrb-    -rrb-  also known as liquor carbonis detergens  -lrb-  lcd  -rrb-  . 
coal tar was a component of the first sealed roads . 
coal tar contains approximately 10,000 chemicals ,  of which only about 50% have been identified . 
coal tar is used in medicated shampoo ,  soap and ointment . 
coal tar causes increased sensitivity to sunlight ,  so skin treated with topical coal tar preparations should be protected from sunlight . 
being flammable ,  coal tar is sometimes used for heating or to fire boilers . 
various phenolic coal tar derivatives have analgesic  -lrb-  pain-killer  -rrb-  properties . 
according to the fda ,  coal tar concentrations between 0.5% and 5% are considered safe and effective for psoriasis . 
the great schism of the west led catherine of siena to go to rome with the pope . 
she accompanied the chaplain of the dominicans to the pope in avignon ,  as ambassador of florence ,  then at war against the pope . 
she is declared a saint and a doctor of the church . 
in late november 1378, with the outbreak of the western schism ,  the new pope ,  urban vi ,  summoned her to rome . 
she is behind the return of the pope from avignon to rome ,  and then carried out many missions entrusted by the pope ,  something quite rare for a woman in the middle ages . 
raymond began writing what is known as the `` legenda major '' ,  his `` life '' of catherine ,  in 1384, and completed it in 1395.
on 4 october 1970, she was proclaimed a doctor of the church by pope paul vi ,  and on 1 october 1999, pope john paul ii named her as one of the six patron saints of europe ,  together with benedict of nursia ,  saints cyril and methodius ,  bridget of sweden and edith stein . 
since 18 june 1939, catherine of siena has been one of the two patron saints of italy ,  together with francis of assisi . 
saint catherine of siena  -lrb-  25 march 1347 – 29 april 1380 -rrb- was a tertiary of the dominican order ,  a scholastic philosopher ,  and theologian who had a great influence on the catholic church . 
born in siena ,  she grew up there and wanted very soon to devote herself to god ,  against the will of her parents . 
catherine is said by her confessor and biographer raymond of capua o . p . 
lyell's most important specific work was in the field of stratigraphy . 
lyell's wife died in 1873, and two years later  -lrb-  in 1875 -rrb- lyell himself died as he was revising the twelfth edition of `` principles '' . 
before the work of lyell ,  phenomena such as earthquakes were understood by the destruction that they brought . 
describing the importance of uniformitarianism on contemporary geology ,  lyell wrote , 
lyell had private means ,  and earned further income as an author . 
 ''principles of geology '' ,  lyell's first book ,  was also his most famous ,  most influential ,  and most important . 
although lyell did not publicly accept evolution  -lrb-  descent with modification  -rrb-  at the time of writing the `` principles '' ,  after the darwin–wallace papers and the `` origin '' lyell wrote in his notebook:
whewell subsequently questioned this topic ,  and in march 1837 lyell told him:
by the time darwin returned from the `` beagle '' survey expedition in 1836, he had begun to doubt lyell's ideas about the permanence of species . 
lyell's work on volcanoes focused largely on vesuvius and etna ,  both of which he had earlier studied . 
darwin's daughter henrietta  -lrb-  etty  -rrb-  wrote to her father: `` is it fair that lyell always calls your theory a modification of lamarck's ? `` 
lyell ,  a devout christian ,  had great difficulty reconciling his beliefs with natural selection . 
lyell's data on stratigraphy were important because darwin thought that populations of an organism changed slowly ,  requiring `` geological time '' . 
chelsea football club were founded by gus mears in 1905.
chelsea are among the most widely supported football clubs in the world . 
the late 1970s through to the '80s was a turbulent period for chelsea . 
chelsea's first shirt sponsor was gulf air ,  agreed during the 1983–84 season . 
this was the first chelsea crest to appear on the shirts ,  in the early 1960s . 
previously ,  the kit was manufactured by umbro  -lrb-  1975–81 -rrb- ,  le coq sportif  -lrb-  1981–86 -rrb- ,  the chelsea collection  -lrb-  1986–87 -rrb- ,  umbro  -lrb-  1987–2006 -rrb- ,  and adidas  -lrb-  2006–2017 -rrb- . 
in the same survey ,  `` chelsea '' was the top answer to the question `` which other english club do you dislike the most ? `` 
most football clubs were founded first ,  and then sought grounds in which to play ,  but chelsea were founded for stamford bridge . 
john terry ,  former captain of the chelsea men's team ,  is the president of chelsea women . 
chelsea have long-standing rivalries with north london clubs arsenal and tottenham hotspur . 
in may 2007, chelsea were the first team to win the fa cup at the new wembley stadium ,  having also been the last to win it at the old wembley . 
with 103 caps  -lrb-  101 while at the club  -rrb-  ,  frank lampard of england is chelsea's most capped international player . 
chelsea's official twitter account has 9.8 million followers  . 
chelsea ,  along with arsenal ,  were the first club to play with shirt numbers ,  on 25 august 1928 in their match against swansea town . 
chelsea's biggest winning scoreline in a competitive match is 13–0, achieved against jeunesse hautcharage in the cup winners' cup in 1971.
in terms of club value ,  chelsea are the seventh most valuable football club in the world ,  worth £1.54 billion  -lrb-  $2.06 billion  -rrb-  ,  and are the eighth highest-earning football club in the world ,  with earnings of over €428 million in the 2017–18 season . 
the club have rivalries with neighbouring clubs fulham ,  arsenal ,  and tottenham hotspur . 
chelsea's kit has been manufactured by nike since july 2017.
no candu 9 reactors have been built . 
by most measures ,  the candu is `` the ontario reactor '' . 
only india operates a candu system that is not based on the candu 6 design . 
in some candu reactors the tritium is periodically extracted . 
the basic operation of the candu design is similar to other nuclear reactors . 
candu's first success was the sale of early candu designs to india . 
the candu was therefore designed to use natural uranium . 
as was the case for the development of the pickering design into the candu 6, the bruce design was also developed into the similar candu 9.
today there are 31 candu reactors in use around the world ,  and 13 `` candu-derivatives '' in india ,  developed from the candu design . 
aecl had been working on a design known as the acr-700, using elements of the latest versions of the candu 6 and candu 9, with a design power of 700 mw . 
an effort to rationalize the larger units in a fashion similar to candu 6 led to the candu 9.
the candu ,  for canada deuterium uranium ,  is a canadian pressurized heavy-water reactor design used to generate electric power . 
many of the operational design changes were also applied to the existing candu 6 to produce the enhanced candu 6.
tritium emissions from other candu plants are similarly low . 
tritium is generated in the fuel of all reactors; candu reactors generate tritium also in their coolant and moderator ,  due to neutron capture in heavy hydrogen . 
candu designs have a positive void coefficient ,  as well as a small power coefficient ,  normally considered bad in reactor design . 
in january 1975, a deal was announced for a single candu 6 reactor to be built in south korea ,  now known as the wolsong-1 power reactor . 
as is the case with earlier candu designs ,  the acr-1000 also offers online refuelling . 
in parallel with the classic candu design ,  experimental variants were being developed . 
most commercial reactor designs use normal water as the moderator . 
although all candu plants to date have used open-cycle cooling ,  modern candu designs are capable of using cooling towers instead . 
acr-1000 is the next-generation  -lrb-  officially ,  `` generation iii+ ''  -rrb-  candu technology ,  which makes some significant modifications to the existing candu design . 
even better than lwrs ,  candu can utilize a mix of uranium and plutonium oxides  -lrb-  mox fuel  -rrb-  ,  the plutonium either from dismantled nuclear weapons or reprocessed reactor fuel . 
candu energy is continuing marketing efforts in china . 
a licensing agreement with romania was signed in 1977, selling the candu 6 design for $5 million per reactor for the first four reactors ,  and then $2 million each for the next twelve . 
where the candu design differs is in the details of the fissile core and the primary cooling loop . 
the candu includes a number of active and passive safety features in its design . 
a series of improvements to the basic pickering design led to the candu 6 design ,  which first went into operation in the early 1980s . 
the second candu was the douglas point reactor ,  a more powerful version rated at roughly 200 mw and located near kincardine ,  ontario . 
based on the projected capital costs ,  and the low cost of fuel and in-service maintenance ,  in 1994 power from candu was predicted to be well under 5 cents/kwh . 
the asteroid 2275 cuitláhuac is also named after this ruler . 
the modern mexican municipality of cuitláhuac ,  veracruz and the mexico city metro station metro cuitláhuac are named in honor of cuitláhuac . 
these include ciudad cuauhtémoc in chihuahua and the cuauhtémoc borough of the mexican federal district ,  as well as ciudad cuauhtémoc ,  in the state of veracruz . 
the mexican football player cuauhtémoc blanco was also named after him . 
many places in mexico are named in honour of cuauhtémoc . 
tlacotzin ,  cuauhtémoc's `` cihuacoatl '' ,  was appointed his successor as `` tlatoani '' . 
there is a cuauhtémoc station on line 1 of the mexico city metro as well as one for moctezuma . 
cuauhtémoc is also one of the few non-spanish given names for mexican boys that is perennially popular . 
cuauhtémoc  -lrb-   ,  also known as cuauhtemotzín ,  guatimozín or guatémoc; c .  1495 -rrb- was the aztec ruler  -lrb-  `` tlatoani ''  -rrb-  of tenochtitlan from 1520 to 1521, making him the last aztec emperor . 
cuauhtémoc took power in 1520 as successor of cuitláhuac and was a cousin of the late emperor moctezuma ii . 
cross sections are typically denoted  -lrb-  sigma  -rrb-  and measured in units of area . 
thus ,  specifying the cross section for a given reaction is a proxy for stating the probability that a given scattering process will occur . 
christian mythology is the body of myths associated with christianity . 
christian tradition contains many stories that do not come from canonical christian texts yet still illustrate christian themes . 
over the centuries ,  christianity has divided into many denominations . 
christian theologian and professor of new testament ,  rudolf bultmann wrote that:
where local law distinguishes corporations by the ability to issue stock ,  corporations allowed to do so are referred to as `` stock corporations '' ,  ownership of the corporation is through stock ,  and owners of stock are referred to as `` stockholders '' or `` shareholders '' . 
 -lrb-  the principle that shareholders are liable to the corporation had been introduced in the joint stock companies act 1844 -rrb- . 
then ,  in 1843, william gladstone became the chairman of a parliamentary committee on joint stock companies ,  which led to the joint stock companies act 1844, regarded as the first modern piece of company law . 
new jersey was the first state to adopt an `` enabling '' corporate law ,  with the goal of attracting more business to the state ,  in 1896.
in the united states ,  forming a corporation usually required an act of legislation until the late 19th century . 
in american english ,  the word `` company '' can include entities such as partnerships that would not be referred to as companies in british english as they are not a separate legal entity . 
a corporation is an organization ,  usually a group of people or a company ,  authorized to act as a single entity  -lrb-  legally a person  -rrb-  and recognized as such in law . 
the 1855 act allowed limited liability to companies of more than 25 members  -lrb-  shareholders  -rrb-  . 
these two features – a simple registration procedure and limited liability – were subsequently codified into the landmark 1856 joint stock companies act . 
corporations come in many different types but are usually divided by the law of the jurisdiction where they are chartered into two kinds: by whether they can issue stock or not ,  or by whether they are formed to make a profit or not . 
it may also be required to designate an agent or other legal representative of the corporation . 
in the late 18th century ,  stewart kyd ,  the author of the first treatise on corporate law in english ,  defined a corporation as:
in medieval times ,  traders would do business through common law constructs ,  such as partnerships . 
in england ,  the government created corporations under a royal charter or an act of parliament with the grant of a monopoly over a specified territory . 
limited liability for insurance companies was allowed by the companies act 1862.
corporations chartered in regions where they are distinguished by whether they are allowed to be for profit or not are referred to as `` for profit '' and `` not-for-profit '' corporations ,  respectively . 
the channel f electronics were designed by jerry lawson using the fairchild f8 cpu ,  the first public outing of this processor . 
the fairchild channel f ,  f for fun ,  is a home video game console released by fairchild semiconductor in november 1976 across north america at the retail price of $169.95.
by 1977, the fairchild channel f had sold 250,000 units ,  trailing behind sales of the vcs . 
all worked for wilf corigan ,  head of fairchild semiconductor ,  a division of fairchild camera & instrument . 
ascending order of numbers differs from alphabetical order ,  e . g . 
when an order has been defined in this way ,  a `` sorting algorithm '' can be used to put a list of any number of items into that order . 
sometimes ,  it is desired to order text with embedded numbers using proper numerical order . 
certain limitations ,  complications ,  and special conventions may apply when alphabetical order is used:
collation is the assembly of written information into a standard order . 
to decide which of two strings comes first in alphabetical order ,  initially their first letters are compared . 
in some contexts ,  numbers and letters are used not so much as a basis for establishing an ordering ,  but as a means of labeling items that are already ordered . 
 -lrb-  the system is not limited to alphabets in the strict technical sense; languages that use a syllabary or abugida ,  for example cherokee ,  can use the same ordering principle provided there is a set ordering for the symbols used .   -rrb- 
the simplest kind of automated collation is based on the numerical codes of the symbols in a character set ,  such as ascii coding  -lrb-  or any of its supersets such as unicode  -rrb-  ,  with the symbols being ordered in increasing numerical order of their codes ,  and this ordering being extended to strings in accordance with the basic principles of alphabetical ordering  -lrb-  mathematically speaking ,  lexicographical ordering  -rrb-  . 
in several languages the rules have changed over time ,  and so older dictionaries may use a different order than modern ones . 
other advantages are that one can easily find the first or last elements on the list  -lrb-  most likely to be useful in the case of numerically sorted data  -rrb-  ,  or elements in a given range  -lrb-  useful again in the case of numerical data ,  and also with alphabetically ordered data when one may be sure of only the first few letters of the sought item or items  -rrb-  . 
clear colas were again produced during the clear craze of the early 1990s . 
in denmark ,  a popular clear cola was made by the cooperative fdb in 1976.
most modern colas contain caramel color ,  and are sweetened with sugar and/or high-fructose corn syrup . 
the capability maturity model integration  -lrb-  cmmi  -rrb-  project was formed to sort out the problem of using multiple models for software development processes ,  thus the cmmi model has superseded the cmm model ,  though the cmm model continues to be a general theoretical process capability model used in the public domain . 
the model's aim is to improve existing software development processes ,  but it can also be applied to other processes . 
watts humphrey's capability maturity model  -lrb-  cmm  -rrb-  was published in 1988 and as a book in 1989, in `` managing the software process '' . 
the cmm model's application in software development has sometimes been problematic . 
the first application of a staged maturity model to it was not by cmu/sei ,  but rather by richard l .  nolan ,  who ,  in 1973 published the stages of growth model for it organizations . 
though the model comes from the field of software development ,  it is also used as a model to aid in business processes generally ,  and has also been used extensively worldwide in government offices ,  commerce ,  and industry . 
rdx is an organic compound with the formula  -lrb-  onnch  -rrb-  . 
rdx was widely used during world war ii ,  often in explosive mixtures with tnt such as torpex ,  composition b ,  cyclotols ,  and h6.
judaism emphasizes the oneness of god and rejects the christian concept of god in human form . 
traditionally ,  both judaism and christianity believe in the god of abraham ,  isaac and jacob ,  for jews the god of the tanakh ,  for christians the god of the old testament ,  the creator of the universe . 
in both religions ,  offenses against the will of god are called sin . 
later ,  god will also judge the jews over their observance of the torah . 
judaism's purpose is to carry out what it holds to be the only covenant between god and the jewish people . 
to the contrary ,  we believe that just as only god can forgive sins against god ,  so only human beings can forgive sins against human beings . `` 
judaism also does not have a notion of hell as a place ruled by satan since god's dominion is total and satan is only one of god's angels . 
see also jewish principles of faith . 
rabbinic tradition asserts that god revealed two torahs to moses ,  one that was written down ,  and one that was transmitted orally . 
judaism's view is summed up by a biblical observation about the torah: in the beginning god clothes the naked  -lrb-  adam  -rrb-  ,  and at the end god buries the dead  -lrb-  moses  -rrb-  . 
a minority jewish view ,  which appears in some codes of jewish law ,  is that while christian worship is polytheistic  -lrb-  due to the multiplicity of the trinity  -rrb-  ,  it is permissible for them to swear in god's name ,  since they are referring to the one god . 
although judaism provides jews with a word to label god's transcendence  -lrb-  `` ein sof '' ,  without end  -rrb-  and immanence  -lrb-  `` shekhinah '' ,  in-dwelling  -rrb-  ,  these are merely human words to describe two ways of experiencing god; god is one and indivisible . 
when man loves god with a love that is fitting he automatically carries out all the precepts of love . 
both christianity and judaism believe in some form of judgment . 
the quintessential physical expression of judaism is behaving in accordance with the 613 mitzvot  -lrb-  the commandments specified in the torah  -rrb-  ,  and thus live one's life in god's ways . 
in jewish liturgy there is significant prayer and talk of a `` book of life '' that one is written into ,  indicating that god judges each person each year even after death . 
thus fundamentally in judaism ,  one is enjoined to bring holiness into life  -lrb-  with the guidance of god's laws  -rrb-  ,  rather than removing oneself from life to be holy . 
according to rabbinic judaism the torah was revealed by god to moses; within it ,  jews find 613 mitzvot  -lrb-  commandments  -rrb-  . 
a minority view in christianity ,  known as christian torah-submission ,  holds that the mosaic law as it is written is binding on all followers of god under the new covenant ,  even for gentiles ,  because it views god’s commands as `` everlasting ''  -lrb-   ,  ;  ,  ;   -rrb-  and `` good ''  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  . 
in judaism ,  heaven is sometimes described as a place where god debates talmudic law with the angels ,  and where jews spend eternity studying the written and oral torah . 
judaism holds instead that proper living is accomplished through good works and heartfelt prayer ,  as well as a strong faith in god . 
many jews view christians as having quite an ambivalent view of the torah ,  or mosaic law: on one hand christians speak of it as god's absolute word ,  but on the other ,  they apply its commandments with a certain selectivity . 
christians believe in individual salvation from sin through receiving jesus christ as their god and savior through faith . 
machiavelli's use of borgia is subject to controversy . 
there was evidence that the bones belonged to borgia . 
cesare was also father to at least 11 illegitimate children ,  among them girolamo borgia ,  who married isabella contessa di carpi ,  and lucrezia borgia  -lrb-  the younger  -rrb-  ,  who ,  after cesare's death ,  was moved to ferrara to the court of her aunt ,  the elder lucrezia borgia . 
the new pope ,  pope pius iii ,  supported cesare borgia and reconfirmed him as gonfaloniere; but after a brief pontificate of twenty-six days ,  he died . 
borgia was left lying naked ,  with just a red tile covering his genitals . 
borgia was originally buried in a marbled mausoleum john iii had ordered built at the altar of the church of santa maría in viana ,  set on one of the stops on the camino de santiago . 
cesare borgia's remains then were sent to viana's town hall ,  directly across from santa maría ,  where they remained until 1953.
vicente blasco ibáñez ,  in `` a los pies de venus '' ,  writes that the then bishop of santa maría had borgia expelled from the church because his own father had died after being imprisoned under alexander vi . 
cesare borgia briefly employed leonardo da vinci as military architect and engineer between 1502 and 1503.
like many aspects of cesare borgia's life ,  the date of his birth is a subject of dispute . 
chronicles are the predecessors of modern `` time lines '' rather than analytical histories . 
in modern times various contemporary newspapers or other periodicals have adopted `` chronicle '' as part of their name . 
a chronicle  -lrb-   ,  from greek `` chroniká '' ,  from  ,  `` chrónos '' – `` time ''  -rrb-  is a historical account of facts and events arranged in chronological order ,  as in a time line . 
because of the immediacy of the information ,  historians tend to value live chronicles ,  such as annals ,  over dead ones . 
concentrations are often called levels ,  reflecting the mental schema of levels on the vertical axis of a graph ,  which can be high or low  -lrb-  for example ,  `` high serum levels of bilirubin '' are concentrations of bilirubin in the blood serum that are greater than normal  -rrb-  . 
lavin worked at caffe lena in saratoga ,  new york ,  until dave van ronk convinced her to move to new york city and make a career as a singer-songwriter . 
christine lavin  -lrb-  born january 2, 1952 -rrb- is a new york city-based singer-songwriter and promoter of contemporary folk music . 
the cutter expansive classification system is a library classification system devised by charles ammi cutter . 
one of the features adopted by other systems ,  including library of congress ,  is the cutter number . 
so to make the three digit cutter number for `` cutter '' ,  you would start with `` c '' ,  then looking under `` other consonants '' ,  find that `` u '' gives the number 8, and under `` additional letters '' ,  `` t '' is 8, giving a cutter number of `` c88 '' . 
although cutter numbers are mostly used for coding the names of authors ,  the system can be used for titles ,  subjects ,  geographic areas ,  and more . 
cutter produced the best classification of the nineteenth century . 
cutter completed and published an introduction and schedules for the first six classifications of his new system  -lrb-  `` expansive classification: part i: the first six classifications ''  -rrb-  ,  but his work on the seventh was interrupted by his death in 1903.
the first classification is meant for only the very small libraries . 
initial letters qa–qt are assigned q2–q29, while entries beginning with numerals have a cutter number a12–a19, therefore sorting before the first a entry . 
a warrant was issued for the arrest of karaca by the government of turkey . 
karaca and dervişan sang poetic and progressive songs . 
after some time ,  the turkish government decided to strip cem karaca of his turkish citizenship ,  keeping the arrest warrant active . 
with these bands ,  he brought a new understanding and interpretation to turkish rock . 
2001 -rrb- whom flockhart adopted at birth . 
calista kay flockhart  -lrb-  born november 11, 1964 -rrb- is an american actress . 
flockhart debuted on broadway in 1994, as laura in `` the glass menagerie '' . 
this had been flockhart's first acting role in three years ,  after her hiatus when `` brothers & sisters '' ended . 
from 2004 to 2014, flockhart served as the national spokesperson for peace over violence . 
calista kay flockhart was born in freeport ,  illinois ,  the daughter of kay calista ,  an english teacher ,  and ronald flockhart ,  a kraft foods executive . 
throughout her professional career ,  flockhart has maintained her lean figure . 
as such ,  it is a particular kind of integral transform:
in mathematics  -lrb-  in particular ,  functional analysis  -rrb-  convolution is a mathematical operation on two functions  -lrb-   and   -rrb-  to produce a third function that expresses how the shape of one is modified by the other . 
the fabric was originally from the city of calicut in southwestern india . 
calico originated in calicut ,   -lrb-  from which the name of the textile came  -rrb-  in southwestern india  -lrb-  in present-day kerala  -rrb-  during the 11th century . 
when a small increment of heat is gained by a calorimetric body ,  with small increments ,  formula_5 of its volume ,  and formula_6 of its temperature ,  the increment of heat ,  formula_7, gained by the body of calorimetric material ,  is given by
it involves heating the sample at a controlled rate and recording the heat flow either into or from the specimen . 
the thermal response of the calorimetric material is fully described by its pressure formula_1 as the value of its constitutive function formula_2 of just the volume formula_3 and the temperature formula_4.
he was also the 36th governor of new york ,  the republican presidential nominee in the 1916 presidential election ,  and the 44th united states secretary of state . 
he passed the new york bar exam in 1884 with the highest score ever awarded by the state . 
taft and roosevelt endured a bitter split during taft's presidency ,  and roosevelt challenged taft for the 1912 republican presidential nomination . 
seeking a strong candidate to defeat newspaper mogul william randolph hearst in the 1906 new york gubernatorial election ,  president theodore roosevelt convinced new york republican leaders to nominate hughes for governor . 
born to a welsh immigrant preacher and his wife in glens falls ,  new york ,  hughes pursued a legal career in new york city . 
hughes's success made him a popular public figure in new york ,  and he was appointed counsel to the armstrong insurance commission ,  which investigated the major life insurance companies headquartered in new york . 
wilson ultimately prevailed after winning the state of california by fewer than 4,000 votes . 
in september 1874, he enrolled in new york city's prestigious public school 35, graduating the following year . 
responding to newspaper stories run by the `` new york world '' ,  governor frank w .  higgins appointed a legislative committee to investigate the state's public utilities in 1905.
hughes's major initiative in office was naval disarmament ,  as he sought to prevent a naval arms race among the three great naval powers of britain ,  japan ,  and the united states . 
the republican ticket won in a landslide ,  taking 61 percent of the popular vote . 
he also joined the board of brown university and served on a special committee that recommended revisions to new york's code of civil procedure . 
there is no clear definition of what constitutes a `` concept album '' . 
other records have been claimed as `` early '' or `` first '' concept albums . 
a concept album is an album in which its tracks hold a larger purpose or meaning collectively than they do individually . 
 ''popular consensus '' for the first rock concept album ,  according to allmusic ,  favours `` sgt . 
author bill martin relates the assumed concept albums of the 1960s to progressive rock:
some clavichords have been built with a single pair of strings for each note . 
while clavichords were typically single manual instruments ,  they could be stacked ,  one clavichord on top of another ,  to provide multiple keyboards . 
in england ,  the composer herbert howells  -lrb-  1892–1983 -rrb- wrote two significant collections of pieces for clavichord  -lrb-  `` lambert's clavichord '' and `` howells' clavichord ''  -rrb-  ,  and stephen dodgson  -lrb-  1924–2013 -rrb- wrote two clavichord suites . 
the clavichord was invented in the early fourteenth century . 
the clavichord has also gained attention in other genres of music ,  in the form of the clavinet ,  which is essentially an electric clavichord that uses a magnetic pickup to produce a signal for amplification . 
in the clavichord ,  strings run transversely from the hitchpin rail at the left-hand end to tuning pegs on the right . 
the clavichord is a european stringed rectangular keyboard instrument that was used largely in the late middle ages ,  through the renaissance ,  baroque and classical eras . 
