a continuous function with a continuous inverse function is called a homeomorphism . 
a real function ,  that is a function from real numbers to real numbers can be represented by a graph in the cartesian plane; such a function is continuous if ,  roughly speaking ,  the graph is a single unbroken curve whose domain is the entire real line . 
there are several different definitions of continuity of a function . 
in vector calculus ,  the curl is a vector operator that describes the infinitesimal rotation of a vector field in three-dimensional euclidean space . 
the curl of a vector field  ,  denoted by  ,  or  ,  or  ,  at a point is defined in terms of its projection onto various lines through the point . 
unlike the gradient and divergence ,  curl does not generalize as simply to other dimensions; some generalizations are possible ,  but only in three dimensions is the geometrically defined curl of a vector field again a vector field . 
gauss had six children . 
gauss was a child prodigy . 
gauss eventually had conflicts with his sons . 
the year 1796 was more productive for both gauss and number theory . 
carl gauss was an ardent perfectionist and a hard worker . 
it appears that gauss already knew the class number formula in 1801.
on 9 october 1805, gauss married johanna osthoff  -lrb-  1780–1809 -rrb- ,  and had a son and a daughter with her . 
though he did take in a few students ,  gauss was known to dislike teaching . 
gauss was a lutheran protestant ,  a member of the st .  albans evangelical lutheran church in göttingen . 
gauss supported the monarchy and opposed napoleon ,  whom he saw as an outgrowth of revolution . 
on the way home from riemann's lecture ,  weber reported that gauss was full of praise and excitement . 
some businesses use cornish names . 
the first cornish language crèche opened in 2010.
the cornish language has influenced the toponomy of cornwall ,  and has historically been used in surnames for the cornish people . 
this act of tyranny was at once gross barbarity to the cornish people ,  and a death blow to the cornish language . `` 
the phonology of modern cornish is based on a number of sources . 
in the 1980s ,  in response to dissatisfaction with unified cornish ,  ken george published a new system ,   -lrb-  `` common cornish ''  -rrb-  . 
it includes music in cornish as well as interviews and features . 
in 1904, the celtic language scholar and cornish cultural activist henry jenner published `` a handbook of the cornish language '' . 
the institute of cornish studies at the university of exeter is working with the cornish language partnership to study the cornish language revival of the 20th century ,  including the growth in number of speakers . 
though estimations of the number of cornish speakers vary ,  the speakers of cornish today are thought to be around five hundred . 
cornish television shows have included a 1982 series by westward television each episode containing a three-minute lesson in cornish . 
the cornish electronic musician aphex twin has used cornish names for track titles ,  most notably on his `` drukqs '' album . 
cornish names are adopted for children ,  pets ,  houses and boats . 
at this time there was still little difference between welsh and cornish ,  and even fewer differences between cornish and breton ,  with some scholars arguing that the terms `` old cornish '' and `` old breton '' are merely geographical terms for the same language . 
unesco has said that a previous classification of `` extinct '' ,  which came under fierce criticism from cornish speakers ,  `` does not reflect the current situation for cornish '' . 
the cornish language partnership promotes and develops the language in cornwall . 
speakers of cornish reside primarily in cornwall ,  which has a population of 563,600  -lrb-  2017 estimate  -rrb-  . 
an gannas is a monthly magazine published entirely in the cornish language . 
as in other celtic languages ,  cornish lacks a number of verbs that are commonly found in other languages . 
cornish has significantly and durably affected cornwall's place-names ,  as well as in cornish surnames ,  and knowledge of the language helps the understanding of these ancient meanings . 
the cornish language continued to flourish well through the middle cornish period  -lrb-  1200–1600 -rrb- ,  reaching a peak of about 39,000 speakers in the 13th century ,  after which the number started to decline . 
in 1981, the breton library ' edited '  -lrb-  passion of our lord  -rrb-  ,  a 15th-century cornish poem . 
a governmental policymaking structure called new public management  -lrb-  npm  -rrb-  has helped the cornish language by managing public life of the cornish language and people . 
the sea monster charybdis was believed to live under a small rock on one side of a narrow channel . 
she lingered on a rock with scylla facing her directly on another rock ,  making a strait . 
charybdis  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: χάρυβδις ,   ,  `` kharubdis ''  -rrb-  was a sea monster in the greek mythology ,  which was later rationalized as a whirlpool and considered a shipping hazard in the strait of messina . 
the oxidation state of carbon in carbon monoxide is +2 in each of these structures . 
too much carbon monoxide causes carbon monoxide poisoning . 
some microbes can convert carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide to yield energy . 
the bond length between the carbon atom and the oxygen atom is 112.8 pm . 
in bacteria ,  carbon monoxide is produced via the reduction of carbon dioxide by the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase ,  an fe-ni-s-containing protein . 
cooa is a carbon monoxide sensor protein . 
the molecule is therefore asymmetric: oxygen has more electron density than carbon ,  and is also slightly positively charged compared to carbon being negative . 
in the free carbon monoxide ,  a net negative charge δ remains at the carbon end and the molecule has a small dipole moment of 0.122 d . 
in coordination complexes the carbon monoxide ligand is called carbonyl . 
in the atmosphere of venus carbon monoxide occurs as a result of the photodissociation of carbon dioxide by electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths shorter than 169 nm . 
carbon monoxide occurs in various natural and artificial environments . 
the four color theorem was proven in 1976 by kenneth appel and wolfgang haken . 
a number of false proofs and false counterexamples have appeared since the first statement of the four color theorem in 1852.
when a conjecture has been proven ,  it is no longer a conjecture but a theorem . 
many important theorems were once conjectures ,  such as the geometrization theorem  -lrb-  which resolved the poincaré conjecture  -rrb-  ,  fermat's last theorem ,  and others . 
in mathematics ,  the four color theorem ,  or the four color map theorem ,  states that ,  given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions ,  producing a figure called a `` map '' ,  no more than four colors are required to color the regions of the map so that no two adjacent regions have the same color . 
these are called `` conditional proofs '': the conjectures assumed appear in the hypotheses of the theorem ,  for the time being . 
this theorem was first conjectured by pierre de fermat in 1637 in the margin of a copy of `` arithmetica '' where he claimed he had a proof that was too large to fit in the margin . 
it is among the most notable theorems in the history of mathematics and prior to its proof it was in the `` guinness book of world records '' for `` most difficult mathematical problems '' . 
the riemann hypothesis implies results about the distribution of prime numbers . 
sometimes the number of cases is quite large ,  in which situation a brute-force proof may require as a practical matter the use of a computer algorithm to check all the cases: the validity of the 1976 and 1997 brute-force proofs of the four color theorem by computer was initially doubted ,  but was eventually confirmed in 2005 by theorem-proving software . 
several teams of mathematicians have verified that perelman's proof is correct . 
christoph ludwig agricola was born on 5 november 1667 at regensburg in germany . 
he was born and died at regensburg  -lrb-  ratisbon  -rrb-  . 
claudius  -lrb-  ; ; 1 august 10 bc – 13 october ad 54   -rrb-  was roman emperor from 41 to 54.
after the death of tiberius ,  the new emperor caligula  -lrb-  the son of claudius' brother germanicus  -rrb-  recognized claudius to be of some use . 
this led to further resentment and suggestions that these same freedmen were ruling the emperor . 
the construction also had the effect of reducing flooding in rome . 
his 13-year reign  -lrb-  slightly longer than nero's  -rrb-  would not be surpassed by any successors until that of domitian ,  who reigned for 15 years . 
annual games were also held in honour of his accession ,  and took place at the praetorian camp where claudius had first been proclaimed emperor . 
claudius also restored and adorned many public venues in rome . 
the freedmen could also officially speak for the emperor ,  as when narcissus addressed the troops in claudius' stead before the conquest of britain . 
his mother ,  antonia ,  may have had two other children who died young . 
claudius also settled disputes in the provinces . 
tourette syndrome has also been considered a possibility . 
claudius was hardly the first emperor to use freedmen to help with the day-to-day running of the empire . 
since the new emperor was no more generous than the old ,  claudius gave up hope of public office and retired to a scholarly ,  private life . 
claudius may have previously looked to adopt one of his sons-in-law to protect his own reign . 
he also put the imperial provinces of macedonia and achaea back under senate control . 
in any case ,  claudius accepted agrippina and later adopted the newly mature nero as his son . 
agrippina was one of the few remaining descendants of augustus ,  and her son lucius domitius ahenobarbus  -lrb-  the future emperor nero  -rrb-  was one of the last males of the imperial family . 
claudius embarked on many public works throughout his reign ,  both in the capital and in the provinces . 
agrippina had motive in ensuring the succession of nero before britannicus could gain power . 
through his brother germanicus ,  claudius was an uncle of caligula and a great-uncle of nero . 
several coup attempts were made during claudius' reign ,  resulting in the deaths of many senators . 
sources disagree as to whether or not she divorced the emperor first ,  and whether the intention was to usurp the throne . 
claudius' will had been changed shortly before his death to either recommend nero and britannicus jointly or perhaps just britannicus ,  who would have been considered an adult man according to roman law only a few months later . 
nero was more popular with the general public as the grandson of germanicus and the direct descendant of augustus . 
during his reign the empire began the conquest of britain  -lrb-  if the earlier invasions of britain by caesar and caligula's aborted attempts are not counted  -rrb-  . 
numerous edicts were issued throughout claudius' reign . 
however ,  as this was also the period during which the power and terror of the commander of the praetorian guard ,  sejanus ,  was at its peak ,  claudius chose to downplay this possibility . 
claudius wrote copiously throughout his life . 
similarly ,  any freedmen found to be laying false claim to membership of the roman equestrian order were sold back into slavery . 
claudius also presented naval battles to mark the attempted draining of the fucine lake ,  as well as many other public games and shows . 
under claudius ,  the empire underwent its first major expansion since the reign of augustus . 
since claudius was the first emperor proclaimed on the initiative of the praetorian guard instead of the senate ,  his repute suffered at the hands of commentators  -lrb-  such as seneca  -rrb-  . 
he left after 16 days ,  but remained in the provinces for some time . 
the minimum age for jurors was also raised to 25 in order to ensure a more experienced jury pool . 
a son ,  first named tiberius claudius germanicus ,  and later known as britannicus ,  was born just after claudius' accession . 
the cantor ternary set formula_1 is created by iteratively deleting the `` open '' middle third from a set of line segments . 
in mathematics ,  the cantor set is a set of points lying on a single line segment that has a number of remarkable and deep properties . 
a set `` y '' is at least as big as a set `` x '' if there is an injective mapping from the elements of `` x '' to the elements of `` y '' . 
a set `` x '' is dedekind-infinite if there exists a proper subset `` y '' of `` x '' with | ''x ''| = | ''y ''| ,  and dedekind-finite if such a subset doesn't exist . 
the axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that given two sets `` x '' and `` y '' ,  either | ''x ''| ≤ | ''y ''| or | ''y ''| ≤ | ''x ''| . 
if `` x '' and `` y '' are disjoint ,  addition is given by the union of `` x '' and `` y '' . 
formally ,  assuming the axiom of choice ,  the cardinality of a set `` x '' is the least ordinal number α such that there is a bijection between `` x '' and α . 
if the two sets are not already disjoint ,  then they can be replaced by disjoint sets of the same cardinality ,  e . g .  ,  replace `` x '' by `` x ''×{0} and `` y '' by `` y ''×{1} . 
he called the cardinal numbers of these infinite sets transfinite cardinal numbers . 
it is also possible for a proper subset of an infinite set to have the same cardinality as the original set ,  something that cannot happen with proper subsets of finite sets . 
the `` transfinite '' cardinal numbers describe the sizes of infinite sets . 
this motivates the definition of an infinite set being any set which has a proper subset of the same cardinality; in this case {2,3,4. .  . } is a proper subset of {1,2,3. .  . } . 
alternatively ,  the cardinality of a set formula_2 may be denoted by formula_6, formula_2, formula_8, or formula_9.
assuming ac ,  the cardinalities of the infinite sets are denoted for each ordinal formula_11, formula_12 is the least cardinal number greater than formula_13.
one of cantor's most important results was that the cardinality of the continuum  -lrb-  formula_24 -rrb- is greater than that of the natural numbers  -lrb-  formula_14 -rrb-; that is ,  there are more real numbers r than whole numbers n .  namely ,  cantor showed that formula_26  -lrb-  see beth one  -rrb-  satisfies:
in mathematics ,  the cardinality of a set is a measure of the `` number of elements of the set '' . 
the smallest infinite cardinality is that of the natural numbers  -lrb-  formula_14 -rrb- . 
cantor also showed that sets with cardinality strictly greater than formula_15 exist  -lrb-  see his generalized diagonal argument and theorem  -rrb-  . 
this film would be his last . 
demille plays himself in the film . 
after five years and thirty hit films ,  demille became the american film industry's most successful director . 
a number of his films featured scenes in two-color technicolor . 
in 1954, demille began his last film ,  the production for which he is best remembered ,  `` the ten commandments '' . 
he was also the first recipient of the golden globe cecil b .  demille award ,  which was later named in his honor . 
in 1954, he was seeking approval for a lavish remake of his 1923 silent film `` the ten commandments '' . 
the first few years of the lasky company  -lrb-  soon to become famous players-lasky  -rrb-  were spent in making films nonstop ,  literally writing the language of film . 
he went on to receive his first nomination for the academy award for best director for his circus drama `` the greatest show on earth ''  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- ,  which won both the academy award for best picture and the golden globe award for best motion picture – drama . 
demille was one of the first directors to become a celebrity in his own right . 
demille also was planning a film about the space race as well as another biblical epic about the book of revelation . 
the immense popularity of demille's silent films enabled him to branch out into other areas . 
despite a cast led by charlton heston and yul brynner ,  the 1958 film `` the buccaneer '' was a disappointment . 
demille was respected by his peers ,  yet his individual films were sometimes criticized . 
he also popularized the camera crane . 
most chinese regard hui halal food as cleaner than food made by non muslims so their restaurants are popular in china . 
at the same time ,  ducks ,  geese ,  and shrimp are rare in comparison to southern china due to the arid climate of northern china . 
due to the large muslim population in western china ,  many chinese restaurants cater to ,  or are run by ,  muslims . 
cuisine of chinese muslims  -lrb-   ,  dungan: чыңжән цаы or  ,  dungan: ҳуэйзў цаы  -rrb-  is the cuisine of the hui  -lrb-  ethnic chinese muslims  -rrb-  and other muslims living in china such as dongxiang ,  salar ,  uyghurs ,  and bonan as well as dungans of central asia . 
in most major eastern cities in china ,  there are very limited islamic/halal restaurants ,  which are typically run by migrants from western china  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  uyghurs  -rrb-  . 
 ''siu laap '' also includes dishes such as:
and the booming of huazhou sugar water stores prove it . 
the majority of siu laap is white meat . 
salt and pepper dishes are one of the few spicy dishes . 
all cantonese-style cooked meats ,  including siu mei ,  lou mei and preserved meat can be classified as siu laap  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
there are a small number of deep-fried dishes in cantonese cuisine ,  which can often be found as street food . 
unlike most other cantonese dishes ,  `` siu mei '' solely consists of meat ,  with no vegetables . 
little pot rice  -lrb-    -rrb-  are dishes cooked and served in a flat-bottomed pot  -lrb-  as opposed to a round-bottomed wok  -rrb-  . 
teochew cuisine is well known for its seafood and vegetarian dishes . 
there is a notable feast in teochew cuisine called ``  ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
there is a teochew chinese association in paris called l'amicale des teochews en france . 
teochew chefs often use a special stock called superior broth  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
if so ,  then no np-complete problem can be in co-np and no co-np-complete problem can be in np . 
the proof that no co-np-complete problem can be in np if np ≠ co-np is symmetrical . 
p ,  the class of polynomial time solvable problems ,  is a subset of both np and co-np . 
in 1966, yeager was inducted into the international air & space hall of fame . 
yeager airport in charleston ,  west virginia ,  is named in his honor . 
yeager was foremost a fighter pilot and held several squadron and wing commands . 
yeager and victoria reside in penn valley ,  california ,  the location of the general chuck yeager foundation ,  which supports programs that `` teach the ideals by which general yeager has lived . `` 
yeager went on to break many other speed and altitude records . 
he is the cousin of former baseball catcher steve yeager . 
after the war ,  yeager became a test pilot of many types of aircraft ,  including experimental rocket-powered aircraft . 
yeager demonstrated outstanding flying skills and combat leadership . 
for this achievement ,  yeager was awarded the distinguished service medal  -lrb-  dsm  -rrb-  in 1954.
yeager made a cameo appearance in the movie `` the right stuff ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- . 
 ''chuck yeager's advanced flight trainer '' was electronic art's top selling game for 1987.
yeager remained in the air force after the war ,  becoming a test pilot at muroc army air field  -lrb-  now edwards air force base  -rrb-  ,  following graduation from air materiel command flight performance school  -lrb-  class 46c  -rrb-  . 
yeager is an honorary board member of the humanitarian organization wings of hope . 
on  ,  1969, yeager was promoted to brigadier general and was assigned in july as the vice-commander of the seventeenth air force . 
yeager's career began in world war ii as a private in the united states army air forces . 
from 1971 to 1973, at the behest of ambassador joe farland ,  yeager was assigned to pakistan to advise the pakistan air force . 
the aromatic vegetables green bell pepper  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  onion ,  and celery are called the holy trinity by cajun chefs in cajun and louisiana creole cuisines . 
blackening was actually an invention by chef paul prudhomme in the 1970s ,  becoming associated with cajun cooking ,  and presented as such by him ,  but is not a true historical or traditional cajun cooking process . 
however ,  there are fewer and fewer people cooking the classic cajun dishes that would have been eaten by the original settlers . 
the main airport for the rhine-ruhr region is düsseldorf airport . 
cologne also has one of the oldest and largest jewish communities in germany . 
cologne was designated as one of the fortresses of the german confederation . 
it is the largest city in the central franconian and ripuarian dialect areas . 
the cologne carnival is one of the largest street festivals in europe . 
the airport is also the main hub of the airline germanwings . 
in 2014 it ranked 36th out of 39 german cities with a population greater than 200,000.
this has led to the common joke of kölsch being the only language one can drink . 
the largest three kölsch breweries are reissdorf ,  gaffel ,  and früh . 
located in the rhine-ruhr area ,  cologne is one of the warmest cities in germany . 
the inner city of cologne was completely destroyed during world war ii . 
cologne was home to the 211th infantry regiment and the 26th artillery regiment . 
the allies dropped 44,923.2 tons of bombs on the city during world war ii ,  destroying 61% of its built up area . 
cologne's largest daily newspaper is the `` kölner stadt-anzeiger '' . 
cologne's international airport is cologne/bonn airport  -lrb-  cgn  -rrb-  . 
 ''häfen und güterverkehr köln ''  -lrb-  ports and goods traffic cologne ,  hgk  -rrb-  is one of the largest operators of inland ports in germany . 
kölsch is one of the very few city dialects in germany ,  besides for example ,  the dialect spoken in berlin . 
during the 19th and 20th centuries ,  cologne absorbed numerous surrounding towns ,  and by world war i had already grown to 700,000 inhabitants . 
cologne's location on the river rhine placed it at the intersection of the major trade routes between east and west as well as the main western europe trade route ,  south – north northern italy-flanders . 
these conflicts alienated the catholic population from berlin and contributed to a deeply felt anti-prussian resentment ,  which was still significant after world war ii ,  when the former mayor of cologne ,  konrad adenauer ,  became the first west german chancellor . 
as the largest city in the rhine-ruhr metropolitan region ,  cologne benefits from a large market structure . 
the second was the permanent improvement of the diverse traffic infrastructure ,  which made cologne one of the most easily accessible metropolitan areas in central europe . 
during world war ii ,  cologne was a military area command headquarters  -lrb-  `` militärbereichshauptkommandoquartier ''  -rrb-  for the military district  -lrb-  `` wehrkreis ''  -rrb-  vi of münster . 
in 1815 at the congress of vienna ,  cologne was made part of the kingdom of prussia ,  first in the jülich-cleves-berg province and then the rhine province . 
compared to other german cities ,  cologne has a traffic layout that is not very bicycle-friendly . 
galerie karsten greve ,  one of the leading galleries for postwar and contemporary art . 
despite cologne's status as the largest city in the region ,  nearby düsseldorf was chosen as the political capital of the federated state of north rhine-westphalia . 
several bridges cross the rhine in cologne . 
düsseldorf is also linked by s-bahn trains ,  which are operated by deutsche bahn . 
colognian or kölsch  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  natively `` kölsch platt ''  -rrb-  is a small set of very closely related dialects ,  or variants ,  of the ripuarian central german group of languages . 
maternus ,  who was elected as bishop in 313, was the first known bishop of cologne . 
many buddhist restaurants also serve vegetarian ,  vegan ,  non-alcoholic or allium-free dishes . 
still ,  both mahayana and theravada buddhists consider that one may practice vegetarianism as part of cultivating bodhisattvas's paramita . 
while monks and a minority of believers are vegetarian year-round ,  many believers follow the buddhist vegetarian diet for celebrations . 
most of the dishes considered to be uniquely buddhist are vegetarian ,  but opinions and restrictions on the eating of meat ,  and whether it should be prohibited ,  vary among sects . 
alcohol and other drugs are also avoided by many buddhists because of their effects on the mind and `` mindfulness '' . 
buddhist vegetarian chefs have become extremely creative in imitating meat using prepared wheat gluten ,  also known as seitan ,  kao fu  -lrb-  烤麸  -rrb-  or wheat meat ,  soy  -lrb-  such as tofu or tempeh  -rrb-  ,  agar ,  konnyaku and other plant products . 
the monastic community in chinese buddhism ,  vietnamese buddhism and most of korean buddhism strictly adhere to vegetarianism . 
the `` codex sinaiticus '' contains a 4th-century manuscript of new testament texts . 
on february 4, the last day of his visit ,  he was shown a text which he recognized as significant — the `` codex sinaiticus '' — a greek manuscript of the complete new testament and parts of the old testament dating to the 4th century . 
the content of the `` oldest bible of the world ''  -lrb-  as it is more complete than codex alexandrinus or codex vaticanus  -rrb-  has been digitised . 
tischendorf pursued a constant course of editorial labours ,  mainly on the new testament ,  until he was broken down by overwork in 1873.
in 1850 appeared his edition of the `` codex amiatinus ''  -lrb-  in 1854 corrected  -rrb-  and of the septuagint version of the old testament  -lrb-  7th ed .  ,  1887 -rrb-; in 1852, amongst other works ,  his edition of the `` codex claromontanus '' . 
in 1862 tischendorf published the text of the codex sinaiticus for the 1000th anniversary of the russian monarchy in both an illustrious four-volume facsimile edition and in a less costly text edition ,  to enable all scholars to have access to the codex . 
a great triumph of these laborious months was the decipherment of the palimpsest `` codex ephraemi syri rescriptus '' ,  of which the new testament part was printed before he left paris ,  and the old testament in 1845.
throughout his life tischendorf sought old biblical manuscripts ,  as he saw it as his task to give theology a greek new testament which was based on the oldest possible scriptures . 
they also won in tennessee ,  the first time a republican ticket had won a southern state since reconstruction . 
the senate failed to act and so the united states did not join the world court . 
john calvin coolidge jr .   -lrb-  ; july 4, 1872 – january 5, 1933 -rrb- was an american politician and the 30th president of the united states from 1923 to 1929.
when mccall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term ,  coolidge announced his intention to run for governor . 
on june 2, 1924, coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all native americans born in the united states . 
in 1906, the local republican committee nominated coolidge for election to the state house of representatives . 
no ,  because in the 1920s ,  such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments . `` 
coolidge nominated 17 judges to the united states courts of appeals ,  and 61 judges to the united states district courts . 
many believed that the split in the republican party ,  like the one in 1912, would allow a democrat to win the presidency . 
the republican convention was held on june 10–12, 1924, in cleveland ,  ohio; coolidge was nominated on the first ballot . 
the coolidges had two sons: john  -lrb-  september 7, 1906 – may 31, 2000 -rrb- and calvin jr .   -lrb-  april 13, 1908 – july 7, 1924 -rrb- . 
at the 1920 republican national convention ,  most of the delegates were selected by state party conventions ,  not primaries . 
coolidge also wielded the veto pen as governor . 
he would be the last sitting american president to visit cuba until barack obama in 2016.
coolidge was unopposed for the republican nomination for governor of massachusetts in 1918.
coolidge appointed one justice to the supreme court of the united states ,  harlan fiske stone in 1925.
in massachusetts ,  the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state senate ,  as is the case in many other states; nevertheless ,  as lieutenant governor ,  coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as administrative inspector and was a member of the governor's council . 
just before the republican convention began ,  coolidge signed into law the revenue act of 1924, which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58% to 46% ,  as well as personal income tax rates across the board ,  increased the estate tax and bolstered it with a new gift tax . 
coolidge also signed the judiciary act of 1925 into law ,  allowing the supreme court more discretion over its workload . 
he signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same ,  while trimming $4 million from expenditures ,  thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt . 
despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician ,  coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president . 
john calvin coolidge jr .  was born in plymouth notch ,  windsor county ,  vermont ,  on july 4, 1872, the only u . s .  president to be born on independence day . 
coolidge considered the 1920 republican victory as a rejection of the wilsonian position that the united states should join the league of nations . 
the state of vermont dedicated a new visitors' center nearby to mark coolidge's 100th birthday on july 4, 1972.
although he usually acted with deliberation ,  the boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader ,  and as a strict enforcer of law and order . 
the convention has three main goals including: the conservation of biological diversity  -lrb-  or biodiversity  -rrb- ; the sustainable use of its components; and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from genetic resources . 
its objective is the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources ,  thereby contributing to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity . 
a conference for the adoption of the agreed text of the convention on biological diversity was held in nairobi ,  kenya ,  in 1992, and its conclusions were distilled in the nairobi final act . 
the convention on fishing and conservation of living resources of the high seas is an agreement that was designed to solve through international cooperation the problems involved in the conservation of living resources of the high seas ,  considering that because of the development of modern technology some of these resources are in danger of being overexploited . 
the convention on long-range transboundary air pollution ,  often abbreviated as air pollution or clrtap ,  is intended to protect the human environment against air pollution and to gradually reduce and prevent air pollution ,  including long-range transboundary air pollution . 
the aim of the convention is that parties shall endeavour to limit and ,  as far as possible ,  gradually reduce and prevent air pollution including long-range transboundary air pollution . 
results of the emep programme are published on the emep website ,  www . emep . int . 
in order to ensure that the general agreement on tariffs and trade  -lrb-  gatt  -rrb-  was not violated ,  the secretariat of gatt was consulted during the drafting process . 
91–92.
the convention bans weather warfare ,  which is the use of weather modification techniques for the purposes of inducing damage or destruction . 
following the us decision of july 1972 to renounce the use of climate modification techniques for hostile purposes ,  the 1973 resolution by the us senate calling for an international agreement `` prohibiting the use of any environmental or geophysical modification activity as a weapon of war '' ,  and an in-depth review by the department of defense of the military aspects of weather and other environmental modification techniques ,  us decided to seek agreement with the soviet union to explore the possibilities of an international agreement . 
the domain of `` f '' is the set of all inputs `` p '' on which it is defined . 
let `` p '' be the domain of a prefix-free universal computable function `` f '' . 
for `` f '' that are universal ,  such a `` p '' can generally be seen both as the concatenation of a program part and a data part ,  as a single program for the function `` f '' . 
the function `` f '' is called prefix-free if there are no two elements `` p '' ,  `` p′ '' in its domain such that `` p′ '' is a proper extension of `` p '' . 
let `` f '' be a prefix-free universal computable function . 
the function `` f '' is called universal if the following property holds: for every computable function `` f '' of a single variable there is a string `` w '' such that for all `` x '' ,  `` f '' -lrb-  `` w '' `` x ''  -rrb-  = `` f '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb- ; here `` w '' `` x '' represents the concatenation of the two strings `` w '' and `` x '' . 
the domain of any universal computable function is a computably enumerable set but never a computable set . 
they are also known as the recursive numbers or the computable reals or recursive reals . 
the computable numbers form a real closed field and can be used in the place of real numbers for many ,  but not all ,  mathematical purposes . 
an old name for direct current was `` galvanic current '' . 
an electric current is a flow of electric charge . 
if the current flows in the opposite direction ,  the variable has a negative value . 
the conventional symbol for current is  ,  which originates from the french phrase `` intensité du courant '' ,   -lrb-  current intensity  -rrb-  . 
since the current in a wire or component can flow in either direction ,  when a variable is defined to represent that current ,  the direction representing positive current must be specified ,  usually by an arrow on the circuit schematic diagram . 
the direction of `` conventional current '' is arbitrarily defined as the same direction as positive charges flow . 
a flow of positive charges gives the same electric current ,  and has the same effect in a circuit ,  as an equal flow of negative charges in the opposite direction . 
charles ancillon  -lrb-  28 july 16595 july 1715 -rrb- was a french jurist and diplomat . 
ancillon was born in metz into a distinguished family of huguenots . 
in 1953 smith suffered a coronary attack . 
for this reason ,  it has been suggested that lovecraft might as well be referred to as a member of a `` smith '' circle as smith was a member of a lovecraft one . 
in september 1935, smith's mother fanny died . 
smith wrote most of his weird fiction and cthulhu mythos stories ,  partially inspired by h .  p .  lovecraft . 
derleth published five more volumes of smith's prose and two of his verse ,  and at his death in 1971 had a large volume of smith's poems in press . 
clark ashton smith was the third member of the great triumvirate of `` weird tales '' ,  with lovecraft and robert e .  howard . 
smith having sold most of his father's tract ,  in 1957 the old house burned — the smiths believed by arson ,  others said by accident . 
joshi is working with other scholars to produce an updated bibliography of smith's work . 
most of smith's weird fiction falls into four series set variously in hyperborea ,  poseidonis ,  averoigne and zothique . 
in 1925 smith published `` sandalwood '' ,  which was partly funded by a gift of $50 from donald wandrei . 
in 1933 smith began corresponding with robert e .  howard ,  the texan creator of conan the barbarian . 
smith now reluctantly did gardening for other residents at pacific grove ,  and grew a goatee . 
squires published many letterpress editions of individual smith poems . 
a non contracting grammar  -lrb-  for which there is an equivalent formula_1 -rrb- for the language formula_14 is defined by formula_15 and formula_16, formula_17, formula_18, formula_19, formula_20, formula_21, formula_22.
with these definitions ,  a derivation for formula_23 is: formula_24.
the kuroda normal form is an actual normal form for non-contracting grammars . 
the emptiness problem for context-sensitive grammars  -lrb-  given a context-sensitive grammar `` g '' ,  is `` l '' -lrb-  `` g ''  -rrb- =∅  ?   -rrb- 
the normal form will not in general be context-sensitive ,  but will be a noncontracting grammar . 
a string `` u '' ∈  -lrb-  `` n ''∪σ  -rrb-  directly yields ,  or directly derives to ,  a string `` v '' ∈  -lrb-  `` n ''∪σ  -rrb-  ,  denoted as `` u '' ⇒ `` v '' ,  if `` u '' can be written as `` l ''α ''a ''β ''r '' ,  and `` v '' can be written as `` l ''αγβ ''r '' ,  for some production rule  -lrb-  α ''a ''β→αγβ  -rrb-  ∈ `` p '' ,  and some context strings `` l '' ,  `` r '' ∈  -lrb-  `` n ''∪σ  -rrb-  . 
the language of the grammar `` g '' is the set of all terminal symbol strings derivable from its start symbol ,  formally: `` l '' -lrb-  `` g ''  -rrb-  = { `` w '' ∈ σ: `` s '' ⇒ `` w '' } . 
a formal grammar `` g '' =  -lrb-  `` n '' ,  σ ,  `` p '' ,  `` s ''  -rrb-  ,  where `` n '' is a set of nonterminal symbols ,  σ is a set of terminal symbols ,  `` p '' is a set of production rules ,  and `` s '' is the start symbol ,  is context-sensitive if all rules in `` p '' are of the form where `` a '' ∈ `` n '' ,  α , β ∈  -lrb-  `` n ''∪σ  -rrb-  and γ ∈  -lrb-  `` n ''∪σ  -rrb-  . 
a context-sensitive grammar  -lrb-  csg  -rrb-  is a formal grammar in which the left-hand sides and right-hand sides of any production rules may be surrounded by a context of terminal and nonterminal symbols . 
indeed ,  every production of a context-free grammar is of the form `` v '' → `` w '' where `` v '' is a `` single '' nonterminal symbol ,  and `` w '' is a string of terminals and/or nonterminals; `` w '' can be empty . 
similarly: formula_5 is another context-sensitive language; the corresponding context-sensitive grammar can be easily projected starting with two context-free grammars generating sentential forms in the formats formula_6 and formula_7 and then supplementing them with a permutation production like  formula_8, a new starting symbol and standard syntactic sugar . 
and is also context-sensitive . 
the chinese room argument was introduced in searle's 1980 paper `` minds ,  brains ,  and programs '' ,  published in `` behavioral and brain sciences '' . 
according to weak ai ,  the correct simulation is a model of the mind . `` 
the centerpiece of the argument is a thought experiment known as the chinese room . 
searle calls the first position `` strong ai '' and the latter `` weak ai '' . 
specifically ,  the argument is intended to refute a position searle calls strong ai: the appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds . 
the chinese room argument holds that a program cannot give a computer a `` mind '' ,  `` understanding '' or `` consciousness '' ,  regardless of how intelligently or human-like the program may make the computer behave . 
this article is about circles in euclidean geometry ,  and ,  in particular ,  the euclidean plane ,  except where otherwise noted . 
a circle is a simple closed curve that divides the plane into two regions: an interior and an exterior . 
each cardinal takes on a titular church ,  either a church in the city of rome or one of the suburbicarian sees . 
cardinals governing a particular church retain that church . 
in 1059, the right of electing the pope was reserved to the principal clergy of rome and the bishops of the seven suburbicarian sees . 
the dean of the college of cardinals in addition to such a titular church also receives the titular bishopric of ostia ,  the primary suburbicarian see . 
though in modern times most cardinals are also bishops ,  the term `` cardinal bishop '' only refers to the cardinals who are titular bishops of one of the seven suburbicarian sees . 
the vice-dean is similarly elected by the latin church cardinal bishops from among their own number with the pope's approval and also formerly belonged by right to the second-longest-serving of the cardinal bishops . 
pope paul vi also increased the number of cardinal bishops by assigning that rank ,  in 1965, to patriarchs of the eastern catholic churches when named cardinals . 
in the 12th century the practice of appointing ecclesiastics from outside rome as cardinals began ,  with each of them assigned a church in rome as his titular church or linked with one of the suburbicarian dioceses ,  while still being incardinated in a diocese other than that of rome . 
a cardinal  -lrb-   ,  literally `` cardinal of the holy roman church ''  -rrb-  is a senior ecclesiastical leader ,  considered a prince of the church ,  and usually an ordained bishop of the catholic church . 
they often support their churches monetarily ,  and many cardinals do keep in contact with the pastoral staffs of their titular churches . 
the cantigas are preserved in four manuscripts: `` to ''  -lrb-  `` códice de toledo , ``  biblioteca nacional de españa ,  ms 10069 -rrb- ,  `` t ''  -lrb-  biblioteca de el escorial ,  ms t . i . 1 -rrb- ,  `` f ''  -lrb-  `` códice de florencia , ``  florence ,  biblioteca nazionale ,  ms b . r . 
the `` códice rico ''  -lrb-  t  -rrb-  from el escorial and the one in the biblioteca nazionale centrale of florence  -lrb-  f  -rrb-  are richly illuminated with narrative vignettes . 
the cantigas de santa maria  -lrb-  `` canticles of holy mary '';   -rrb-  ,   ,  are 420 poems with musical notation ,  written in the medieval galician-portuguese language during the reign of alfonso x of castile `` el sabio ''  -lrb-  1221–1284 -rrb- and often attributed to him . 
monteverdi's contribution to opera at this period is notable . 
during this period of his venetian residency monteverdi composed quantities of sacred music . 
monteverdi's musical direction received the attention of foreign visitors . 
at the turn of the 17th century ,  monteverdi found himself the target of musical controversy . 
the last years of monteverdi's life were much occupied with opera for the venetian stage . 
monteverdi's brother giulio cesare joined the court musicians in 1602.
there is continuing debate about how much of the extant `` l'incoronazione '' music is monteverdi's original ,  and how much is the work of others  -lrb-  there are ,  for instance ,  traces of music by francesco cavalli  -rrb-  . 
apart from the madrigal books ,  monteverdi's only published collection during this period was the volume of `` scherzi musicale '' in 1632.
much of monteverdi's output ,  including many stage works ,  has been lost . 
on the death of pallavicino in 1601 monteverdi was confirmed as the new `` maestro di capella '' . 
 ''il ritorno '' ,  says carter ,  is clearly influenced by monteverdi's earlier works . 
during his years in venice monteverdi published his sixth  -lrb-  1614 -rrb- ,  seventh  -lrb-  1619 -rrb- and eighth  -lrb-  1638 -rrb- books of madrigals . 
the modern music historian massimo ossi has placed the artusi issue in the context of monteverdi's artistic development: `` if the controversy seems to define monteverdi's historical position ,  it also seems to have been about stylistic developments that by 1600 monteverdi had already outgrown '' . 
monteverdi's first fifteen years of service in mantua are bracketed by his publications of the third book of madrigals in 1592 and the fourth and fifth books in 1603 and 1605.
monteverdi was baptised in the church of ss nazaro e celso ,  cremona ,  on 15 may 1567.
monteverdi was still not entirely free from his responsibilities for the musicians at san marco . 
monteverdi also received commissions from other italian states and from their communities in venice . 
the non-appearance of monteverdi's promised explanatory treatise may have been a deliberate ploy ,  since by 1608, by monteverdi's reckoning ,  artusi had become fully reconciled to modern trends in music ,  and the `` seconda pratica '' was by then well established; monteverdi had no need to revisit the issue . 
by this time monteverdi was in his sixties ,  and his rate of composition seems to have slowed down . 
correspondence of monteverdi in 1625 and 1626 with the mantuan courtier ercole marigliani reveals an interest in alchemy ,  which apparently monteverdi had taken up as a hobby . 
monteverdi's younger brother giulio cesare also died at this time ,  probably from the plague . 
ingegneri ,  monteverdi's first tutor ,  was a master of the `` musica reservata '' vocal style ,  which involved the use of chromatic progressions and word-painting; monteverdi's early compositions were grounded in this style . 
money worries at this time also led monteverdi to visit cremona to secure for himself a church canonry . 
a series of disturbing events troubled monteverdi's world in the period around 1630.
monteverdi's first publications also give evidence of his connections beyond cremona ,  even in his early years . 
born in cremona ,  where he undertook his first musical studies and compositions ,  monteverdi developed his career first at the court of mantua  -lrb-  c .  1590–1613 -rrb- and then until his death in the republic of venice where he was `` maestro di capella '' at the basilica of san marco . 
in his lifetime monteverdi enjoyed considerable status among musicians and the public . 
they would then start the bedstead tape motor and lamp and ,  when the tape was up to speed ,  operate the master start switch . 
a switch on the selection panel specified the `` near '' or the `` far '' tape . 
as an example: a set of runs for a message tape might initially involve two `` chi '' wheels ,  as in tutte's 1+2 algorithm . 
the design overcame the problem of synchronizing the electronics with the message tape by generating a clock signal by reading the sprocket holes of the message tape . 
the prototype ,  colossus mark 1, was shown to be working in december 1943 and was in use at bletchley park by early 1944.
the main units of the mark 2 design were as follows . 
these signals from the wheel simulators could be specified as stepping on with each new pass of the message tape or not . 
the first job in operating colossus for a new message ,  was to prepare the paper tape loop . 
the second task was `` wheel setting '' ,  which worked out the start positions of the wheels for a particular message ,  and could only be attempted once the cam patterns were known . 
the cryptanalyst would examine the printout to determine which of the putative start positions was most likely to be the correct one for the `` chi ''-1 and `` chi ''-2 wheels . 
each processor could evaluate a boolean function and count and display the number of times it yielded the specified value of `` false ''  -lrb-  0 -rrb- or `` true ''  -lrb-  1 -rrb- for each pass of the message tape . 
input to the processors came from two sources ,  the shift registers from tape reading and the thyratron rings that emulated the wheels of the tunny machine . 
the k2 switch panel had a group of switches on the left hand side to specify the algorithm . 
this was the section at bletchley park led by major ralph tester where the bulk of the decrypting work was done by manual and linguistic methods . 
a functioning rebuild of a mark 2 colossus was completed in 2008 by tony sale and some volunteers; it is on display at the national museum of computing at bletchley park . 
the canadian shield is one of the world's richest areas in terms of mineral ores . 
the canadian shield is among the oldest on earth ,  with regions dating from 2.5 to 4.2 billion years . 
the north american craton is the bedrock forming the heart of the north american continent and the canadian shield is the largest exposed part of the craton's bedrock . 
the rocks that now form the surface of the shield were once far below the earth's surface . 
the canadian shield also contains the mackenzie dike swarm ,  which is the largest dike swarm known on earth . 
the canadian shield ,  also called the laurentian plateau ,  or ``  ''  -lrb-  french  -rrb-  ,  is a large area of exposed precambrian igneous and high-grade metamorphic rocks  -lrb-  geological shield  -rrb-  that forms the ancient geological core of the north american continent  -lrb-  the north american craton or laurentia  -rrb-  . 
the canadian shield is part of an ancient continent called arctica ,  which was formed about 2.5 billion years ago during the neoarchean era . 
the largest comic book market is japan . 
comic books are reliant on their organization and appearance . 
 -lrb-  see recalled comics for more pulped ,  recalled ,  and erroneous comics .   -rrb- 
another major comic book market is france ,  where franco-belgian comics and japanese manga each represent 40% of the market ,  followed by american comics at 10% market share . 
a comic book or comicbook ,  also called comic magazine or simply comic ,  is a publication that consists of comic art in the form of sequential juxtaposed panels that represent individual scenes . 
the 1970s saw the advent of specialty comic book stores . 
modern comic books in japan developed from a mixture of these earlier comic books and of woodblock prints with western styles of drawing . 
in the 1980s ,  a resurgence of british writers and artists gained prominence in mainstream comic books ,  which was dubbed the `` british invasion '' in comic book history . 
historians generally divide the timeline of the american comic book into eras . 
in france ,  authors control the publication of most comics . 
the modern age of comic books runs from the mid-1980s to the present day . 
the rise of comic book specialty stores in the late 1970s created/paralleled a dedicated market for `` independent '' or `` alternative comics '' in the u . s . 
the term `` comic book '' derives from american comic books once being a compilation of comic strips of a humorous tone; however ,  this practice was replaced by featuring stories of all genres ,  usually not humorous in tone . 
belgian comic books originally written in dutch show the influence of the francophone `` franco-belgian '' comics ,  but have their own distinct style . 
in 2017, the comic book market size for north america was just over $1 billion with digital sales being flat ,  book stores having a 1 percent decline ,  and comic book stores having a 10 percent decline over 2016.
though a close equivalent to the american comic book ,  manga has historically held a more important place in japanese culture than comics have in american culture . 
key tasks in the creation of comic books are writing ,  drawing ,  and coloring . 
on november 13, 2007, marvel comics launched marvel digital comics unlimited ,  a subscription service allowing readers to read many comics from marvel's history online . 
the original artwork pages from comic books are also collected ,  and these are perhaps the rarest of all comic book collector's items ,  as there is only one unique page of artwork for each page that was printed and published . 
however ,  with increasing recognition of comics as an art form and the growing pop culture presence of comic book conventions ,  they are now embraced by many adults . 
a subset of a topological space `` x '' is a connected set if it is a connected space when viewed as a subspace of `` x '' . 
the nuclear lamina is composed mostly of lamin proteins . 
nuclear import depends on the importin binding its cargo in the cytoplasm and carrying it through the nuclear pore into the nucleus . 
at a certain point during the cell cycle in open mitosis ,  the cell divides to form two cells . 
towards the end of the cell cycle ,  the nuclear membrane is reformed ,  and around the same time ,  the nuclear lamina are reassembled by dephosphorylating the lamins . 
because the nuclear envelope is impermeable to large molecules ,  nuclear pores are required to regulate nuclear transport of molecules across the envelope . 
both structures serve to mediate binding to nuclear transport proteins . 
both systems provide structural support for the nuclear envelope and anchoring sites for chromosomes and nuclear pores . 
a nuclear localisation signal on the nf-κb protein allows it to be transported through the nuclear pore and into the nucleus ,  where it stimulates the transcription of the target genes . 
nuclear export is similar ,  as the exportin binds the cargo inside the nucleus in a process facilitated by rangtp ,  exits through the nuclear pore ,  and separates from its cargo in the cytoplasm . 
this process is accompanied by disassembly of the lamina on the nuclear face of the inner membrane . 
the main function of the cell nucleus is to control gene expression and mediate the replication of dna during the cell cycle . 
in cell biology ,  the nucleus  -lrb-  pl . 
the nuclear envelope acts as a barrier that prevents both dna and rna viruses from entering the nucleus . 
apoptosis is a controlled process in which the cell's structural components are destroyed ,  resulting in death of the cell . 
the nucleus is an organelle found in eukaryotic cells . 
an anucleated cell contains no nucleus and is ,  therefore ,  incapable of dividing to produce daughter cells . 
anucleated cells can also arise from flawed cell division in which one daughter lacks a nucleus and the other has two nuclei . 
a small fraction of the cell's genes are located instead in the mitochondria . 
this can result from normal development ,  as in the maturation of mammalian red blood cells ,  or from faulty cell division . 
cbs are involved in a number of different roles relating to rna processing ,  specifically small nucleolar rna  -lrb-  snorna  -rrb-  and small nuclear rna  -lrb-  snrna  -rrb-  maturation ,  and histone mrna modification . 
the main structures making up the nucleus are the nuclear envelope ,  a double membrane that encloses the entire organelle and isolates its contents from the cellular cytoplasm ,  and the nuclear matrix  -lrb-  which includes the nuclear lamina  -rrb-  ,  a network within the nucleus that adds mechanical support ,  much like the cytoskeleton ,  which supports the cell as a whole . 
tertullian is one of the first christians who affirm the date of christ's death as having a correlation with the date of his birth . 
nevertheless ,  several first christians attested december 25 as the exact date of the birth of christ . 
although the month and date of jesus' birth are unknown ,  by the early-to-mid fourth century the western christian church had fixed the date of christmas as december 25, a date that was later adopted in the east . 
in the 3rd century ,  the date of birth of jesus was the subject of great interest . 
in eastern christianity the birth of jesus was celebrated in connection with the epiphany on january 6, which date emphasized the celebration of the baptism of jesus . 
today ,  most christians celebrate on december 25 in the gregorian calendar ,  which has been adopted almost universally in the civil calendars used in countries throughout the world . 
theophilus of caesarea ,  born in the year ad 115, wrote:
a subcontraction map or subcontractor is a map `` f '' on a metric space  -lrb-  `` m '' , `` d ''  -rrb-  such that
thus ,  if  -lrb-  `` m '' , `` d ''  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  `` n '' , `` d '''  -rrb-  are two metric spaces ,  then formula_3 is a contractive mapping if there is a constant formula_4 such that for all `` x '' and `` y '' in `` m '' . 
in mathematics ,  a contraction mapping ,  or contraction or contractor ,  on a metric space ``  -lrb-  m , d  -rrb- ``  is a function `` f '' from `` m '' to itself ,  with the property that there is some nonnegative real number formula_1 such that for all `` x '' and `` y '' in `` m '' , 
a double bond between two given atoms consists of one σ and one π bond ,  and a triple bond is one σ and two π bonds . 
in three-center two-electron bonds  -lrb-  `` 3c–2e ''  -rrb-  three atoms share two electrons in bonding . 
a covalent bond ,  also called a molecular bond ,  is a chemical bond that involves the sharing of electron pairs between atoms . 
the bond between the nitrogen and each oxygen is a double bond in one structure and a single bond in the other two ,  so that the average bond order for each n–o interaction is =  . 
in the molecule  ,  the hydrogen atoms share the two electrons via covalent bonding . 
bonds with one or three electrons can be found in radical species ,  which have an odd number of electrons . 
covalent bonding that entails sharing of electrons over more than two atoms is said to be delocalized . 
covalent bonding includes many kinds of interactions ,  including σ-bonding ,  π-bonding ,  metal-to-metal bonding ,  agostic interactions ,  bent bonds ,  and three-center two-electron bonds . 
covalent bonds are also affected by the electronegativity of the connected atoms which determines the chemical polarity of the bond . 
these types of bond are only stable between atoms with similar electronegativities . 
amino acids ,  the stoichiometry of the polymerization includes co-formation of water:
the production of nylon 66, the polymerization produces two molecules of water per repeat unit:
the space foundation is based in colorado springs . 
between 1965 and 1968, the university of colorado colorado springs ,  pikes peak community college and colorado technical university were established in or near the city . 
colorado springs is a home rule municipality that is the largest city by area in colorado as well as the county seat and the most populous municipality of el paso county ,  colorado ,  united states . 
the city covers  ,  making it the most extensive municipality in colorado . 
colorado springs is one of the most active lightning strike areas in the united states . 
as of the 2010 census ,  the population of colorado springs was 416,427  -lrb-  40th most populous u . s .  city  -rrb-  ,  and the population of the colorado springs metropolitan statistical area was 645,613 in 2010  -lrb-  84th most populous msa  -rrb-  ,  and the population of the front range urban corridor in colorado was an estimated 4,166,855.
this was only one of several military presences in and around colorado springs during the war . 
it is situated on fountain creek and is located south of the colorado state capitol in denver . 
colorado springs has many features of a modern urban area ,  such as parks ,  bike trails ,  and urban open-area spaces . 
many universities grant professional certificates as an award for the completion of an educational program . 
a few universities put some of their professional certificates into a subclass they refer to as advanced professional certificates . 
professional certification ,  trade certification ,  or professional designation ,  often called simply `` certification '' or `` qualification '' ,  is a designation earned by a person to assure qualification to perform a job or task . 
certification is different from professional licensure . 
there are three general types of certification . 
carl menger  -lrb-  ; ; february 23, 1840 – february 26, 1921 -rrb- was an austrian economist and the founder of the austrian school of economics . 
in the late 1880s menger was appointed to head a commission to reform the austrian monetary system . 
menger was born in the city of neu-sandez in galicia ,  austrian empire ,  which is now nowy sącz in poland . 
menger also came up with an explanation of how money develops that is still accepted by some schools of thought today . 
in 1884 menger responded with the pamphlet `` the errors of historicism in german economics '' and launched the infamous `` methodenstreit , ``  or methodological debate ,  between the historical school and the austrian school . 
but civilization is also spread by the technical ,  material and social dominance that civilization engenders . 
 ''civilization '' can also refer to the culture of a complex society ,  not just the society itself . 
this view has recently been championed by christopher chase-dunn and other world systems theorists . 
civilization concentrates power ,  extending human control over the rest of nature ,  including over other human beings . 
in the late 1700s and early 1800s ,  during the french revolution ,  `` civilization '' was used in the singular ,  never in the plural ,  and meant the progress of humanity as a whole . 
it is possible that food surpluses and relatively large scale social organization and division of labour predates plant and animal domestication . 
the bronze age collapse was followed by the iron age around 1200 bce ,  during which a number of new civilizations emerged ,  culminating in a period from the 8th to the 3rd century bce which karl jaspers termed the axial age ,  presented as a critical transitional phase leading to classical civilization . 
another group of theorists ,  making use of systems theory ,  looks at a civilization as a complex system ,  i . e .  ,  a framework by which a group of objects can be analysed that work in concert to produce some result . 
from the days of the earliest monetarized civilizations ,  monopolistic controls of monetary systems have benefited the social and political elites . 
the notion of world history as a succession of `` civilizations '' is an entirely modern one . 
many theorists argue that the entire world has already become integrated into a single `` world system '' ,  a process known as globalization . 
compared with other societies ,  civilizations have a more complex political structure ,  namely the state . 
the earlier neolithic technology and lifestyle was established first in western asia  -lrb-  for example at göbekli tepe ,  from about 9,130 bce  -rrb-  ,  and later in the yellow river and yangtze basins in china  -lrb-  for example the pengtoushan culture from 7,500 bce  -rrb-  ,  and later spread . 
he said that the world crisis was from humanity losing the ethical idea of civilization ,  `` the sum total of all progress made by man in every sphere of action and from every point of view in so far as the progress helps towards the spiritual perfecting of individuals as the progress of all progress '' . 
spengler states civilization is the beginning of the decline of a culture as `` the most external and artificial states of which a species of developed humanity is capable '' . 
a civilization or civilisation  -lrb-  see english spelling differences  -rrb-  is any complex society characterized by urban development ,  social stratification imposed by a cultural elite ,  symbolic systems of communication  -lrb-  for example ,  writing systems  -rrb-  ,  and a perceived separation from and domination over the natural environment . 
the scope of `` civilization '' is larger than most other games . 
shelley wrote out the `` civilopedia '' entries for all the elements of the game and the game's large manual . 
in 1992 the magazine named it the overall game of the year ,  in 1993 added the game to its hall of fame ,  and in 1996 chose `` civilization '' as the best game of all time:
in 1994, meier produced a similar game titled `` colonization '' . 
another game that partially clones civilization is a public domain game called `` c-evo '' . 
after a number of acquisitions and legal actions ,  the `` civilization '' brand  -lrb-  both as a board game and video game  -rrb-  is now owned by take-two ,  and firaxis ,  under meier's oversight ,  continues to develop games in the `` civilization '' series . 
by the time the game was completed and ready for release ,  meier estimated that it had cost $170,000 in development . 
by then ,  meier was not an official employee of microprose but worked under contract where the company paid him upfront for game development ,  a large payment on delivery of the game ,  and additional royalties on each game of his sold . 
on march 12, 2007, `` the new york times '' reported on a list of the ten most important video games of all time ,  the so-called game canon ,  which included `` civilization '' . 
when previewing `` civilization '' in december 1991, `` computer gaming world '' stated that `` a new olympian in the genre of god games has truly emerged '' ,  comparing its importance to computer games to that of the wheel . 
in 2000, gamespot rated `` civilization '' as the seventh most influential video game of all time . 
sid meier's civilization is a turn-based strategy 4x video game created by sid meier and bruce shelley for microprose in 1991.
 ''civilization '' is a turn-based single- or multiplayer strategy game . 
before the game begins ,  the player chooses which historical or current civilization to play . 
among the late piano works are two books of `` préludes ''  -lrb-  1909–10, 1911–13 -rrb- ,  short pieces that depict a wide range of subjects . 
he wrote his own poems for the `` proses lyriques ''  -lrb-  1892–1893 -rrb- but ,  in the view of the musical scholar robert orledge ,  `` his literary talents were not on a par with his musical imagination '' . 
boulez also discovered debussy's music at a young age and said that it gave him his first sense of what modernity in music could mean . 
we must at all costs preserve this magic which is peculiar to music and to which music ,  by its nature ,  is of all the arts the most receptive '' . 
the suite `` pour le piano ''  -lrb-  1894–1901 -rrb- is ,  in halford's view ,  one of the first examples of the mature debussy as a composer for the piano: `` a major landmark  .  .  .  and an enlargement of the use of piano sonorities '' . 
with early influences including russian and far-eastern music ,  debussy developed his own style of harmony and orchestral colouring ,  derided – and unsuccessfully resisted – by much of the musical establishment of the day . 
debussy's orchestral works include `` prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune ''  -lrb-  1894 -rrb- ,  `` nocturnes ''  -lrb-  1897–1899 -rrb- and `` images ''  -lrb-  1905–1912 -rrb- . 
bartók first encountered debussy's music in 1907 and later said that `` debussy's great service to music was to reawaken among all musicians an awareness of harmony and its possibilities '' . 
of the later orchestral works ,  `` images ''  -lrb-  1905–1912 -rrb- is better known and more often played than `` jeux ''  -lrb-  1913 -rrb- . 
debussy opined that chopin was `` the greatest of them all ,  for through the piano he discovered everything ''; he professed his `` respectful gratitude '' for chopin's piano music . 
achille-claude debussy  -lrb-  ; 22 august 1862 – 25 march 1918 -rrb- was a french composer . 
later commentators have rated some of the late works more highly than newman and other contemporaries did ,  but much of the music for which debussy is best known is from the middle years of his career . 
with the advent of the first world war ,  debussy became ardently patriotic in his musical opinions . 
in 1912 debussy had remarked to his publisher of the opera `` ariane et barbe-bleue '' by the  -lrb-  also jewish  -rrb-  composer paul dukas ,  `` you're right ,  it is a masterpiece – but it's not a masterpiece of french music . `` 
this too made an impression on him ,  and its harmonic freedom and non-teutonic tone colours influenced his own developing musical style . 
– although he also conceded ,  `` i feel free because i have been through the mill ,  and i don't write in the fugal style because i know it . `` 
his fatal illness prevented him from completing the set ,  but those for cello and piano  -lrb-  1915 -rrb- ,  flute ,  viola and harp  -lrb-  1915 -rrb- ,  and violin and piano  -lrb-  1917 – his last completed work  -rrb-  are all concise ,  three-movement pieces ,  more diatonic in nature than some of his other late works . 
debussy finally composed four pieces that were submitted to the academy: the symphonic ode `` zuleima ''  -lrb-  based on a text by heinrich heine  -rrb- ; the orchestral piece `` printemps ''; the cantata `` la damoiselle élue ''  -lrb-  1887–1888 -rrb- ,  the first piece in which the stylistic features of his later music began to emerge; and the `` fantaisie '' for piano and orchestra ,  which was heavily based on franck's music and was eventually withdrawn by debussy . 
others have made orchestrations of some of the piano and vocal works ,  including john adams's version of four of the baudelaire songs  -lrb-  `` le livre de baudelaire '' ,  1994 -rrb- ,  robin holloway's of `` en blanc et noir ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  and colin matthews's of both books of `` préludes ''  -lrb-  2001–2006 -rrb- . 
among french predecessors ,  chabrier was an important influence on debussy  -lrb-  as he was on ravel and poulenc  -rrb- ; howat has written that chabrier's piano music such as `` sous-bois '' and `` mauresque '' in the `` pièces pittoresques '' explored new sound-worlds of which debussy made effective use 30 years later . 
during his years in rome debussy composed – not for the academy – most of his verlaine cycle ,  `` ariettes oubliées '' ,  which made little impact at the time but was successfully republished in 1903 after the composer had become well known . 
in february 1894 debussy completed the first draft of act i of his operatic version of `` pelléas et mélisande '' ,  and worked to complete the work for most of the year . 
debussy continued to compose songs ,  piano pieces and other works ,  some of which were publicly performed ,  but his music made only a modest impact ,  although his fellow composers recognised his potential by electing him to the committee of the société nationale de musique in 1893.
in his final years ,  he focused on chamber music ,  completing three of six planned sonatas for different combinations of instruments . 
