the connected lakes form the great lakes waterway . 
the great lakes are an important source of fishing . 
the surrounding region is called the great lakes region ,  which includes the great lakes megalopolis . 
lake michigan is the largest lake that is entirely within one country . 
dispersed throughout the great lakes are approximately 35,000 islands . 
the saint lawrence seaway and great lakes waterway make the great lakes accessible to ocean-going vessels . 
the erie canal connects to the great lakes at the east end of lake erie  -lrb-  at buffalo ,  new york  -rrb-  and at the south side of lake ontario  -lrb-  at oswego ,  new york  -rrb-  . 
the most well-known winter effect of the great lakes on regional weather is the `` lake effect '' in snowfall ,  which is sometimes very localized . 
this is most noticeable along lake superior's shores . 
the great lakes also have several peninsulas between them ,  including the door peninsula ,  the peninsulas of michigan ,  and the ontario peninsula . 
some of these lakes even have their own islands ,  like treasure island in lake mindemoya in manitoulin island
new york and wisconsin's jurisdictions extend into two lakes ,  and each of the remaining states into one of the lakes . 
lakes huron and michigan are sometimes considered a single lake ,  called lake michigan–huron ,  because they are one hydrological body of water connected by the straits of mackinac . 
the great lakes  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the laurentian great lakes and the great lakes of north america ,  are a series of interconnected freshwater lakes located primarily in the upper mid-east region of north america ,  on the canada–united states border ,  which connect to the atlantic ocean through the saint lawrence river . 
in graph theory ,  the girth of a graph is the length of a shortest cycle contained in the graph . 
a graph with girth four or more is triangle-free . 
the odd girth and even girth of a graph are the lengths of a shortest odd cycle and shortest even cycle respectively . 
in cases where the firearm is being handled indoors ,  up and down may not be safe directions . 
there were 47,000 unintentional firearm deaths worldwide in 2013.
a 'gun safe' or 'gun cabinet' is commonly used to physically prevent access to a firearm . 
some manufacturers ,  such as taurus ,  build locks into the firearm itself . 
jeff cooper ,  an influential figure in modern firearms training ,  formalized and popularized `` four rules '' of safe firearm handling . 
access to a functioning firearm can be prevented by keeping the firearm disassembled and the parts stored at separate locations . 
firearms may also fire unintentionally for several reasons ,  including dropping the weapon or when a firearm receives any hard mechanical shocks . 
a consequence of this rule is that any kind of playing or `` toying '' with firearms is prohibited . 
firearm malfunctions may be caused by the primer and/or powder ,  by mechanical failures ,  or by mishandling . 
the rules of gun safety follow from this mindset . 
the trigger guard and the receiver area above the trigger of a firearm presents a natural point for a handler to keep their finger out straight alongside the weapon ,  so as not to violate this rule . 
while the first rule teaches that a firearm must be assumed to be ready to fire ,  this second rule goes beyond that and says ,  `` since the firearm `` might '' fire ,  assume that it `` will '' and make sure no harm occurs when it does . `` 
many firearm accidents result from the handler mistakenly `` believing '' a firearm is emptied ,  safetied ,  or otherwise disarmed when in fact it is ready to be discharged . 
this may create situations that present dilemmas for a handler . 
therefore ,  gun safety rules apply even to guns loaded with blanks . 
 ''go down moses '' is an american negro spiritual . 
when there is no matter present ,  so that the energy–momentum tensor vanishes ,  the results are the vacuum einstein equations , 
the einstein field equations are nonlinear and very difficult to solve . 
on the left-hand side is the einstein tensor ,  a specific divergence-free combination of the ricci tensor formula_1 and the metric . 
on the right-hand side ,  `` formula_5 '' is the energy–momentum tensor . 
closely related to light deflection is the gravitational time delay  -lrb-  or shapiro delay  -rrb-  ,  the phenomenon that light signals take longer to move through a gravitational field than they would in the absence of that field . 
in particular , 
although the bending of light can also be derived by extending the universality of free fall to light ,  the angle of deflection resulting from such calculations is only half the value given by general relativity . 
some predictions of general relativity differ significantly from those of classical physics ,  especially concerning the passage of time ,  the geometry of space ,  the motion of bodies in free fall ,  and the propagation of light . 
at the base of classical mechanics is the notion that a body's motion can be described as a combination of free  -lrb-  or inertial  -rrb-  motion ,  and deviations from this free motion . 
the relation is specified by the einstein field equations ,  a system of partial differential equations . 
given the universality of free fall ,  there is no observable distinction between inertial motion and motion under the influence of the gravitational force . 
the ricci tensor itself is related to the more general riemann curvature tensor as
these equations specify how the geometry of space and time is influenced by whatever matter and radiation are present ,  and form the core of einstein's general theory of relativity . 
for weak gravitational fields and slow speed relative to the speed of light ,  the theory's predictions converge on those of newton's law of universal gravitation . 
the differences between the two become significant when dealing with speeds approaching the speed of light ,  and with high-energy phenomena . 
this and related predictions follow from the fact that light follows what is called a light-like or null geodesic—a generalization of the straight lines along which light travels in classical physics . 
genealogists use a wide variety of records in their research . 
genealogists begin their research by collecting family documents and stories . 
volunteers do record lookups or take photos in their home areas for researchers who are unable to travel . 
genealogists sometimes specialize in a particular group ,  e . g . 
genealogical research is a complex process that uses historical records and sometimes genetic analysis to demonstrate kinship . 
these forums can be used to try to find relatives ,  request record lookups ,  obtain research advice ,  and much more . 
to effectively conduct genealogical research ,  it is important to understand how the records were created ,  what information is included in them ,  and how and where to access them . 
genealogists and family historians often join family history societies ,  where novices can learn from more experienced researchers . 
the internet has become not only a major source of data for genealogists ,  but also of education and communication . 
in modern times ,  genealogy became more widespread ,  with commoners as well as nobility researching and maintaining their family trees . 
because a person's dna contains information that has been passed down relatively unchanged from early ancestors ,  analysis of dna is sometimes used for genealogical research . 
establishing descent from these was ,  and is ,  important to such groups as the daughters of the american revolution . 
some of the most notable scholarly american genealogical journals are `` the american genealogist '' ,  `` national genealogical society quarterly '' ,  `` the new england historical and genealogical register '' ,  `` the new york genealogical and biographical record '' ,  and `` the genealogist '' . 
the first president of gabon ,  elected in 1961, was léon m'ba ,  with omar bongo ondimba as his vice president . 
in 1990, the government made major changes to gabon's political system . 
gabon  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the gabonese republic  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a country on the west coast of central africa . 
gabon is divided into nine provinces ,  which are further subdivided into 50 departments . 
gabon has a bicameral legislature with a national assembly and senate . 
since its independence from france in 1960, the sovereign state of gabon has had three presidents . 
in 1910, gabon became one of the four territories of french equatorial africa ,  a federation that survived until 1959.
by the 18th century ,  a myeni speaking kingdom known as orungu formed in gabon . 
several bantu groups lived in the area that is now gabon when france officially occupied it in 1885.
bongo was re-elected president in both december 1979 and november 1986 to 7-year terms . 
omar bongo's son ,  ruling party leader ali bongo ondimba ,  was formally declared the winner after a 3-week review by the constitutional court; his inauguration took place on october 16, 2009.
there were some instances of violence following the announcement of his win ,  but gabon generally remained peaceful . 
gabon is a republic with a presidential form of government under the 1961 constitution  -lrb-  revised in 1975, rewritten in 1991, and revised in 2003 -rrb- . 
the coast became a center of the slave trade . 
gabon was settled from the 14th century by bantu peoples . 
little is known of the history of gabon prior to european contact . 
farther north on the coast ,  it is 3810 mm . 
gabon has a total of 3,261 km of international boundaries . 
the demographics of gabon is the makeup of the population of gabon . 
the biggest religion in gabon is christianity ,  with between 55–75% of the population of gabon being christian . 
registration of vital events is in gabon not complete . 
m'ba died later that year ,  and omar bongo became president . 
in march 1968, bongo declared gabon a one-party state by dissolving the bdg and establishing a new party—the gabonese democratic party . 
politics of gabon takes place in a framework of a republic whereby the president of gabon is head of state and in effect ,  also the head of government ,  since he appoints the prime minister and his cabinet . 
the president is elected by popular vote for a seven-year term . 
the parliament  -lrb-  `` parlement ''  -rrb-  has two chambers . 
the electoral regulations benefitted president bongo ,  according to the mission's report . 
gabon depended on timber and manganese until oil was discovered offshore in the early 1970s . 
gabon's oil revenues have given it a per capita gdp of more than $10,000, unusually high for the region . 
gabon's proven oil reserves were estimated at in 2015, and its proven natural gas reserves were estimated at  . 
the sogara oil refinery at port-gentil is the sole refinery in gabon ,  built in 1968 by a consortium that included total ,  shell ,  mobil ,  texaco ,  petrofina and agip . 
in 2012 gabon signed an agreement with samsung for the construction of a new refinery at port-gentil . 
telecommunications in gabon include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
as of 2004, gabon state railways totalled 814 km of standard-gauge track . 
 ''total: '' 814 km  -lrb-  gabon state railways or octra  -rrb- `` standard gauge: '' 814 km 1.435-m gauge; single track  -lrb-  1994 -rrb-
president mba promoted the initiative following a visit to tel aviv ,  israel ,  where he met female staff in its defense forces . 
gabon has been a strong proponent of regional stability ,  and gabonese armed forces played an important role in the un peacekeeping mission to the central african republic  -lrb-  minurca  -rrb-  . 
egypt's sinai peninsula borders the gaza strip and israel . 
in spite of israel's withdrawal from gaza in 2005, the hamas government in gaza considers gaza as occupied territory . 
israel captured the gaza strip from egypt in the six-day war in 1967.
the main trade partners of the gaza strip are israel and egypt . 
between 1994 and 1996, israel built the israeli gaza strip barrier to improve security in israel . 
in 2005, israel withdrew from the gaza strip under their unilateral disengagement plan . 
after the takeover ,  israel and egypt closed their border crossings with gaza . 
the gaza strip is located in the middle east  -lrb-  at   -rrb-  . 
israel destroyed gaza's only airport in 2001 and 2002, during the second intifada . 
between december 2000 and june 2001, the barrier between gaza and israel was reconstructed . 
in 2005, after the israeli withdrawal from the gaza strip ,  gaza businessmen envisaged a `` magnificent future '' . 
after the hamas takeover of the gaza strip health conditions in gaza strip faced new challenges . 
initially ,  israel imposed a 50-meter buffer zone in gaza . 
palestinians living in the gaza strip or egypt were issued all-palestine passports . 
economic output in the gaza strip declined by about one-third between 1992 and 1996.
it is simply not plausible to argue that israel exercises effective control over the gaza strip . `` 
in june 1967, during the six-day war ,  israel defense forces captured the gaza strip . 
gaza is dependent on israel for its water ,  electricity ,  telecommunications ,  and other utilities . 
any external travel from gaza requires cooperation from either egypt or israel . 
egypt moved its embassy from gaza to the west bank . 
gaza's marine gas reserves extend 32 kilometres from the gaza strip's coastline and were calculated at 35 bcm . 
israel and egypt maintain a blockade of the gaza strip ,  although israel allows in limited quantities of medical humanitarian aid . 
in total ,  between 1967 and 2005, israel established 21 settlements in gaza ,  comprising 20% of the total territory . 
the gaza strip  -lrb-  ; '   -rrb-  ,  or simply gaza ''' ,  is a self-governing palestinian territory on the eastern coast of the mediterranean sea ,  that borders egypt on the southwest for and israel on the east and north along a border . 
the international border along the philadelphi corridor between egypt and the gaza strip is long . 
israel states that it does not exercise effective control or authority over any land or institutions in the gaza strip and thus the gaza strip is no longer subject to the former military occupation . 
israeli drones routinely patrol over gaza . 
israel claims the blockade is necessary to prevent the smuggling of weapons into gaza . 
the role of private corporations in the relationship between israel and the gaza strip is an issue that has not been extensively studied . 
in gaza ,  there are hospitals and additional healthcare facilities . 
sunni muslims make up the predominant part of the palestinian population in the gaza strip . 
sunni muslims make up the predominant part of the palestinian population in the gaza strip . 
gaza and the west bank are claimed by the state of palestine . 
in 2012, there were five universities in the gaza strip and eight new schools were under construction . 
 ''the oslo agreements gave israel full control over gaza's airspace ,  but established that the palestinians could build an airport in the area .  .  . ``  and the disengagement plan states that: `` israel will hold sole control of gaza airspace and will continue to carry out military activity in the waters of the gaza strip . `` 
because of the israeli–egyptian blockade ,  the population is not free to leave or enter the gaza strip . 
before the second palestinian uprising in september 2000, around 25,000 workers from the gaza strip  -lrb-  about 2% of the population  -rrb-  worked in israel on a daily basis . 
in 2010 approximately 1.6 million palestinians lived in the gaza strip ,  almost 1.0 million of them un-registered refugees . 
mounir el-barash ,  the director of donations in gaza's health department ,  claims 30% of aid sent to gaza is used . 
after a round of tit-for-tat arrests between fatah and hamas in the gaza strip and west bank ,  the hilles clan from gaza were relocated to jericho on 4 august 2008.
i have seen a lot in my years as a journalist in gaza ,  but this is the worst it's been . `` 
gaza was part of the ottoman empire ,  before it was occupied by the united kingdom  -lrb-  1918–1948 -rrb- ,  egypt  -lrb-  1948–1967 -rrb- ,  and then israel ,  which in 1994 granted the palestinian authority in gaza limited self-governance through the oslo accords . 
likewise ,  alex stein argued in 2014 that gaza was not occupied by israel ,  and thus israel's only obligation under international law towards gaza was to minimize harm to civilians during military operations . 
the supreme court ruled that israel has not exercised effective control over the gaza strip since 2005, and accordingly ,  it was no longer occupied . 
the gaza strip places 24th out of 135 countries according to human poverty index . 
the israel defense forces left the gaza strip on 1 september 2005 as part of israel's unilateral disengagement plan and all israeli citizens were evicted from the area . 
on 25 november 2008, israel closed its cargo crossing with gaza after qassam rockets were fired into its territory . 
in november 2018, israeli justice minister ayelet shaked asserted that gaza is an independent state ,  stating that palestinians `` already have a state '' in gaza . 
after the dissolution of the all-palestine government in 1959, under the excuse of pan-arabism ,  egypt continued to occupy the gaza strip until 1967.
following the takeover of gaza by hamas ,  the territory has been subjected to a blockade ,  maintained by israel and egypt ,  with israel arguing that it is necessary to impede hamas from rearming and to restrict palestinian rocket attacks and egypt preventing gaza residents from entering egypt . 
as agreed between israel and the palestinian authority in the oslo accords ,  israel has exclusive control over the airspace . 
fighting spread in the gaza strip ,  with both factions attacking vehicles and facilities of the other side . 
the international community regards all of the palestinian territories including gaza as occupied . 
natural resources of gaza include arable land—about a third of the strip is irrigated . 
the resulting political disorder and economic stagnation led to many palestinians emigrating from the gaza strip . 
after the israeli withdrawal in 2005 the oslo accords give the palestinian authority administrative authority in the gaza strip . 
the territories of gaza and the west bank are separated from each other by israeli territory . 
georgia covers an area of  . 
the coastline of georgia is 310 km long . 
georgia is a country in the caucasus region . 
georgia is located in the mountainous south caucasus region of eurasia ,  straddling western asia and eastern europe between the black sea and the caspian sea . 
beginning in the 1980s ,  black sea pollution has greatly harmed georgia's tourist industry . 
without abkhazia and south osetia ,  the population in the regions controlled by the central government of georgia was 4,321,500 in 2005 and 4,382,100 in 2008  -lrb-  compare the 2008 figure with the cia estimate of 4,630,841 for all of georgia ,  including abkhazia and south osetia  -rrb-  . 
the population grew steadily while georgia was part of the soviet union and during the first years of independence ,  rising from less than 4 million in the 1950s to a peak of 5.5 million in 1992.
georgia also strenghtened fight against the thiefs-in-law . 
in january 2006 a new party ,  georgia's way ,  was created . 
legislative power is vested in both the government and the unicameral parliament of georgia . 
after the rose revolution georgia started looking westwards . 
77% of total number of voters supported integration of georgia into nato . 
while ,   ,  the georgian government recognizes abkhazia as autonomous within georgia ,  it does not recognize south ossetia as having any special status . 
both branches descend in unbroken ,  legitimate male line from the medieval kings of georgia down to constantine ii of georgia who died in 1505.
georgia's way has said it intends to have candidates for all the seats in georgia's upcoming local elections ,  with zourabichvili hoping to become tbilisi mayor . 
consideration of replacing georgia's republic with some form of constitutional monarchy has become part of georgian political debate since the georgian orthodox primate and other leading georgians suggested the idea in 2007.
tensions between georgia and separatist authorities in ajaria increased after the elections ,  climaxing on may 1, 2004 when abashidze responded to military maneuvers held by georgia near the region by having the three bridges connecting ajaria and the rest of georgia over the choloki river blown up . 
the economy of georgia is an emerging free market . 
since 2014, georgia is part of the european union's free trade area ,  with the eu continuing to be the country's largest trading partner ,  accounting for over a quarter of georgia's total trade turnover . 
telecommunications in georgia include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
georgia immediately began a process of re-armament after the war . 
on august 8, 2008 the georgian military conducted an operation in georgia's breakaway region south ossetia  -lrb-  see 2008 south ossetia war  -rrb-  . 
the military budget of georgia increased more than 50 times over the period from 2002  -lrb-  us$18 mln .   -rrb- 
the defense forces of georgia  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  known as the georgian armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  until december 2018, are the combined military forces of georgia ,  tasked with the defense of the nation’s independence ,  sovereignity ,  and territorial integrity . 
the new level of cooperation brings georgia onto the list of special nato partners together with sweden and four other countries . 
the eastern command and its western counterpart are two main regional operational groupings ,  respectively ,  for eastern and western georgia . 
georgia was one of the first former soviet republics to join the nato partnership for peace program in 1994 and individual partnership action plan  -lrb-  ipap  -rrb-  in 2004 and has sought to bring its military in line with the nato standards . 
georgia's location ,  nestled between the black sea ,  russia ,  and turkey ,  renders it strategically important . 
 ,  ghana had a population of 28,206,728.
the oldest university in ghana ,  the university of ghana ,  was founded in 1948.
ghana is a multiethnic country . 
the government of ghana states that the official language of ghana is english ,  and is spoken by 67.1% of the inhabiting population of ghana . 
du bois into the formation of 1960s ghana . 
ghana also produces high-quality cocoa . 
ghana has a strong relationship with the united states . 
the northernmost part of ghana is pulmakong and the southernmost part of ghana is cape three points . 
homosexual acts are prohibited by law in ghana . 
the ghana space science and technology centre  -lrb-  gsstc  -rrb-  and ghana space agency  -lrb-  ghsa  -rrb-  oversee the space exploration and space programmes of ghana . 
the ghana prisons service and the sub-division borstal institute for juveniles administers incarceration in ghana . 
ghana is classified as a middle income country . 
today ,  ghana is a regional power and regional hegemon . 
on 6 march 1957 at 12 a . m .  nkrumah declared ghana's establishment and autonomy . 
majority of secondary ,  and some basic schools of ghana have computer laboratories . 
ghana is divided into 10 administrative regions ,  sub-divided into 275 districts:
with over 95% of its children in school ,  ghana currently has one of the highest school enrollment rates in all of africa . 
 ''ghana '' means `` warrior king '' in the soninke language . 
ghana  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of ghana ,  is a country located along the gulf of guinea and atlantic ocean ,  in the subregion of west africa . 
in 2010, the population of ghana was 72.2% christian  -lrb-  24.3% pentecostal ,  18.4% protestant ,  13.1% catholic and 11.4% other  -rrb-  . 
the government of ghana has drawn up plans to nationalise ghana's entire mining industry to increase government revenues . 
the etymology of the word `` ghana '' means `` warrior king '' and was the title accorded to the kings of the medieval ghana empire in west africa ,  but the empire was further north than the modern country of ghana ,  in the region of guinea . 
the flag of ghana ,  consisting of the colours red ,  gold ,  green ,  and a black star ,  became the new flag in 1957 when gold coast gained its name ghana . 
ghana's jubilee oilfield which contains up to of sweet crude oil was discovered in 2007, among the many other offshore and inland oilfields in ghana . 
while women in ghana are given equal rights under the constitution of ghana ,  disparities in education ,  employment ,  and health for women remain prevalent . 
kwame nkrumah was the first prime minister of ghana and president of ghana and formed the convention people's party  -lrb-  cpp  -rrb-  with the motto `` self-government now '' . 
the government of ghana has drawn up plans to nationalise ghana's entire petroleum and natural gas reserves to increase government revenue . 
following the ghanaian presidential election ,  2012, john dramani mahama became president-elect and was inaugurated as the 4th president of the fourth republic of ghana and 7th president of ghana on 7 january 2013, to serve one term of office of four-year term length as president of ghana until 7 january 2017, maintaining ghana's status as a stable democracy . 
the earliest known kingdoms to emerge in modern ghana were the mole-dagbani states . 
a new constitution of ghana restoring multi-party system politics was promulgated in ghanaian presidential election ,  1992; rawlings was elected as president of ghana then ,  and again in ghanaian general election ,  1996.
kufuor was succeeded to the presidency of the republic of ghana by john atta mills of the national democratic congress  -lrb-  ndc  -rrb-  following the ghanaian presidential election ,  2008. and john atta mills was inaugurated as the third president of the fourth republic of ghana and eleventh president of ghana on 7 january 2009, prior to john atta mills being succeeded as president of ghana by then vice-president of ghana john dramani mahama on 24 july 2012.
as a result of the ghanaian presidential election ,  2016, nana akufo-addo became president-elect and was inaugurated as the 5th president of the fourth republic of ghana and 8th president of ghana on 7 january 2017, to serve one term of office of four-year term length as president of ghana ,  until 7 january 2021.
the first permanent state in the territory of present-day ghana dates back to the 11th century . 
the government of ghana is elected by universal suffrage after every four years . 
ghana is a unitary presidential constitutional democracy with a parliamentary multi-party system . 
the northernmost part of ghana is pulmakong and the southernmost part of ghana is cape three points near axim . 
the volta basin takes up most of south-central ghana and ghana's highest point is mount afadja which is and is found in the akwapim-togo ranges . 
ghana is a country in africa ,  along the gulf of guinea ,  just a few degrees north of the equator . 
the demography of ghana describes the condition and overview of ghana's population . 
ghana has to of petroleum in reserves . 
53.6% of ghana's workforce were employed in agriculture in 2013.
ghana's national budget was the equivalent of 39.8% of gdp in 2013.
value-added tax is a consumption tax administered in ghana . 
ghana's industrial base is relatively advanced . 
the transfer rate is 1 ghana cedi for every 10,000 cedis . 
as of 2012 there were four major companies in the textiles sector: akosombo textiles limited ,  tex style ghana limited ,  printex ghana ,  and ghana textile manufacturing company . 
ghana has vast natural gas reserves ,  which is used by many foreign multinational companies operating in ghana . 
ghana national petroleum corporation and ghana oil company deal with crude oil and gas exploration ,  exploitation ,  and refining . 
urban electric cars have been manufactured in ghana since 2014.
to enter ghana ,  it is necessary to have a visa authorized by the government of ghana ,  except for certain entrepreneurs on business trips . 
ghana embarked on a currency re-denomination exercise ,  from cedi  -lrb-  ₵  -rrb-  to the new currency ,  the ghana cedi  -lrb-  gh₵  -rrb-  in july 2007.
in 2011, `` forbes '' magazine ranked ghana eleventh-friendliest country in the world . 
the mass media of ghana is among the most liberal in africa ,  with ghana ranking as the third-freest in africa and 30th-most free in the world on the worldwide press freedom index . 
television broadcasters include first digital tv  -lrb-  atv ,  bta ,  faith tv ,  channel d ,  star tv ,  ftv ,  sports 24, cinimax ,  planet kidz  -rrb-  tv africa ,  metro tv ,  tv3, gtv ,  gh one tv and viasat 1.
the mass media of ghana today is among the most liberal in africa ,  with ghana ranking as the third freest in africa and 30th in the world on the `` 2013 world press freedom index '' from reporters without borders . 
article 21 of the constitution of ghana guarantees freedom of the press and other media ,  freedom of speech and expression ,  thought ,  and information . 
the ghana road network is 64,323 km and road transportation is the most dominant choice of transportation in ghana . 
trunk roads in ghana are classified as national roads ,  regional roads ,  and inter-regional roads ,  all of which form the ghana road network . 
ghana railway network is limited to south ghana and the southern part of ghana within the greater accra region ,  central region ,  western region ,  eastern region and ashanti region of south ghana . 
concession agreements have been signed by the ghana railway corporation for the development and extension of the ghana eastern rail line and the rehabilitation of the ghana western rail line . 
transport in ghana is accomplished by road ,  rail ,  air and water . 
the ghana police service's motor transport and traffic unit  -lrb-  mttu  -rrb-  and the ghana highways authority is responsible for the maintenance of the road traffic control of ghana and the ghana road network  -lrb-  ghana national highways and motorways  -rrb-  . 
the major rail routes in ghana are the ghana eastern rail line that connects kumasi to koforidua ,  and the ghana western rail line that connects kumasi to sekondi-takoradi ,  sunyani and cape coast . 
the ghana armed forces  -lrb-  gaf  -rrb-  were formed in 1957.
the gaf are supervised by the ghanaian ministry of defence . 
the ghana armed forces  -lrb-  gaf  -rrb-  is the unified armed force of ghana ,  consisting of the army  -lrb-  ga  -rrb-  ,  navy  -lrb-  gn  -rrb-  ,  and ghana air force . 
the gaf military private bank is cited at burma camp and serves the gaf military personnels and their gaf civilian counterparts . 
the gaf  -lrb-  ghana army  -rrb-  operates the gaf cadet corps for gaf cadets whom go on to military education and training and recruit training graduation from the gaf military academy for army recruit and seaman recruit prior to enlistment into the military branches of the gaf  -lrb-  ghana armed forces  -rrb- :
the ghana army  -lrb-  ga  -rrb-  is structured as follows:
the supervision of the ghana armed forces  -lrb-  gaf  -rrb-  is managed by the minister of defence and the chief of defence staff . 
the group formed the national liberation council ,  which ruled ghana from 1966 to 1969.
operation untac was the gaf largest external operation since the gaf first external operation in military operation onuc . 
the foreign relations of ghana are controlled by the ministry of foreign affairs of ghana . 
ghana is also a member of the international criminal court . 
ghana has been a member state of the commonwealth since independence in 1957, firstly as a dominion ,  then as a commonwealth republic . 
cro-magnon man took over gibraltar around 24,000 bce . 
while the rest of europe was cooling ,  the area around gibraltar back then resembled a european serengeti . 
the romans visited gibraltar ,  but no permanent settlement was established . 
about 10% of last names in gibraltar have portuguese origin . 
the majority of the spanish population in gibraltar  -lrb-  about 5000 -rrb- ,  with few exceptions ,  left gibraltar when the dutch and english took the village in 1704.
moroccans have always had a significant presence in gibraltar . 
they are the descendants of economic migrants that came to gibraltar after the majority of the spanish population left in 1704.
the government of gibraltar is elected for a term of four years . 
daniel feetham of the gibraltar social democrats  -lrb-  gsd  -rrb-  since 2013.
in his june 2009, budget speech ,  chief minister peter caruana noted that gibraltar's economy remains in good shape and government finances remain healthy ,  solid ,  stable and robust ,  despite global economic and financial turmoil . 
the first submarine telegraph cable started its operation in gibraltar in 1870.
regulation of telecommunications and broadcasting are the responsibility of the gibraltar regulatory authority  -lrb-  gra  -rrb-  ,  established by means of the gibraltar regulatory authority act in 2000.
the first telephones were introduced to gibraltar in 1886 by a private company which was later taken over by the colonial authorities . 
there are no extant railways in gibraltar . 
gibraltar has of highways ,  all of which are paved . 
no cases in gibraltar were reported . 
a ferry operated between algeciras and gibraltar until 1969.
gibraltar bus company increased the bus fares for all routes in gibraltar in may 2013.
gibraltar airport will be adapted to have an entrance from spain  -lrb-  as well as gibraltar  -rrb-  ,  in a similar manner to basel and geneva airports  -lrb-  which are also adjacent to borders  -rrb-  . 
there are a total of 8 different bus routes in gibraltar . 
the road crossing from gibraltar into spain can often be subject to long delays . 
following an agreement signed in córdoba between the governments of the united kingdom ,  spain and gibraltar in september 2006, the use of gibraltar airport by both gibraltarian and spanish services was agreed . 
being a peninsula ,  the sea has long been vital to gibraltar's transport links . 
the glorieuses or glorioso islands  -lrb-   or officially also `` archipel des glorieuses ''  -rrb-  are a group of french islands and rocks totalling  ,  at  ,  in comoro islands ,  between the french region of mayotte and madagascar . 
in 1895, the glorioso island became a part of the colony of mayotte and dependencies . 
the archipelago consists of two islands ,  grande glorieuse  -lrb-    -rrb-  and île du lys ,  as well as eight rock islets  -lrb-  `` roches vertes ''  -rrb- : wreck rock  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  south rock  -lrb-    -rrb-  and verte rocks  -lrb-    -rrb-  and three others that are unnamed . 
the area of the gulf is  . 
the gulf of finland  -lrb-  ; ; ;   -rrb-  is the easternmost arm of the baltic sea . 
the ecological condition of the gulf of finland ,  neva bay and neva river is unsatisfactory . 
russia reclaimed the eastern part of the gulf as a result of the victory in the great northern war  -lrb-  1700–1721 -rrb- . 
in the east ,  the gulf ends with neva bay and on the west merges with the baltic sea . 
in 1710, the cities of peterhof and oranienbaum were founded on the southern shore of the gulf of finland . 
from the 8th to the 13th century ,  the gulf of finland and neva were parts of the waterway from scandinavia ,  through eastern europe to the byzantine empire . 
starting from 1700, nineteen artificial islands with fortresses were built in the gulf by russia . 
the largest rivers flowing into the gulf are neva  -lrb-  from the east  -rrb-  ,  narva  -lrb-  from the south  -rrb-  ,  and kymi  -lrb-  from the north  -rrb-  . 
the gulf contains numerous banks ,  skerries and islands . 
construction of the saint petersburg dam reduced water exchange of the neva bay with the eastern part of the gulf by 10–20% that increased the contamination level of neva bay . 
saimaa canal connects the gulf with the saimaa lake . 
gdańsk  -lrb-   ,  ; german: danzig   -rrb-  is a polish city on the baltic coast . 
the german name ,  `` danzig '' ,  is pronounced as  . 
between the world wars ,  the free city of danzig was in a customs union with poland and was located between german east prussia and the so-called polish corridor . 
major companies in gdańsk:
danzig was annexed by the kingdom of prussia in 1793, in the second partition of poland . 
from the eastern portion of pre-war poland . 
the german attack began in danzig ,  with a bombardment of polish positions at westerplatte by the german battleship  ,  and the landing of german infantry on the peninsula . 
gdańsk is home to the university of gdańsk ,  gdańsk university of technology ,  the national museum ,  the gdańsk shakespeare theatre ,  the museum of the second world war ,  polish baltic philharmonic and the european solidarity centre . 
the danzig research society  -lrb-  in german `` naturforschende gesellschaft in danzig ''  -rrb-  founded in 1743 was one of the first of its kind . 
in 1300, the town had an estimated population of 2,000.
gdańsk lies at the mouth of the motława river ,  connected to the leniwka ,  a branch in the delta of the nearby vistula river ,  which drains 60 percent of poland and connects gdańsk with the polish capital ,  warsaw . 
as a stronghold of stanisław leszczyński's supporters during the war of the polish succession ,  it was taken by the russians after the siege of danzig in 1734.
on 15 may 1457, casimir iv of poland granted the town the `` great privilege '' ,  after he had been invited by the town's council and had already stayed in town for five weeks . 
in the 1575 election of a king to the polish throne ,  danzig supported maximilian ii against stephen báthory . 
on special occasions the city is also referred to as `` the royal polish city of gdańsk ''  -lrb-  polish `` królewskie polskie miasto gdańsk '' ,  latin `` regia civitas polonica gedanensis '' ,  kashubian `` królewsczi polsczi gard gduńsk ''  -rrb-  . 
in december 1970, gdańsk was the scene of anti-regime demonstrations ,  which led to the downfall of poland's communist leader władysław gomułka . 
gdańsk native donald tusk became prime minister of poland in 2007, and president of the european council in 2014.
while gravitons are presumed to be massless ,  they would still carry energy ,  as does any other quantum particle . 
in string theory ,  believed to be a consistent theory of quantum gravity ,  the graviton is a massless state of a fundamental string . 
this result suggests that ,  if a massless spin-2 particle is discovered ,  it must be the graviton . 
a feature of gravitons in string theory is that ,  as closed strings without endpoints ,  they would not be bound to branes and could move freely between them . 
alternatively ,  if gravitons are massive at all ,  the analysis of gravitational waves yielded a new upper bound on the mass of gravitons . 
most theories containing gravitons suffer from severe problems . 
the trollhätte canal  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a canal in sweden that is now part of the göta canal . 
göta canal is a sister canal of caledonian canal in scotland ,  which was also constructed by thomas telford . 
the göta canal  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a swedish canal constructed in the early 19th century . 
the göta canal was officially opened on 26 september 1832 in an event commemorated by the painter johan christian berger in his work `` the opening of the göta canal on 26 september 1832 '' . 
shares of gm were down 16% for the year before the new announcement of gm's lower profits . 
general motors is divided into four business segments: `` gm north america ''  -lrb-  gmna  -rrb-  ,  `` gm south america ''  -lrb-  gmsa  -rrb-  ,  `` gm international operations ''  -lrb-  gmio  -rrb-  ,  and `` gm financial '' . 
gm was removed from the index as it approached bankruptcy in 2009.
however ,  in 2009 the `` new gm '' reversed this ,  saying that emphasis on its four core divisions would downplay the gm logo . 
on april 24, 2014, cnnmoney reported that gm profits fell to $108 million for the first three months of 2014.
in 2009, general motors sold 6.5 million cars and trucks globally; in 2010, it sold 8.39 million . 
the next year ,  durant started the chevrolet motor car company in the u . s .  ,  and in canada in 1915, and through this ,  he secretly purchased a controlling interest in gm . 
the chevrolet brand was the main contributor to gm performance ,  with 4.76 million vehicles sold around the world in 2011, a global sales record . 
in addition to its twelve brands ,  general motors also holds a 20% stake in imm ,  and a 77% stake in gm korea . 
the golden gate bridge is a suspension bridge spanning the golden gate ,  the strait connecting san francisco bay and the pacific ocean . 
the total length of the golden gate bridge from abutment to abutment is  . 
the golden gate bridge and highway district ,  authorized by an act of the california legislature ,  was incorporated in 1928 as the official entity to design ,  construct ,  and finance the golden gate bridge . 
until 1964, the golden gate bridge had the longest suspension bridge main span in the world ,  at  . 
bus service across the bridge is provided by two public transportation agencies: san francisco muni and golden gate transit . 
when the golden gate bridge opened in 1937, the toll was 50 cents per car  -lrb-  equivalent to $ today  -rrb-  ,  collected in each direction . 
in an effort to save $19.2 million over the following 10 years ,  the golden gate district voted in january 2011 to eliminate all toll takers by 2012 and use only open road tolling . 
in march 2008, the golden gate bridge district board approved a resolution to start congestion pricing at the golden gate bridge ,  charging higher tolls during the peak hours ,  but rising and falling depending on traffic levels . 
before the bridge was built ,  the only practical short route between san francisco and what is now marin county was by boat across a section of san francisco bay . 
the golden gate transportation district then planned to increase the tolls by 25 cents in july 2015, and then by another 25 cents each of the next three years . 
san francisco and most of the counties along the north coast of california joined the golden gate bridge district ,  with the exception being humboldt county ,  whose residents opposed the bridge's construction and the traffic it would generate . 
the trip from the san francisco ferry building took 27 minutes . 
the golden gate bridge ,  highway and transportation district has jurisdiction over the segment of highway that crosses the bridge instead of the california department of transportation  -lrb-  caltrans  -rrb-  . 
in may 1987, as part of the 50th anniversary celebration ,  the golden gate bridge district again closed the bridge to automobile traffic and allowed pedestrians to cross the bridge . 
the former elevated approach to the golden gate bridge through the san francisco presidio ,  known as doyle drive ,  dated to 1933 and was named after frank p .  doyle ,  president and son of the founder of the exchange bank in santa rosa ,  and the man who ,  more than any other person ,  made it possible to build the golden gate bridge . 
although the idea of a bridge spanning the golden gate was not new ,  the proposal that eventually took hold was made in a 1916 `` san francisco bulletin '' article by former engineering student james wilkins . 
the last of the construction bonds were retired in 1971, with $35 million  -lrb-  equivalent to $ million today  -rrb-  in principal and nearly $39 million  -lrb-  $ million today  -rrb-  in interest raised entirely from bridge tolls . 
many wanted to build a bridge to connect san francisco to marin county . 
the golden gate bridge is the second-most used suicide site/suicide bridge in the world ,  after the nanjing yangtze river bridge . 
modern knowledge of the effect of earthquakes on structures led to a program to retrofit the golden gate to better resist seismic events . 
marconi joined the italian fascist party in 1923.
from youth ,  marconi was interested in science and electricity . 
guglielmo marconi ,  1st marquis of marconi  -lrb-  ; 25 april 187420 july 1937 -rrb- was an italian inventor and electrical engineer ,  known for his pioneering work on long-distance radio transmission ,  development of marconi's law ,  and a radio telegraph system . 
marconi came up with a functional system with many components:
marconi was also an entrepreneur ,  businessman ,  and founder of the wireless telegraph & signal company in the united kingdom in 1897  -lrb-  which became the marconi company  -rrb-  . 
marconi made the first demonstration of his system for the british government in july 1896.
marconi's experimental apparatus proved to be the first engineering-complete ,  commercially successful radio transmission system . 
righi's article renewed marconi's interest in developing a wireless telegraphy system based on radio waves ,  a line of inquiry that marconi noted that other inventors did not seem to be pursuing . 
marconi and beatrice had divorced on 12 february 1924 in the free city of rijeka . 
in the summer of 1895, marconi moved his experiments outdoors on his father's estate in bologna . 
marconi did not attend school as a child and did not go on to formal higher education . 
the role played by marconi co .  wireless in maritime rescues raised public awareness of the value of radio and brought fame to marconi ,  particularly the sinking of the rms `` titanic '' on 15 april 1912 and the rms `` lusitania '' on 7 may 1915.
marconi went on to marry maria cristina bezzi-scali  -lrb-  1900–1994 -rrb- ,  the only daughter of francesco ,  count bezzi-scali . 
the göta älv  -lrb-   ,  `` river of the geats ''  -rrb-  is a river that drains lake vänern into the kattegat ,  at the city of gothenburg ,  on the western coast of sweden . 
at trollhättan there is a dam ,  canal locks and a hydropower station in the river . 
the göta älv is located in götaland ,  with the river itself being a site of early geatish settlement . 
greek unemployment stood at 21.7% in april 2017.
members of these groups ethnically identify as greeks and are today all at least bilingual in greek . 
during that time ,  the greek orthodox church was also instrumental in the spread of greek ideas to the wider orthodox world . 
after the greek independence ,  the modern greek architects tried to combine traditional greek and byzantine elements and motives with the western european movements and styles . 
greek literature can be divided into three main categories: ancient ,  byzantine and modern greek literature . 
this aspect of greek stonework is described as polychrome . 
the greek economy is classified as advanced and high-income . 
in total ,  the germans executed some 21,000 greeks ,  the bulgarians 40,000, and the italians 9,000.
the following era was marked by instability ,  as over 1.5 million propertyless greek refugees from turkey had to be integrated into greek society . 
greek military personnel total 367,450, of whom 142,950 are active and 220,500 are reserve . 
modern greek literature refers to literature written in common modern greek ,  emerging from late byzantine times in the 11th century . 
this issue would continue to plague greek politics until the 1970s . 
in modern period ,  diafotismos  -lrb-  greek: διαφωτισμός ,  `` enlightenment '' ,  `` illumination ''  -rrb-  was the greek expression of the age of enlightenment and its philosophical and political ideas . 
near the northern greek borders there are also some slavic–speaking groups ,  locally known as `` slavomacedonian ''-speaking ,  most of whose members identify ethnically as greeks . 
government documents and newspapers were consequently published in `` katharevousa ''  -lrb-  purified  -rrb-  greek ,  a form which few ordinary greeks could read . 
the roman catholic community is estimated to be around 250,000 of which 50,000 are greek citizens . 
greeks have a long tradition of valuing and investing in `` paideia ''  -lrb-  education  -rrb-  ,  which was upheld as one of the highest societal values in the greek and hellenistic world . 
almost two-thirds of the greek people live in urban areas . 
in handball ,  ac diomidis argous is the only greek club to have won a european cup . 
the 1950s and early 1960s are considered by many to be a `` golden age '' of greek cinema . 
the modern greek theatre was born after the greek independence ,  in the early 19th century ,  and initially was influenced by the heptanesean theatre and melodrama ,  such as the italian opera . 
later ,  during the period of greek enlightenment  -lrb-  diafotismos  -rrb-  ,  writers such as adamantios korais and rigas feraios prepared with their works the greek revolution  -lrb-  1821–1830 -rrb- . 
in the 14th century ,  much of the greek peninsula was lost by the byzantine empire at first to the serbs and then to the ottomans . 
throughout the 20th century ,  millions of greeks migrated to the united states ,  united kingdom ,  australia ,  canada ,  and germany ,  creating a large greek diaspora . 
except from these three most significant greek philosophers other known schools of greek philosophy from other founders during ancient times were stoicism ,  epicureanism ,  skepticism and neoplatonism . 
greeks in crete continued to stage regular revolts ,  and in 1897, the greek government under theodoros deligiannis ,  bowing to popular pressure ,  declared war on the ottomans . 
by 500 bc ,  the persian empire controlled the greek city states in asia minor and macedonia . 
along with the byzantine  -lrb-  church  -rrb-  chant and music ,  the greek people also cultivated the greek folk song  -lrb-  `` demotiko ''  -rrb-  which is divided into two cycles ,  the akritic and klephtic . 
most of the greek islands and many main cities of greece are connected by air mainly from the two major greek airlines ,  olympic air and aegean airlines . 
the administration of the greek territory is shared between the church of greece and the patriarchate of constantinople . 
after 1453 a number of greek byzantine scholars who fled to western europe contributed to the renaissance . 
in the late eighteenth century ,  an increase in secular learning during the modern greek enlightenment led to the revival among greeks of the diaspora of the notion of a greek nation tracing its existence to ancient greece ,  distinct from the other orthodox peoples ,  and having a right to political autonomy . 
this had the effect of galvanizing public opinion in western europe in favor of the greek rebels . 
all greeks were united ,  however ,  in their determination to liberate the hellenic lands under ottoman rule . 
the greek government-debt crisis ,  and subsequent austerity policies ,  have resulted in protests . 
during the 19th and 20th centuries there was a major dispute known as the greek language question ,  on whether the official language of greece should be the archaic katharevousa ,  created in the 19th century and used as the state and scholarly language ,  or the dimotiki ,  the form of the greek language which evolved naturally from byzantine greek and was the language of the people . 
there is also a considerable number of co-ethnics that came from the greek communities of albania and the former soviet union . 
the greek orthodox church and the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople were considered by the ottoman governments as the ruling authorities of the entire orthodox christian population of the ottoman empire ,  whether ethnically greek or not . 
greek cuisine is characteristic of the healthy mediterranean diet ,  which is epitomised by dishes of crete . 
in a eurostat – eurobarometer 2010 poll ,  79% of greek citizens responded that they `` believe there is a god '' . 
although `` popular '' byzantine literature and early modern greek literature both began in the 11th century ,  the two are indistinguishable . 
greece has one of the highest rates of tertiary enrollment in the world ,  while greeks are well represented in academia worldwide; many leading western universities employ a disproportionately high number of greek faculty . 
the shipping industry has been a key element of greek economic activity since ancient times . 
as a result of these trends ,  the average greek household is smaller and older than in previous generations . 
greek prime minister ,  alexis tsipras ,  asserted that errors in the design of the first two programmes which lead to a loss of 25% of the greek economy due to the harsh imposition of excessive austerity . 
the greek national football team ,  ranking 12th in the world in 2014  -lrb-  and having reached a high of 8th in the world in 2008 and 2011 -rrb- ,  were crowned european champions in euro 2004 in one of the biggest upsets in the history of the sport . 
in the aftermath of world war i ,  greece attempted further expansion into asia minor ,  a region with a large native greek population at the time ,  but was defeated in the greco-turkish war of 1919–1922, contributing to a massive flight of asia minor greeks . 
as a result of years of negotiation ,  the nascent greek state was finally recognised under the london protocol in 1830.
later influences from the roman empire ,  middle east ,  and the byzantine empire also had effect on greek music . 
when military conflicts broke out between the ottoman empire and other states ,  greeks usually took up arms against the ottomans ,  with few exceptions . 
the basis of the modern greek maritime industry was formed after world war ii when greek shipping businessmen were able to amass surplus ships sold to them by the u . s .  government through the ship sales act of the 1940s . 
lack of political unity within greece resulted in frequent conflict between greek states . 
the events in the north spurred the greeks of the peloponnese into action and on 17 march 1821 the maniots declared war on the ottomans . 
greece  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the hellenic republic  -lrb-  greek:   -rrb-  ,  historically also known as hellas  -lrb-  greek: ελλάς  -rrb-  ,  is a country located in southern and southeast europe ,  with a population of approximately /1e6 round 0 million as of  . 
byzantine literature refers to literature of the byzantine empire written in atticizing ,  medieval and early modern greek ,  and it is the expression of the intellectual life of the byzantine greeks during the christian middle ages . 
greek science ,  technology ,  and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the hellenistic period . 
international railway lines connect greek cities with the rest of europe ,  the balkans and turkey . 
in their pursuit of order and proportion ,  the greeks created an ideal of beauty that strongly influenced western art . 
tensions soon developed among different greek factions ,  leading to two consecutive civil wars . 
while some greeks in the ionian islands and constantinople lived in prosperity ,  and greeks of constantinople  -lrb-  phanariotes  -rrb-  achieved positions of power within the ottoman administration ,  much of the population of mainland greece suffered the economic consequences of the ottoman conquest . 
the greek telecommunications company ote has become a strong investor in yugoslavia and other balkan countries . 
the architecture of ancient greece was produced by the ancient greeks  -lrb-  `` hellenes ''  -rrb-  ,  whose culture flourished on the greek mainland ,  the aegean islands and their colonies ,  for a period from about 900 bc until the 1st century ad ,  with the earliest remaining architectural works dating from around 600 bc . 
after the 2005 european championship triumph of the greek national basketball team ,  greece became the reigning european champion in both football and basketball . 
with its capital in constantinople ,  its language and literary culture was greek and its religion was predominantly eastern orthodox christian . 
after the establishment of the greek kingdom ,  the architecture of athens and other cities was mostly influenced by the neoclassical architecture . 
many of the educated elite saw this as a peasant dialect and were determined to restore the glories of ancient greek . 
regarding the classical music ,  it was through the ionian islands  -lrb-  which were under western rule and influence  -rrb-  that all the major advances of the western european classical music were introduced to mainland greeks . 
estimates of the recognised greek muslim minority ,  which is mostly located in thrace ,  range around 100,000,  -lrb-  about 1% of the population  -rrb-  . 
the first textual evidence of the greek language dates back to 15th century bc and the linear b script which is associated with the mycenaean civilization . 
important greek industries include tourism  -lrb-  with 14.9 million international tourists in 2009, it is ranked as the 7th most visited country in the european union and 16th in the world by the united nations world tourism organization  -rrb-  and merchant shipping  -lrb-  at 16.2% of the world's total capacity ,  the greek merchant marine is the largest in the world  -rrb-  ,  while the country is also a considerable agricultural producer  -lrb-  including fisheries  -rrb-  within the union . 
two greek authors have been awarded the nobel prize in literature: george seferis in 1963 and odysseas elytis in 1979.
during the paleologi dynasty  -lrb-  1261–1453 -rrb- a new era of greek patriotism emerged accompanied by a turning back to ancient greece . 
the byzantine recovery of lost provinces began toward the end of the 8th century and most of the greek peninsula came under imperial control again ,  in stages ,  during the 9th century . 
led by athens and sparta ,  the greek victories in the greco-persian wars are considered a pivotal moment in world history ,  as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as the golden age of athens ,  the seminal period of ancient greek development that laid many of the foundations of western civilization . 
by the end of the month ,  the peloponnese was in open revolt against the ottomans and by october 1821 the greeks under theodoros kolokotronis had captured tripolitsa . 
the demographics of greece refer to the demography of the population that inhabits the greek peninsula . 
the population estimates on the greeks during the 4th century bc ,  is approximately 3.5 million on the greek peninsula and 4 to 6.5 million in the rest of the entire mediterranean basin ,  including all colonies such as those in magna graecia ,  asia minor and the shores of the black sea . 
the population transfers with bulgaria and turkey that took place in the early 20th century ,  added in total some two million greeks from to the demography of the greek kingdom . 
between the restoration of democracy in 1974 and the greek government-debt crisis the party system was dominated by the liberal-conservative new democracy  -lrb-  νέα δημοκρατία – `` nea dimokratia ''  -rrb-  and the social-democratic panhellenic socialist movement  -lrb-  πανελλήνιο σοσιαλιστικό κίνημα – `` panellinio sosialistiko kinima '' ,  πασοκ/pasok  -rrb-  . 
during the latter period ,  the country's annual budget deficit usually exceeded 3% of gdp ,  but its effect on the debt-to gdp ratio was counterbalanced by high gdp growth rates . 
public debt was forecast ,  according to some estimates ,  to hit 120% of gdp during 2010.
according to imf estimates for 2017, greece is ranked 40th and 49th in the world at $18,637 and $27,796 for nominal gdp per capita and purchasing power parity per capita respectively . 
in general ,  however ,  during the 20th century it enjoyed one of the highest gdp growth rates on the planet
greece was accepted into the economic and monetary union of the european union by the european council on 19 june 2000, based on a number of criteria  -lrb-  inflation rate ,  budget deficit ,  public debt ,  long-term interest rates ,  exchange rate  -rrb-  using 1999 as the reference year . 
their implementation was to be monitored and evaluated by the european commission ,  the european central bank and the imf . 
the economy of greece is the 51st largest in the world with a nominal gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  of $200.288 billion per annum . 
greece ,  like other european nations ,  had faced debt crises in the 19th century ,  as well as a similar crisis in 1932 during the great depression . 
greece also has the eu's lowest index of economic freedom and second lowest global competitiveness index ,  ranking 115th and 57th in the world respectively . 
world war ii  -lrb-  1939-1945 -rrb- devastated the country's economy ,  but the high levels of economic growth that followed from 1950 to 1980 have been called the greek economic miracle . 
after an audit commissioned by the incoming new democracy government in 2004, eurostat revealed that the statistics for the budget deficit had been under-reported . 
the evolution of the greek economy during the 19th century  -lrb-  a period that transformed a large part of the world because of the industrial revolution  -rrb-  has been little researched . 
by the end of 2009, as a result of a combination of international and local factors the greek economy faced its most-severe crisis since the restoration of democracy in 1974 as the greek government revised its deficit from a prediction of 3.7% in early 2009 and 6% in september 2009, to 12.7% of gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  . 
as of 2005, cosmote's share on the market hovered around 76% . 
transport in greece have undergone significant changes in the past two decades ,  vastly modernizing the country's infrastructure and transportation . 
the structure of its forces includes the general staff of air force ,  the hellenic tactical air force ,  the air support command ,  the air training command and a number of units and services . 
hellenic air force incorporates a modern air fleet  -lrb-  for combat ,  transportation and training  -rrb-  ,  the congruent structure ,  as well as a modern system of air control ,  which cooperates with a widespread net of anti aircraft defence . 
they consist of the hellenic national defense general staff ,  the hellenic army ,  the hellenic navy ,  and the hellenic air force . 
the black sea is a region heavily colonized by greeks throughout history . 
former head of greek intelligence service leonidas vasilikopoulos said they had received information from their agents in turkey that turkish agents or others were involved in the forest fires on greek islands . 
the greek government opposes the use of the name without any qualification such as 'republic of northern macedonia' to the post-1991 constitutional name of its northern neighbour ,  citing historical and territorial concerns resulting from the ambiguity between the terms republic of macedonia ,  the greek region of macedonia and the ancient kingdom of macedon ,  which falls within greek macedonia . 
greece also objects to the use of the terms `` macedonian '' to denote ethnic macedonians and the macedonian language ,  as these terms have a different meaning in greece  -lrb-  inhabitants of the greek region of macedonia and the macedonian dialect of greek  -rrb-  . 
northern epirus is the name used generally by greeks to refer to the southern part of albania ,  home to a greek minority which after 1989 keeps reducing due to immigration to greece . 
the overwhelming turkish land ,  naval and air superiority against island's weak defenses led to the bringing of 37% of the land under turkish control . 
representation through: embassy – greek embassy in another country<br> general consulate – liaison office – no representation – greece
prominent issues in hellenic foreign policy include the claims in the aegean sea and eastern mediterranean by turkey and the turkish occupation of cyprus . 
the former cia director george j .  tenet ,  pyrros dimas ,  sotiris ninis and former greek president kostis stefanopoulos have ancestral links to the greek minority . 
the greek minority is organized under the unity for human rights party which is the continuation of the former banned party called `` omonoia ''  -lrb-  unity in greek  -rrb-  and has since 1997 joined the socialist coalition . 
during greek prime-minister's kostas karamanlis historic visit to turkey in 2007, recep tayyip erdoğan promised to reconsider his country's stance on the matter . 
