greek  -lrb-  modern greek:  ,  `` elliniká '' ,  `` greek '' ,   ,  `` ellinikí glóssa '' ,  `` greek language ''  -rrb-  is an independent branch of the indo-european family of languages ,  native to greece ,  cyprus and other parts of the eastern mediterranean and the black sea . 
greek roots are often used to coin new words for other languages; greek and latin are the predominant sources of international scientific vocabulary . 
the golem is a popular figure in the czech republic . 
the existence of a golem is sometimes a mixed blessing . 
the oldest stories of golems date to early judaism . 
some versions have the golem eventually going on a murderous rampage . 
all of these early accounts of the golem of prague are in german by jewish writers . 
some orthodox jews believe that the maharal did actually create a golem . 
according to john neubauer ,  the first writers on the prague golem were:
the most famous golem narrative involves judah loew ben bezalel ,  the late-16th-century rabbi of prague . 
 ''golem '' passed into yiddish as `` goylem '' to mean someone who is stupid or lethargic . 
orwell spent time in wallington and southwold working on a dickens essay and it was in june 1939 that orwell's father ,  richard blair ,  died . 
he was one of those boys who thought for himself . `` 
in his tramping days ,  he did domestic work for a time . 
blair liked to carry out practical jokes . 
eric arthur blair was born on 25 june 1903 in motihari ,  bihar ,  british india . 
orwell left london for jura on 10 april 1947.
his father ,  richard walmesley blair ,  worked in the opium department of the indian civil service . 
blair was very lonely after eileen's death in 1945, and desperate for a wife ,  both as companion for himself and as mother for richard . 
in april 1932 blair became a teacher at the hawthorns high school ,  a school for boys ,  in hayes ,  west london . 
orwell's son ,  richard horatio blair ,  was brought up by orwell's sister avril . 
in january ,  blair took up the place at wellington ,  where he spent the spring term . 
at this time he also resigned from the home guard on medical grounds . 
cyril connolly followed blair to eton ,  but because they were in separate years ,  they did not associate with each other . 
blair now contributed regularly to `` adelphi '' ,  with `` a hanging '' appearing in august 1931.
while at st cyprian's ,  blair wrote two poems that were published in the `` henley and south oxfordshire standard '' . 
jacintha buddicom's account ,  `` eric & us '' ,  provides an insight into blair's childhood . 
blair had an interest in natural history which stemmed from his childhood . 
at the end of the summer term in 1932, blair returned to southwold ,  where his parents had used a legacy to buy their own home . 
later ,  he wrote that he felt guilty about his role in the work of empire and he `` began to look more closely at his own country and saw that england also had its oppressed . `` 
in 1904 ida blair settled with her children at henley-on-thames in oxfordshire . 
orwell was also openly against homosexuality ,  at a time when such prejudice was common . 
in imitation of jack london ,  whose writing he admired  -lrb-  particularly `` the people of the abyss ''  -rrb-  ,  blair started to explore the poorer parts of london . 
jack common observed on meeting him for the first time ,  `` right away manners ,  and more than manners – breeding – showed through . `` 
mabel fierz ,  who later became blair's confidante ,  said: `` he used to say the one thing he wished in this world was that he'd been attractive to women . 
in march 1943 orwell's mother died and around the same time he told moore he was starting work on a new book ,  which turned out to be `` animal farm '' . 
buddicom and blair lost touch shortly after he went to burma and she became unsympathetic towards him . 
the result of his journeys through the north was `` the road to wigan pier '' ,  published by gollancz for the left book club in 1937.
in 2008, `` the times '' ranked him second on a list of `` the 50 greatest british writers since 1945 '' . 
blair's maternal grandmother lived at moulmein ,  so he chose a posting in burma ,  then still a province of british india . 
the orwells spent some time in the north east ,  near carlton ,  county durham ,  dealing with matters in the adoption of a boy whom they named richard horatio blair . 
orwell's research for `` the road to wigan pier '' led to him being placed under surveillance by the special branch from 1936, for 12 years ,  until one year before the publication of `` nineteen eighty-four '' . 
blair's academic performance reports suggest that he neglected his academic studies ,  but during his time at eton he worked with roger mynors to produce a college magazine ,  `` the election times '' ,  joined in the production of other publications – `` college days '' and `` bubble and squeak '' – and participated in the eton wall game . 
in mid-1933 blair left hawthorns to become a teacher at frays college ,  in uxbridge ,  middlesex . 
at this time ,  victor gollancz suggested orwell spend a short time investigating social conditions in economically depressed northern england . 
he also renewed friendships with older friends ,  such as dennis collings ,  whose girlfriend eleanor jacques was also to play a part in his life . 
although the gentility passed down the generations ,  the prosperity did not; eric blair described his family as `` lower-upper-middle class '' . 
at this time jonathan cape rejected `` a scullion's diary '' ,  the first version of `` down and out '' . 
in december 1929, after nearly two years in paris ,  blair returned to england and went directly to his parents' house in southwold ,  a coastal town in suffolk ,  which remained his base for the next five years . 
she wrote that it was because of the letters he wrote complaining about his life ,  but an addendum to `` eric & us '' by venables reveals that he may have lost her sympathy through an incident which was ,  at best ,  a clumsy attempt at seduction . 
the spanish civil war played the most important part in defining orwell's socialism . 
eric arthur blair  -lrb-  25 june 1903 – 21 january 1950 -rrb- ,  better known by his pen name george orwell ,  was an english novelist ,  essayist ,  journalist and critic ,  whose work is marked by lucid prose ,  awareness of social injustice ,  opposition to totalitarianism ,  and outspoken support of democratic socialism . 
orwell's experiences in the spanish civil war gave rise to `` homage to catalonia ''  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- . 
 ''animal farm: a fairy story '' was published in britain on 17 august 1945, and a year later in the us ,  on 26 august 1946.
in august 1941, orwell finally obtained `` war work '' when he was taken on full-time by the bbc's eastern service . 
around the same time orwell's mother and sister avril ,  who had found work in a sheet-metal factory behind king's cross station ,  moved into a flat close to george and eileen . 
orwell returned to england in june 1937, and stayed at the o'shaughnessy home at greenwich . 
throughout his life orwell continually supported himself as a book reviewer ,  writing works so long and sophisticated they have had an influence on literary criticism . 
at the outbreak of the second world war ,  orwell's wife eileen started working in the censorship department of the ministry of information in central london ,  staying during the week with her family in greenwich . 
he wrote in the conclusion to his 1940 essay on charles dickens ,  george woodcock suggested that the last two sentences also describe orwell . 
after sonia brownell's death ,  other works on orwell were published in the 1980s ,  with 1984 being a particularly fruitful year . 
the goeldi's marmoset or goeldi's monkey  -lrb-  `` callimico goeldii ''  -rrb-  is a small ,  south american new world monkey that lives in the upper amazon basin region of bolivia ,  brazil ,  colombia ,  ecuador ,  and peru . 
goeldi's marmoset was first described in 1904, making `` callimico '' one of the more recent monkey genera to be described . 
it is the only species classified in the genus callimico ,  and the monkeys are sometimes referred to as `` callimicos '' . 
while almost any game can be played for money ,  and any game typically played for money can also be played just for fun ,  some games are generally offered in a casino setting . 
other churches that oppose gambling include the jehovah's witnesses ,  the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ,  the iglesia ni cristo ,  and the members church of god international . 
for case law on recovery of gambling losses where the loser had stolen the funds see `` rights of owner of stolen money as against one who won it in gambling transaction from thief '' . 
methodists ,  in accordance with the doctrine of outward holiness ,  oppose gambling which they believe gambling is a sin that feeds on greed; examples include the united methodist church ,  the free methodist church ,  the evangelical wesleyan church ,  the salvation army ,  and the church of the nazarene . 
under common law ,  particularly english law  -lrb-  english unjust enrichment  -rrb-  ,  a gambling contract may not give a casino `` bona fide '' purchaser status ,  permitting the recovery of stolen funds in some situations . 
other protestants that oppose gambling include many mennonites ,  quakers ,  the christian reformed church in north america ,  the church of the lutheran confession ,  the southern baptist convention ,  the assemblies of god ,  and the seventh-day adventist church . 
some parish pastors have also opposed casinos for the additional reason that they would take customers away from church bingo and annual festivals where games such as blackjack ,  roulette ,  craps ,  and poker are used for fundraising . 
poker ,  the most popular u . s .  card game associated with gambling ,  derives from the persian game as-nas ,  dating back to the 17th century . 
these are games the play of which is the development of the rules for another game ,  the target or subject game . 
these are games prevailing over all forms of society . 
the games studied in game theory are well-defined mathematical objects . 
a particular case of differential games are the games with a random time horizon . 
the game pictured consists of two players . 
most commonly studied asymmetric games are games where there are not identical strategy sets for both players . 
an important subset of sequential games consists of games of perfect information . 
many card games are games of imperfect information ,  such as poker and bridge . 
the extensive form can also capture simultaneous-move games and games with imperfect information . 
however ,  the most common payoffs for each of these games are symmetric . 
differential games such as the continuous pursuit and evasion game are continuous games where the evolution of the players' state variables is governed by differential equations . 
games ,  as studied by economists and real-world game players ,  are generally finished in finitely many moves . 
a symmetric game is a game where the payoffs for playing a particular strategy depend only on the other strategies employed ,  not on who is playing them . 
other zero-sum games include matching pennies and most classical board games including go and chess . 
games of perfect information have been studied in combinatorial game theory ,  which has developed novel representations ,  e . g . 
separately ,  game theory has played a role in online algorithms; in particular ,  the k-server problem ,  which has in the past been referred to as `` games with moving costs '' and `` request-answer games '' . 
if players have some information about the choices of other players ,  the game is usually presented in extensive form . 
consequently ,  notions of equilibrium for simultaneous games are insufficient for reasoning about sequential games; see subgame perfection . 
most cooperative games are presented in the characteristic function form ,  while the extensive and the normal forms are used to define noncooperative games . 
games of incomplete information can be reduced ,  however ,  to games of imperfect information by introducing `` moves by nature '' . 
many games studied by game theorists  -lrb-  including the famed prisoner's dilemma  -rrb-  are non-zero-sum games ,  because the outcome has net results greater or less than zero . 
game theory experienced a flurry of activity in the 1950s ,  during which time the concepts of the core ,  the extensive form game ,  fictitious play ,  repeated games ,  and the shapley value were developed . 
zero-sum games are a special case of constant-sum games ,  in which choices by players can neither increase nor decrease the available resources . 
simultaneous games are games where both players move simultaneously ,  or if they do not move simultaneously ,  the later players are unaware of the earlier players' actions  -lrb-  making them `` effectively '' simultaneous  -rrb-  . 
game theory has been put to several uses in philosophy . 
the payoffs of the game are generally taken to represent the utility of individual players . 
a prototypical paper on game theory in economics begins by presenting a game that is an abstraction of a particular economic situation . 
early discussions of examples of two-person games occurred long before the rise of modern ,  mathematical game theory . 
much of game theory is concerned with finite ,  discrete games ,  that have a finite number of players ,  moves ,  events ,  outcomes ,  etc . 
this player is not typically considered a third player in what is otherwise a two-player game ,  but merely serves to provide a roll of the dice where required by the game . 
games in which the difficulty of finding an optimal strategy stems from the multiplicity of possible moves are called combinatorial games . 
this normative use of game theory has also come under criticism . 
game theory was developed extensively in the 1950s by many scholars . 
the extensive form can be used to formalize games with a time sequencing of moves . 
the total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman . 
the separation rate was 6 per 10 marriages . 
99 percent of all german companies belong to the german `` mittelstand , ``  small and medium-sized enterprises ,  which are mostly family-owned . 
germany is the world's top location for trade fairs . 
the german chemical industry became the most advanced in the world ,  and by 1914 the country was producing half the world's electrical equipment . 
the establishment of the deutscher zollverein  -lrb-  german customs union  -rrb-  in 1834 and the expansion of railway systems were the main drivers of germany's industrial development and political union . 
the largest annual international trade fairs and congresses are held in several german cities such as hanover ,  frankfurt ,  cologne ,  leipzig and düsseldorf . 
deutsche bahn  -lrb-  german rail  -rrb-  is the major german railway infrastructure and service operator . 
the autobahn is the german federal highway system . 
germany has approximately 650,000 km of roads ,  of which 231,000 km are non-local roads . 
these systems are called stadtbahn  -lrb-  not to be confused with s-bahn  -rrb-  ,  on main line rails . 
the road network is extensively used with nearly 2 trillion km travelled by car in 2005, in comparison to just 70 billion km travelled by rail and 35 billion km travelled by plane . 
the autobahns are considered the safest category of german roads: for example ,  in 2012, while carrying 31% of all motorized road traffic ,  they only accounted for 11% of germany's traffic fatalities . <ref name= ''http://www . bast . de 2012 ''></ref>
germany features a total of 43,468 km railways ,  of which at least 19,973 km are electrified  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- . 
the first highway system to have been built ,  the extensive german autobahn network famously has no general speed limit for light vehicles  -lrb-  although posted speed limits are in force in most sections today ,  and there is a blanket 80 km/h limit for trucks  -rrb-  . 
almost all major metro areas of germany have suburban rail systems called s-bahnen  -lrb-  `` schnellbahnen ''  -rrb-  . 
verkehrsmittel and verkehrszeichen - transportation signs in germany are available here in german and english . 
with respect to foreign policy ,  the bundestag acts in a supervisory capacity . 
however ,  germany is giving increasing attention to coordinating its policies with the european union through the common foreign and security policy . 
accordingly ,  other ministries may only invite foreign guests or participate in treaty negotiations with the approval of the federal foreign office . 
the federal republic of germany  -lrb-  frg  -rrb-  is a central european country and member of the european union ,  g4, g8, the g20, the organisation for economic co-operation and development and the north atlantic treaty organization  -lrb-  nato  -rrb-  . 
there is a raft of ngos in germany that engage foreign policy issues . 
european integration has gone a long way since the european coal and steel community  -lrb-  ecsc  -rrb-  and the elysée treaty . 
germany is a member of the council of europe ,  european union ,  european space agency ,  g4, g8, international monetary fund ,  nato ,  oecd ,  organization for security and co-operation in europe ,  un ,  world bank group and the world trade organization . 
the cdu quickly announced angela merkel as christian democrat candidate for chancellor ,  aspiring to be the first female chancellor in german history . 
the most likely outcome of coalition talks was a so-called grand coalition between the christian democrats  -lrb-  cdu/csu  -rrb-  and the social democrats  -lrb-  spd  -rrb-  . 
the german head of state is the federal president . 
the multilateral system has ,  since 1949, been dominated by the christian democratic union  -lrb-  cdu  -rrb-  and the social democratic party of germany  -lrb-  spd  -rrb-  . 
the current system also prevents the chancellor from calling a snap election . 
official coalition talks between cdu/csu and spd started in january 2018 and led to a renewal of the grand coalition on 12 march 2018 as well as the subsequent re-election of angela merkel as chancellor . 
as a result of this christian democratic union  -lrb-  cdu  -rrb-  crisis ,  angela merkel became chair . 
the chancellor cannot be removed from office during a four-year term unless the `` bundestag '' has agreed on a successor . 
after 1949, the federal republic of germany had christian democratic chancellors for 20 years until a coalition between the social democrats and the liberals took over . 
on 22 may 2005 the spd received a devastating defeat in its former heartland ,  north rhine-westphalia . 
half an hour after the election results ,  the spd chairman franz müntefering announced that the chancellor would clear the way for new federal elections . 
this took the republic by surprise ,  especially because the spd was below 25% in polls at the time . 
the office is currently held by angela merkel  -lrb-  since 2005 -rrb- . 
after 16 years of the christian–liberal coalition ,  led by helmut kohl ,  the social democratic party of germany  -lrb-  spd  -rrb-  together with the greens won the bundestag elections of 1998.
750-650 bc  -rrb-  and the `` apastamba sulba sutra '' ,  composed by apastamba  -lrb-  c .  600 bc  -rrb-  ,  contained results similar to the `` baudhayana sulba sutra '' . 
the `` baudhayana sulba sutra '' ,  the best-known and oldest of the `` sulba sutras ''  -lrb-  dated to the 8th or 7th century bc  -rrb-  contains examples of simple pythagorean triples ,  such as: formula_2, formula_3, formula_4, formula_5, and formula_6 as well as a statement of the pythagorean theorem for the sides of a square: `` the rope which is stretched across the diagonal of a square produces an area double the size of the original square . `` 
in all ,  three `` sulba sutras '' were composed . 
plato  -lrb-  427-347 bc  -rrb-  is a philosopher that is highly esteemed by the greeks . 
brahmagupta's formula: the area ,  `` a '' ,  of a cyclic quadrilateral with sides of lengths `` a '' ,  `` b '' ,  `` c '' ,  `` d '' ,  respectively ,  is given by
contained the first statements of the theorem; the egyptians had a correct formula for the volume of a frustum of a square pyramid;
the babylonians may have known the general rules for measuring areas and volumes . 
 -lrb-  see areas of mathematics and algebraic geometry .   -rrb- 
chapter 12 also included a formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral  -lrb-  a generalization of heron's formula  -rrb-  ,  as well as a complete description of rational triangles  -lrb-  `` i . e . `` 
it also contains the general statement of the pythagorean theorem  -lrb-  for the sides of a rectangle  -rrb- : `` the rope stretched along the length of the diagonal of a rectangle makes an area which the vertical and horizontal sides make together . `` 
triangles with rational sides and rational areas  -rrb-  . 
reagan and bush ran for reelection in 1984.
by that time ,  bush had become a millionaire . 
during his career in public service ,  he was known simply as george bush ,  but after his son george w .  bush became the 43rd president in 2001, he was referred to as `` george h .  w .  bush '' ,  `` bush 41 '' ,  or `` george bush sr . `` 
george herbert walker bush was born at 173 adams street in milton ,  massachusetts on june 12, 1924 to prescott sheldon bush and dorothy  -lrb-  walker  -rrb-  bush . 
bush was inaugurated on january 20, 1989, succeeding ronald reagan . 
yarborough endorsed bentsen ,  who went on to defeat bush ,  53.4 to 46.6% . 
in early 1992, bush announced that he would seek a second term . 
several key factors led to bush's defeat . 
the speech at the convention included bush's famous pledge: ``  . `` 
bush's approval ratings skyrocketed after the successful offensive . 
in his inaugural address ,  bush said: early in his term ,  bush faced the problem of what to do with leftover deficits spawned during the reagan years . 
by december 2008, 60% of americans gave bush's presidency a positive rating . 
bush urged that progress be made in improving relations between the u . s .  and japan . 
bush praised prime minister shamir for his leadership during the crisis . 
in march 1986, bush outlined the government's policy on the combating of terrorism . 
after bush received his military discharge ,  he enrolled at yale university . 
by the end of 1985, a committee had been established ,  and over two million dollars were raised for bush . 
bush was named after his maternal grandfather george herbert walker ,  who was known as `` pop '' ,  and young bush was called `` poppy '' as a tribute to his namesake . 
after the win ,  bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum ,  or `` the big mo '' . 
after graduating from yale ,  bush moved his young family to west texas . 
bush also pointed out that dukakis was opposed to a law that would require all students to say the pledge of allegiance ,  a topic highlighted in bush's nomination acceptance speech . 
this experience shaped bush profoundly ,  leading him to ask ,  `` why had i been spared and what did god have for me ? `` 
conservative political columnist pat buchanan challenged bush for the republican nomination . 
both were popular issues with conservatives ,  and bush ,  largely a moderate ,  began courting them through his work . 
in the wake of a struggle with congress ,  bush was forced by the democratic majority to raise tax revenues; as a result ,  many republicans felt betrayed because bush had promised `` no new taxes '' in his 1988 campaign . 
as the 1988 republican national convention approached ,  there was much speculation who bush would choose to be his running mate . 
at a press conference in 1990, bush told reporters that he found foreign policy more enjoyable . 
president bush was joined by presidents jimmy carter ,  bill clinton ,  and george w .  bush to highlight the role volunteer service plays in people's lives . 
on september 28, bush delivered a televised address pledging that the us would forever be aligned with poland . 
conservative republicans pointed out that bush's 1990 agreement to raise taxes contradicted his famous ``  '' pledge . 
after ford assumed the presidency ,  bush was under serious consideration for being nominated as vice president . 
bush lost most of the remaining primaries as well ,  and formally dropped out of the race in may of that year . 
in may 1986, bush underwent a procedure to remove a malignant growth from his left cheek . 
the general election campaign between bush and dukakis was described in 2008 as one of the dirtiest in modern times . 
in keeping with tradition ,  bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office . 
after bob dole resigned as chairman of the republican national committee in 1972, nixon named bush to the position . 
ford again passed over bush when he chose bob dole to replace rockefeller on the 1976 presidential ticket . 
with george w .  bush's victory in the 2000 presidential election ,  bush and his son became the second father–son pair to serve as president ,  following john adams and john quincy adams . 
following his 1970 loss ,  bush was well known as a prominent republican businessman from the southern sun belt . 
during his eight-year tenure as vice president ,  bush headed task forces on deregulation and the war on drugs . 
in 1999, the cia headquarters in langley ,  virginia ,  was named `` george bush center for intelligence '' in his honor . 
on july 13, 1985, bush became the first vice president to serve as acting president when reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon; bush served as the acting president for approximately eight hours . 
the use of the concepts of `` spirit '' and `` idea '' is central in berkeley's philosophy . 
berkeley was the namesake of the city of berkeley ,  california ,  which is perhaps most famous as the home of the prestigious university . 
berkeley was born at his family home ,  dysart castle ,  near thomastown ,  county kilkenny ,  ireland ,  the eldest son of william berkeley ,  a cadet of the noble family of berkeley . 
his 1744 work on tar-water sold more copies than any of his other books during berkeley's lifetime . 
which are caused in the spirits of humans by the spirit of god . 
berkeley is also known for his critique of abstraction ,  an important premise in his argument for immaterialism . 
george berkeley  -lrb-  ; 12 march 168514 january 1753 -rrb- – known as bishop berkeley  -lrb-  bishop of cloyne  -rrb-  – was an anglo-irish philosopher whose primary achievement was the advancement of a theory he called `` immaterialism ''  -lrb-  later referred to as `` subjective idealism '' by others  -rrb-  . 
shortly afterwards ,  berkeley visited england and was received into the circle of addison ,  pope and steele . 
moore is best known today for his defence of ethical non-naturalism ,  his emphasis on common sense in philosophical method ,  and the paradox that bears his name . 
moore was born in upper norwood ,  croydon ,  greater london ,  on 4 november 1873, the middle child of seven of dr daniel moore and henrietta sturge . 
thus ,  the following: could be recast as:
more generally ,  a collection of formula_1 equivalent definitions  -lrb-  each of which is expressed with one unique genus  -rrb-  can be recast as one definition that is expressed with formula_2 genera . 
for example ,  consider these two definitions: those definitions can be expressed as one genus and two `` differentiae '':
for instance ,  consider the following: a part of that definition may be singled out  -lrb-  using parentheses here  -rrb- : and with that part ,  an abstraction may be formed: then ,  the definition of `` a square '' may be recast with that abstraction as its genus:
gatling gun  -rrb-  . 
the smallest of all firearms is the handgun . 
a long gun is generally any firearm that is larger than a handgun and is designed to be held and fired with both hands ,  either from the hip or the shoulder . 
the development behind firearms accelerated during the 19th and 20th centuries . 
most modern long guns are either rifles or shotguns . 
the earliest evolution of the firearm ,  there are many types of manual action firearms . 
selective fire ,  or `` select fire '' ,  means the capability of a weapon's fire control to be adjusted in either semi-automatic or fully automatic firing modes . 
submachine guns were originally about the size of carbines . 
most automatic weapons are classed as long guns  -lrb-  as the ammunition used is of similar type as for rifles ,  and the recoil of the weapon's rapid fire is better controlled with two hands  -rrb-  ,  but handgun-sized automatic weapons also exist ,  generally in the `` submachine gun '' or `` machine pistol '' class . 
the definition of machine gun is different in u . s .  law . 
a submachine gun is a magazine-fed firearm ,  usually smaller than other automatic firearms ,  that fires pistol-caliber ammunition; for this reason certain submachine guns can also be referred to as `` machine pistols '' ,  especially when referring to handgun-sized designs such as the škorpion vz . 
modern firearms can be described by their caliber  -lrb-  i . e . 
small arms include handguns  -lrb-  revolvers and pistols  -rrb-  and long guns ,  such as rifles ,  carbines ,  shotguns ,  submachine guns ,  assault rifles ,  battle rifles ,  personal defense weapons ,  and light machine guns . 
 ''machine gun '' is therefore largely synonymous with `` automatic weapon '' in the u . s .  civilian parlance ,  covering all automatic firearms . 
firearms are also categorized by their functioning cycle or `` action '' which describes its loading ,  firing ,  and unloading cycle . 
the europeans and arabs  -lrb-  first mamluks  -rrb-  obtained firearms in the 14th century . 
washington arrived in philadelphia on may 9, 1787.
washington dealt with major problems . 
washington grew up in virginia's tidewater region . 
washington played a central role before and during the american revolution . 
washington's brother lawrence was an adjutant general at death ,  and this inspired washington to pursue his own military career . 
washington lent his prestige to the goodwill and work of the other delegates . 
washington's repeated petitions to the continental congress for provisions were futile . 
washington denounced the societies and demanded that the french recall genêt . 
washington's army went into winter quarters at new windsor ,  new york ,  in december 1780, where they again suffered and washington urged congress and state officials to expedite provisions . 
washington assumed personal command and reorganized west point . 
washington later said the british could have successfully counter-attacked his encampment before his troops were dug in . 
anticipating what awaited them ,  washington and his party headed to boston to engage the british for the first time . 
washington became `` america's first spymaster '' ,  for his successful design of an espionage system against the british . 
washington soon was counted among the political and social elite in virginia . 
washington was considered an incisive leader who kept his `` ambition in check . `` 
washington saw the advantage ,  and feinted towards clinton in new york before heading south to virginia . 
washington succeeded a prosperous family of slaveholding planters in colonial virginia . 
washington's father ,  augustine ,  was a justice of the peace and a prominent public figure who had 10 children ,  4 by his first marriage to jane butler ,  and 6 by mary ,  including washington . 
washington's farewell address proved to be one of the most influential statements on republicanism . 
the admiration for washington was waning ,  including little credit from john adams . 
hamilton demanded that jefferson resign if he could not support washington ,  and rather than respond publicly ,  jefferson told washington that hamilton's fiscal system would lead to the overthrow of the republic . 
the upshot of the rebellion strengthened washington's bond with hamilton ,  distancing him from knox who resigned . 
washington was inaugurated on april 30, 1789, taking the oath of office at federal hall in new york city . 
approaching the election of 1792, hamilton urged the popular washington to run for a second term . 
washington ,  however ,  abandoned the party ,  after a month of hardship ,  and returned home . 
washington favored hamilton's agenda ,  which went into effect and resulted in bitter controversy . 
on april 12, 1743 augustine died ,  leaving washington under the care of his mother mary . 
washington and madison then spent four days at mount vernon evaluating the transition of the new government . 
washington's army of less experienced men were defeated in the pitched battles at philadelphia . 
washington's cabinet became a consulting and advisory body ,  not mandated by the constitution . 
washington inherited his mount vernon estate in 1754 after the deaths of lawrence's wife and daughter . 
washington then marched his army to new york ,  initiated fortification ,  and correctly predicted that the british would return and attack in full force . 
washington was elected to the virginia house of burgesses for frederick county in 1758 until 1765, and then for fairfax county . 
george washington was born on february 22, 1732 at popes creek in westmoreland county ,  virginia . 
von steuben was promoted to major general and became washington's chief of staff . 
during the forbes expedition ,  washington's suggestion to employ indian-style warfare was ignored . 
once exposed ,  conway later wrote an apology to washington ,  resigned ,  and returned to france . 
thirty years later washington reflected `` that so young and inexperienced a person should have been employed '' . 
the feuding jefferson and hamilton agreed on one thing ,  that washington remain in office for a second term . 
washington's farewell address was widely regarded as one of the most influential statements on republicanism . 
washington was unanimously elected president by the electoral college in the first two national elections . 
washington was outraged over the indians' brutality and execution of captives ,  including women and children . 
washington's forceful action demonstrated that the government could protect itself and its tax collectors . 
washington's army of 11,000 went into winter quarters at valley forge north of philadelphia in december 1777.
washington became honorary brigadier general ,  leading a final 2,500-man assault . 
in july 1754, the french responded by attacking the fort in the ten-hour battle of fort necessity ,  which ended in washington's surrender . 
the gulf coast is a major center of economic activity . 
as of 2004, seven of the top ten busiest ports in the u . s .  are on the gulf coast . 
the gulf coast is made of many inlets ,  bays ,  and lagoons . 
the gulf coast of the united states is the coastline along the southern united states where they meet the gulf of mexico . 
the first europeans to settle the gulf coast were primarily the french and the spanish . 
it has also been suggested that the dark matter halo can pull the galaxy ,  thus stopping disk contraction . 
stars form out of cold gas  -lrb-  see also the kennicutt-schmidt law  -rrb-  ,  so a galaxy is quenched when it has no more cold gas . 
more recent theories include the clustering of dark matter halos in the bottom-up process . 
current models also predict that the majority of mass in galaxies is made up of dark matter ,  a substance which is not directly observable ,  and might not interact through any means except gravity . 
astronomers now believe that disk galaxies likely formed first ,  then evolved into elliptical galaxies through galaxy mergers . 
elliptical galaxies have central supermassive black holes ,  and the masses of these black holes correlate with the galaxy’s mass . 
for galaxies with massive dark matter halos ,  another preventive mechanism called “virial shock heating” may also prevent gas from becoming cool enough to form stars . 
the lambda-cdm model is a cosmological model that explains the formation of the universe after the big bang . 
olin eggen ,  donald lynden-bell ,  and allan sandage in 1962, proposed a theory that disk galaxies form through a monolithic collapse of a large gas cloud . 
generation x or gen x is the demographic cohort following the baby boomers and preceding the millennials . 
those in `` generation flux '' have birth years in the ranges of gen x and millennials . 
the time period of the gen x childhood saw an increase in latchkey children ,  leading to the terminology of the `` latchkey generation '' for generation x . 
strauss and howe define generation x as those born between 1961 and 1981.
but according to authors and demographers william strauss and neil howe  -lrb-  who use 1961 to 1981 for gen x birth years  -rrb-  ,  by 1991 there were approximately 88.5 million gen xers in the u . s . 
stereotypes of gen x young adults also included that they were `` bleak ,  cynical ,  and disaffected '' . 
in their 1991 book `` generations '' authors and demographers neil howe and william strauss ,  used 1961 to 1981 for gen x birth years . 
gen xers were the first cohort to come of age with mtv . 
at the time it was published they wrote that there are approximately 88.5 million u . s .  gen xers . 
on the american television program `` survivor '' ,  for their 33rd season ,  subtitled ``  '' ,  the `` gen x tribe '' consisted of individuals born between 1963 and 1982.
author jeff gordinier ,  in his 2008 book `` x saves the world '' ,  defines generation x as those born roughly between 1961 and 1977 but possibly as late as 1980.
in terms of advocating for their children in the educational setting ,  demographer neil howe describes gen x parents as distinct from baby boomer parents . 
generally ,  gen xers are the children of the silent generation and older baby boomers . 
the `` x '' refers to an unknown variable or to a desire not to be defined . 
 ''the generation map '' ,  a report from australia's mccrindle research center writes of gen x children: `` their boomer parents were the most divorced generation in australian history '' . 
in other words ,  adults of all ages were more cynical and disaffected in the 1990s ,  not just generation x . 
in 2002, `` time '' magazine published an article titled `` gen xers aren't slackers after all '' ,  reporting four out of five new businesses were the work of gen xers . 
by the 1990s punk rock re-emerged in the mainstream ,  as punk rock and pop punk bands with gen x members such as green day ,  rancid ,  the offspring ,  and blink-182 brought the genre widespread popularity . 
in 2016, 162,742 people resided on guam . 
guam lies between 13.2° and 13.7°n and 144.6° and 145.0°e . 
guam is the biggest single segment of micronesia ,  the largest islands between the island of kyushu  -lrb-  japan  -rrb-  ,  new guinea ,  the philippines ,  and the hawaiian islands . 
some historians estimate that war violence killed 10% of guam's then 20,000 population . 
a marine seaplane unit was stationed in guam from 1921 to 1930, the first in the pacific . 
other pacific island languages and many asian languages are spoken in guam as well . 
on august 6, 1997, guam was the site of the korean air flight 801 aircraft accident . 
the japanese occupation of guam lasted for approximately thirty-one months . 
guam temporarily hosted 100,000 vietnamese refugees in 1975, and 6,600 kurdish refugees in 1996.
by july 1695, quiroga had completed the conquest of guam ,  rota ,  tinian and aguigan . 
guam is among the seventeen non-self-governing territories listed by the united nations . 
challenger deep ,  at the deepest surveyed point in the oceans ,  lies southwest of guam . 
guam received nineteen filipino prisoners after their failed 1872 cavite mutiny . 
after world war ii ,  the guam organic act of 1950 established guam as an unincorporated organized territory of the united states ,  provided for the structure of the island's civilian government ,  and granted the people u . s .  citizenship . 
it was the final game boy and last handheld to have backwards compatibility with game boy and game boy color games . 
the game boy line is a line of handheld game consoles developed ,  manufactured ,  and marketed by nintendo ,  consisting of the game boy ,  game boy color and game boy advance . 
the game boy pocket is a redesigned version of the original game boy having the same features . 
unlike the game boy advance and game boy advance sp ,  the game boy micro is unable to play any original game boy or game boy color games ,  only playing game boy advance titles  -lrb-  with the exception of the nintendo e-reader ,  discontinued in america ,  but still available in japan  -rrb-  . 
the game boy light was superseded by the game boy color six months later and was the only game boy to have a backlit screen until the release of the game boy advance sp ags-101 model in 2003.
a number of game boy ,  game boy color ,  and game boy advance games have been rereleased digitally through the virtual console service for the nintendo 3ds and wii u . 
the game that pushed the game boy into the upper reaches of success was `` tetris '' . 
nintendo's game boy handheld was first released in 1989.
some games written specifically for the game boy color can be played on older model game boys ,  whereas others cannot  -lrb-  see the game paks section for more information  -rrb-  . 
in april 1998, a variant of the game boy pocket named game boy light was exclusively released in japan . 
gemini 10  -lrb-  officially gemini x  -rrb-  was a 1966 manned spaceflight in nasa's gemini program . 
because gardeners may have different goals ,  organisms considered `` garden pests '' vary from gardener to gardener . 
the use of these items can be part of the expression of a gardener's gardening personality . 
in these situations ,  a staff of gardeners or groundskeepers maintains the gardens . 
garden design is considered to be an art in most cultures ,  distinguished from gardening ,  which generally means `` garden maintenance '' . 
assyria was also renowned for its beautiful gardens . 
community gardening comprises a wide variety of approaches to sharing land and gardens . 
residential gardening takes place near the home ,  in a space referred to as the garden . 
forest gardening ,  a forest-based food production system ,  is the world's oldest form of gardening . 
gardening also takes place in non-residential green areas ,  such as parks ,  public or semi-public gardens  -lrb-  botanical gardens or zoological gardens  -rrb-  ,  amusement parks ,  along transportation corridors ,  and around tourist attractions and garden hotels . 
rock gardens increased in popularity in the 19th century . 
wealthy ancient egyptians used gardens for providing shade . 
a notable example of ancient ornamental gardens were the hanging gardens of babylon—one of the seven wonders of the ancient world —while ancient rome had dozens of gardens . 
people often surround their house and garden with a hedge . 
both `` graffiti '' and its occasional singular form `` graffito '' are from the italian word `` graffiato ''  -lrb-  `` scratched ''  -rrb-  . 
the ancient romans carved graffiti on walls and monuments ,  examples of which also survive in egypt . 
unrelated to hip-hop graffiti ,  gangs use their own form of graffiti to mark territory or to serve as an indicator of gang-related activities . 
graffiti may also express underlying social and political messages and a whole genre of artistic expression is based upon spray paint graffiti styles . 
for `` shin godzilla ''  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- ,  godzilla was made even taller than the legendary version ,  at  . 
steven spielberg cited `` godzilla '' as an inspiration for `` jurassic park ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  specifically `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters ! `` 
the film and character has often been branded as a knock-off of godzilla . 
in the original japanese films ,  godzilla and all the other monsters are referred to with gender-neutral pronouns equivalent to `` it '' ,  while in the english dubbed versions ,  godzilla is explicitly described as a male ,  such as in the title of `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters ! ``  . 
in `` godzilla ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- ,  the character was portrayed entirely via cgi . 
in `` godzilla ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- ,  special effects artist patrick tatopoulos was instructed to redesign godzilla as an incredibly fast runner . 
the creature in the 1998 godzilla film was depicted laying eggs through parthenogenesis . 
during the development of the american version of `` godzilla raids again ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- ,  godzilla's name was changed to `` gigantis '' ,  a move initiated by producer paul schreibman ,  who wanted to create a character distinct from godzilla . 
godzilla has been featured alongside many supporting characters . 
godzilla's allegiance and motivations have changed from film to film to suit the needs of the story . 
 -lrb-  `` godzilla '' ,  `` king kong vs .  godzilla '' ,  `` mothra vs .  godzilla '' ,  `` ghidorah ,  the three-headed monster '' ,  `` invasion of astro-monster '' ,  `` godzilla vs .  mechagodzilla '' ,  `` rodan '' ,  `` mothra '' ,  `` atragon '' ,  and `` king kong escapes ''  -rrb-  . 
they then re-released the film on blu-ray on april 1, 2014, along with `` king kong escapes '' . 
in north america ,  `` king kong vs .  godzilla '' premiered in new york city on june 26, 1963.
when john beck sold the `` king kong vs .  prometheus '' script to toho  -lrb-  which became `` king kong vs .  godzilla ''  -rrb-  ,  he was given exclusive rights to produce a version of the film for release in non-asian territories . 
in france ,  where it was called `` king kong contre godzilla '' ,  it drew 554,695 box office admissions . 
the film had its roots in an earlier concept for a new `` king kong '' feature developed by willis o'brien ,  animator of the original stop-motion kong . 
the jsdf then decides to transport kong via balloons to godzilla ,  in hopes that they will kill each other . 
the film was released in japan on august 11, 1962.
kong retreats after realizing that he is not yet ready to take on godzilla and its atomic breath . 
by association ,  it is thought that this `` king kong vs .  godzilla '' dub is an uncut ,  english-language international version not known to have been released on home video . 
since king kong was seen as the bigger draw  -lrb-  at the time ,  he was even more popular in japan than godzilla  -rrb-  ,  and since godzilla was still a villain at this point in the series ,  the decision was made to not only give king kong top billing but also to present him as the winner of the climactic fight . 
godzilla escapes from the island just before it explodes . 
the underwater sequences were filmed on an indoor soundstage where the godzilla and ebirah suits were filmed through the glass of a water-filled aquarium ,  with some scenes of the godzilla suit shot separately underwater as well . 
this is the first of two `` godzilla '' films in which a pacific island is the primary setting ,  rather than a location inside japan  -lrb-  the second ,  and final ,  one was `` son of godzilla ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb-  -rrb-  . 
godzilla is then attacked by ookondoru ,  a giant condor ,  and a squadron of red bamboo fighter jets ,  but he destroys them both . 
fukuda also wanted to portray the monsters almost as people in regards to the father-son relationship between godzilla and minilla ,  as fukuda stated `` we focused on the relationship between godzilla and his son throughout the course of `` son of godzilla '' . 
the godzilla suit built for this film was the biggest in terms of size and girth . 
the baby godzilla ,  named minilla ,  quickly grows to about half the size of the adult godzilla and godzilla instructs it on the important monster skills of roaring and using its atomic ray . 
 ''son of godzilla '' was distributed theatrically in japan by toho on december 16, 1967.
the film was released in japan on august 1, 1968.
the film was written by honda and takeshi kimura who introduced the concept of monster island into the `` godzilla '' film series . 
new monster suits for godzilla and anguirus were constructed for the film ,  while rodan and king ghidorah suits were modified from previous films ,  with king ghidorah having less detail than he had in previous films . 
the film was written by takeshi kimura and ishirō honda ,  making it the first `` godzilla '' film since `` godzilla raids again '' not written by shinichi sekizawa . 
from contemporary reviews ,  both `` variety '' and `` monthly film bulletin '' noted the film's best scenes involved the monsters together ,  while criticising the film making . 
 ''destroy all monsters '' was released on vhs by adv films in 1998 which featured english dubbed dialogue from toho's own international version of the film . 
like previous godzilla films ,  `` godzilla vs .  megalon '' heavily employs stock footage from previous toho godzilla films such as `` mothra vs .  godzilla ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- ,  `` the war of the gargantuas ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  `` ebirah ,  horror of the deep ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  `` destroy all monsters ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- ,  `` godzilla vs .  hedorah ''  -lrb-  1971 -rrb- ,  and `` godzilla vs .  gigan ''  -lrb-  1972 -rrb- . 
in japan ,  `` godzilla vs .  megalon '' sold approximately 980,000 tickets . 
as godzilla journeys to fight megalon ,  jet jaguar programs into a safeguard mode and grows to gigantic proportions to face megalon itself until godzilla arrives . 
 ''godzilla vs .  megalon '' has attracted the ire of many `` godzilla '' fans in the decades since its original release . 
 ''godzilla vs .  megalon '' was originally planned as a non- ''godzilla '' film ,  a solo vehicle for jet jaguar ,  which was the result of a contest toho had for children in mid-to-late 1972.
 ''godzilla vs .  megalon '' is the first godzilla film to receive an american prime time network television premiere ,  where it was broadcast nationwide at 9:00 pm on nbc on march 15, 1977.
the film had three early treatments ,  each written by shinichi sekizawa ,  one was titled `` godzilla vs . 
according to teruyoshi nakano ,  the godzilla suit used in this film  -lrb-  nicknamed the `` megaro-goji '' suit  -rrb-  was made in a week ,  making it the fastest godzilla suit ever made to date . 
john belushi hosted the broadcast where he did some skits ,  all in a godzilla suit . 
after uniting with japan's defense force ,  goro manages to regain control of jet jaguar and sends the robot to monster island to bring godzilla to fight megalon . 
godzilla reawakens and leaves for the ocean . 
in the aftermath of godzilla's attack on tokyo and later imprisonment at mt . 
japan hero said ,  `` this is definitely a godzilla movie not to be missed . `` 
gondo is killed in the process ,  and an unaffected godzilla leaves the city . 
 ''godzilla vs .  biollante '' was released on vhs by hbo home video on november 25, 1992.
unlike the case with later ,  more committee-driven `` godzilla '' films ,  ōmori was given considerable leeway in writing and directing the film ,  which toho staff later judged to have been an error resulting in a movie with a very narrow audience . 
in early 1990, toho entered discussions with miramax to distribute the film . 
the film is one of the only `` godzilla '' films with nudity . 
the film was the least successful of the entire godzilla franchise . 
toho titled its english version of the film `` terror of mechagodzilla '' and had it dubbed into english in hong kong . 
it wasn't until 1984 and `` godzilla '''s 30th anniversary that toho would start production on a new godzilla movie . 
in the mid-1980s ,  the u . s .  television version ,  `` terror of mechagodzilla '' ,  was replaced by the theatrical edit ,  `` the terror of godzilla '' ,  on television and home video . 
terror of mechagodzilla  -lrb-  released in japan as is a 1975 japanese science fiction kaiju film featuring godzilla ,  produced and distributed by toho . 
fortunately ,  godzilla arrives to fight off titanosaurus . 
in japan ,  the film sold 980,000 tickets . 
extras included the trailer for `` godzilla vs .  king ghidorah '' and `` godzilla vs .  mothra '' . 
the godzilla suits used in `` godzilla vs .  biollante '' were reused in `` godzilla vs .  king ghidorah '' ,  though with slight modifications . 
godzilla arrives in japan and is met by king ghidorah . 
columbia tristar home entertainment released `` godzilla vs .  king ghidorah '' and `` godzilla vs .  mothra '' on dvd in 1998.
 ''watchmojo '' ranked it as the #2 best godzilla movie . 
although the previously filmed `` godzilla vs .  biollante '' had been the most expensive `` godzilla '' film produced at the time ,  its low audience attendance and loss of revenue convinced executive producer and `` godzilla '' series creator tomoyuki tanaka to revitalize the series by bringing back iconic monsters from pre-1984 `` godzilla '' movies ,  specifically godzilla's archenemy king ghidorah . 
at the same time ,  shindo plans to use his nuclear submarine to recreate godzilla . 
 ''godzilla vs .  mothra '' was released in japan on december 12, 1992 where it was distributed by toho . 
originally conceived as a standalone mothra film entitled `` mothra vs .  bagan '' ,  the movie was notable for its return to a more fantasy-based ,  family-oriented atmosphere evocative of pre-1984 `` godzilla '' films . 
the film was released in the united states as `` godzilla and mothra: the battle for earth '' on april 28, 1998 on home video by columbia tristar home video . 
meanwhile ,  godzilla surfaces from mount fuji . 
unadjusted for inflation ,  the film remains the highest-grossing film of the toho `` godzilla '' films and was the second highest-grossing film in japan in 1993, second only to `` jurassic park '' . 
the film was released in japan on december 12, 1992 and in direct to video in the united states in 1998 by columbia tristar home video as `` godzilla and mothra: the battle for earth '' . 
the 1956 `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters ! `` 
honda was unaware that `` godzilla '' had been re-edited until toho released `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters '' in japan in may 1957 as `` monster king godzilla '' . 
after further destruction ,  godzilla returns to the ocean . 
most of the film was shot in the toho lot . 
 ''godzilla ,  king of the monsters '' grossed $2 million during its theatrical run ,  more than what the 1954 film grossed in japan . 
after its run ,  the film had a final gross of $150,191.
in 2009, classic media released `` godzilla '' on blu-ray . 
yeah ,  that'll stop godzilla in his tracks . ``  ''
steven spielberg cited `` godzilla '' as an inspiration for `` jurassic park ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  specifically `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters ! `` 
godzilla's name was also a source of consternation for the filmmakers . 
nakajima would go on to portray godzilla and other monsters until his retirement in 1972.
so ,  i took the characteristics of an atomic bomb and applied them to godzilla . `` 
since its release ,  `` godzilla '' has been regarded not only as one of the best giant monster films ever made but an important cinematic achievement . 
honda's team spent 51 days shooting the film . 
in 1984, kinema junpo magazine listed `` godzilla '' as one of the top 20 japanese films of all time ,  while a survey of 370 japanese movie critics published in `` nihon eiga besuto 150 ''  -lrb-  `` best 150 japanese films ''  -rrb-  ,  had `` godzilla '' ranked as the 27th best japanese film ever made . 
 ''godzilla '' went into production after a japanese-indonesian co-production collapsed . 
the special effects crew spent 71 days on filming . 
in the film ,  godzilla symbolizes nuclear holocaust from japan's perspective and has since been culturally identified as a strong metaphor for nuclear weapons . 
the film grossed ¥183 million during its theatrical run . 
godzilla was designed by teizo toshimitsu and akira watanabe under eiji tsuburaya's supervision . 
tezuka filmed scenes in the godzilla suit but due to his older body ,  he was unable to fully commit to the physical demands required of the role . 
godzilla has since become an international pop culture icon and the film has been largely credited for establishing the template for `` tokusatsu '' . 
since the release of the film ,  toho had adopted the moniker `` king of the monsters '' for godzilla ,  which has since appeared in official marketing ,  advertisement ,  and promotional materials . 
the original 1954 film is also largely credited ,  because of eiji tsuburaya ,  for establishing the template for tokusatsu ,  a technique of practical special effects filmmaking that would become essential in japan's film industry since the release of `` godzilla ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- . 
godzilla and the super x battle through the streets . 
the return of godzilla ,  released in japan as is a 1984 japanese `` kaiju '' film featuring godzilla ,  produced and distributed by toho . 
godzilla attacks the ihama nuclear power plant . 
 ''the return of godzilla '' was released on december 15, 1984 in japan where it was distributed by toho . 
it is the 16th film in the `` godzilla '' franchise and the first film in the heisei series ,  despite having been produced during the shōwa period . 
in tokyo ,  okumura realizes by looking at pictures that the monster he saw was a new godzilla . 
 ''the return of godzilla '' serves as both a sequel to the original 1954 film and a reboot of the franchise that ignores the events of the shōwa films ,  placing itself in line with the darker tone and themes of the original film and returning godzilla to his destructive ,  antagonistic roots . 
in 1985, new world pictures released `` godzilla 1985 '' ,  a heavily re-edited american adaptation of the film which included additional footage ,  raymond burr reprising his role from `` godzilla ,  king of the monsters ! 
the special effects were again directed by teruyoshi nakano ,  who had directed the special effects of several previous `` godzilla '' films . 
however ,  it was also revealed that the americanized version of the film ,  `` godzilla 1985 '' would not be featured in the release due to on-going copyright issues concerning music cues that new world pictures borrowed from `` def-con 4 '' for use in `` godzilla 1985 '' . 
meanwhile ,  the soviets have their own plans to counter the threat posed by godzilla ,  and a soviet control ship disguised as a freighter in tokyo harbor prepares to launch a nuclear missile from one of their orbiting satellites should godzilla attack . 
it was thus mistakenly thought to be a new work by kant himself . 
reviews were assuming kant was the author when kant cleared the confusion and openly praised the work and author . 
from zurich ,  fichte returned to leipzig in may 1790.
fichte also wrote works of political philosophy; he has a reputation as one of the fathers of german nationalism . 
in october 1793, he was married in zurich ,  where he remained the rest of the year . 
johann gottlieb fichte  -lrb-  ; ; 19 may 1762 – 27 january 1814 -rrb- was a german philosopher who became a founding figure of the philosophical movement known as german idealism ,  which developed from the theoretical and ethical writings of immanuel kant . 
his son ,  immanuel hermann fichte  -lrb-  18 july 1796 – 8 august 1879 -rrb- ,  also made contributions to philosophy . 
