complicating the use of aspirin for prevention is the phenomenon of aspirin resistance . 
aspirin is known to interact with other drugs . 
there is no evidence that aspirin prevents dementia . 
aspirin overdose can be acute or chronic . 
aspirin is an nsaid but is not affected by the new warnings . 
the synthesis of aspirin is classified as an esterification reaction . 
aspirin use has been shown to increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding . 
aspirin may also inhibit the absorption of vitamin c . 
low dose aspirin appears useful for people less than 70 kg while higher dose aspirin is required to benefit those over 70 kg . 
aspirin's popularity declined after the development of acetaminophen/paracetamol in 1956 and ibuprofen in 1962.
aspirin can cause prolonged bleeding after operations for up to 10 days . 
aspirin can induce swelling of skin tissues in some people . 
dogs are better able to tolerate aspirin than cats are . 
low-dose aspirin use was also associated with a trend toward lower risk of cardiovascular events ,  and lower aspirin doses  -lrb-  75 or 81 mg/day  -rrb-  may optimize efficacy and safety for people requiring aspirin for long-term prevention . 
bayer lost its trademark for aspirin in the united states in 1918 because it had failed to use the name for its own product and had for years allowed the use of `` aspirin '' by other manufacturers  . 
aspirin is an important part of the treatment of those who have had a myocardial infarction  -lrb-  heart attack  -rrb-  . 
aspirin has been shown to have at least three additional modes of action . 
topical aspirin may be effective for treating some types of neuropathic pain . 
low-dose aspirin supplementation has moderate benefits when used for prevention of pre-eclampsia . 
aspirin is thought to reduce the overall risk of both getting cancer and dying from cancer . 
aspirin's popularity grew over the first half of the twentieth century leading to fierce competition with the proliferation of aspirin brands and products . 
aspirin and other nsaids ,  such as ibuprofen ,  may delay the healing of skin wounds . 
however ,  when the aspirin was taken alone ,  it did not cause angioedema in these people; the aspirin had been taken in combination with another nsaid-induced drug when angioedema appeared . 
aspirin has also been suggested as a component of a polypill for prevention of cardiovascular disease . 
taking equal doses of vitamin c and aspirin may decrease the amount of stomach damage that occurs compared to taking aspirin alone . 
and they buried abner in hebron ,  and the king raised his voice and wept on abner's grave ,  and all the people wept . `` 
david had abner buried in hebron ,  as it states in 2 samuel 3:31-32, `` and david said to all the people who were with him ,  'rend your clothes and gird yourselves with sackcloth ,  and wail before abner . '
a bow-shot west of the cave is the sepulchre of abner the son of ner . `` 
in the first and second books of samuel ,  abner  -lrb-   `` ’avner ''  -rrb-  was saul's uncle and commander-in-chief of his army  -lrb-  1 samuel 14:50, 20:25 -rrb- . 
shortly after abner's death ,  ish-bosheth was assassinated as he slept  -lrb-  2 samuel 4 -rrb- ,  and david became king of the reunited kingdoms  -lrb-  2 samuel 5 -rrb- . 
the site known as the tomb of abner is located not far from the cave of the patriarchs in hebron and receives visitors throughout the year . 
the new grand vizier ,  nasuh pasha ,  did not want to fight with the safavids . 
in 1605, sinan pasha marched to take tabriz ,  but the army was undermined by köse sefer pasha ,  the beylerbey of erzurum ,  marching independently from sinan pasha and consequently being taken prisoner by the safavids . 
ahmed i  -lrb-   ``  ''; ; april 1590 – 22 november 1617 -rrb- was the sultan of the ottoman empire from 1603 until his death in 1617.
sarhoş i̇brahim pasha ,  the beylerbey of nagykanizsa  -lrb-  kanije  -rrb-  ,  attacked the austrian region of istria . 
his son ,  mehmed ,  obtained the governorship of baghdad with a fake firman and defeated the forces of nasuh pasha sent to defeat him . 
on 20 november 1612, the treaty of nasuh pasha was signed ,  which ceded all the lands the ottoman empire had gained in the war of 1578–90 back to persia and reinstated the 1555 boundaries . 
however ,  with jelali revolts in anatolia more dangerous than ever and a defeat in the eastern front ,  mehmed pasha was called to constantinople . 
sultan ahmed constructed the sultan ahmed mosque ,  the magnum opus of the ottoman architecture ,  across from the hagia sophia . 
murad pasha then suppressed some smaller revolts in central anatolia and suppressed other jelali chiefs by inviting them to join the army . 
under fazıl mustafa pasha's successors ,  the ottomans suffered further defeats . 
ahmed ii was born on 25 february 1643, the son of sultan ibrahim and muazzez sultan . 
ahmed ii  -lrb-  ottoman turkish: احمد ثانى `` aḥmed-i sānī ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  25 february 1643 – 6 february 1695 -rrb- was the sultan of the ottoman empire from 1691 to 1695.
in the year 1712, the mughal emperor jahandar shah ,  a grandson of aurangzeb sent gifts to the ottoman sultan ahmad iii and referred to himself as the ottoman sultan's devoted admirer . 
ahmed iii  -lrb-  ottoman turkish: احمد ثالث ,  `` aḥmed-i sālis ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  30/31 december 16731 july 1736 -rrb- was sultan of the ottoman empire and a son of sultan mehmed iv  -lrb-  r .  1648–87 -rrb- . 
nevşehirli damat i̇brahim pasha and the sultan's daughter ,  fatma sultan  -lrb-  wife of the former  -rrb-  directed the government from 1718 to 1730, a period referred to as the `` tulip era '' . 
however ,  this was halted as a report reached istanbul that the safavids were invading the ottoman empire ,  causing a period of panic ,  turning the sultan's attention away from russia . 
in 1966 the number of `` pure '' ainu was about 300.
in the 18th century ,  there were 80,000 ainu . 
most hokkaido ainu and some other ainu are members of an umbrella group called the hokkaido utari association . 
there is no evidence of living descendants of the kamchatka ainu . 
in 1868, there were about 15,000 ainu in hokkaido ,  2000 in sakhalin and around 100 in the kuril islands . 
a village is called a `` kotan '' in the ainu language . 
the ainu people had various types of marriage . 
many ainu were subject to japanese rule which led to a violent ainu revolt such as koshamain's revolt  -lrb-    -rrb-  in 1456.
ainu men were first recruited into the japanese military in 1898.
the was founded on january 21, 2012, after a group of ainu activists in hokkaido announced the formation of a political party for the ainu on october 30, 2011.
many of the ainu dialects ,  even from one end of hokkaido to the other ,  were not mutually intelligible; however ,  the classic ainu language of the yukar ,  or ainu epic stories ,  was understood by all . 
the ainu hunted from late autumn to early summer . 
the ainu placed `` sintoko ''  -lrb-  hokai  -rrb-  and `` ikayop ''  -lrb-  quivers  -rrb-  there . 
the ainu usually hunted bear during the time of the spring thaw . 
no attempt to show a relationship with ainu to any other language has gained wide acceptance ,  and ainu is currently considered to be a language isolate . 
ainu assimilated into mainstream japanese society have adopted buddhism and shinto ,  while some northern ainu are members of the russian orthodox church . 
ainu men have abundant wavy hair and often have long beards . 
another kind of traditional ainu house was called `` chise '' . 
it now is run exclusively by ainu and operates mostly independently of the government . 
traditional ainu culture was quite different from japanese culture . 
the ainu have emphasized that they were the natives of the kuril islands and that the japanese and russians were both invaders . 
the official number of the ainu is 25,000, but unofficially is estimated at 200,000, due to many ainu having been completely assimilated into japanese society and ,  as a result ,  having no knowledge of their ancestry . 
during the muromachi period  -lrb-  1336–1573 -rrb- ,  the disputes between the japanese and ainu developed into a war . 
the ainu economy was based on farming ,  as well as on hunting ,  fishing and gathering . 
the ainu also obtained glass balls secretly made by the matsumae clan . 
genetic testing has shown that the ainu belong mainly to y-haplogroup d-m55.
ainu cuisine is not commonly eaten outside ainu communities; there are only a few ainu-run restaurants in japan ,  all located in tokyo or hokkaido ,  serving primarily japanese fare . 
another large-scale revolt by ainu against japanese rule was the menashi-kunashir battle in 1789.
the ainu or the aynu  -lrb-  ainu アィヌ аину `` aynu ''; japanese: `` ainu ''; russian: `` ajny ''  -rrb-  ,  in the historical japanese texts the ezo  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  are an indigenous people of japan  -lrb-  hokkaido ,  and formerly northeastern honshu  -rrb-  and russia  -lrb-  sakhalin ,  the kuril islands ,  and the kamchatka peninsula  -rrb-  . 
an acropolis  -lrb-  ancient greek: ἀκρόπολις ,  `` akropolis ''; from `` akros ''  -lrb-  άκρος  -rrb-  or `` akron ''  -lrb-  άκρον  -rrb-  ,  `` highest ,  topmost ,  outermost '' and `` polis ''  -lrb-  πόλις  -rrb-  ,  `` city ''; plural in english: `` acropoles '' ,  `` acropoleis '' or `` acropolises ''  -rrb-  was in ancient greece a settlement ,  especially a citadel ,  built upon an area of elevated ground—frequently a hill with precipitous sides ,  chosen for purposes of defense . 
although originating in the mainland of greece ,  use of the acropolis model quickly spread to greek colonies such as the dorian lato on crete during the archaic period . 
a 2012 review found that acupuncture seems to be cost-effective for some pain conditions . 
a meta-analysis found that acupuncture for chronic low back pain was cost-effective as an adjunct to standard care ,  while a systematic review found insufficient evidence for the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture in the treatment of chronic low back pain . 
a 2015 cochrane review found that there is insufficient evidence to determine whether acupuncture is an effective treatment for cancer pain in adults . 
a 2010 systematic review found a small pain relief effect that was not apparently discernible from bias; acupuncture is not a recommendable treatment for the management of fibromyalgia on the basis of this review . 
a 2014 overview of systematic reviews found insufficient evidence to suggest that acupuncture is effective for surgical or post-operative pain . 
a 2010 overview of systematic reviews found insufficient evidence to recommend acupuncture in the treatment of most rheumatic conditions ,  with the exceptions of osteoarthritis ,  low back pain ,  and lateral elbow pain . 
a 2009 overview of cochrane reviews found acupuncture is not effective for a wide range of conditions . 
they also found that the effects of acupuncture decreased by about 15% after one year . 
a 2012 review found that the effectiveness of acupuncture to treat rheumatoid arthritis is `` sparse and inconclusive . `` 
a 2013 cochrane review found low to moderate evidence that acupuncture improves pain and stiffness in treating people with fibromyalgia compared with no treatment and standard care . 
a 2012 systematic review of randomised clinical trials published in the same journal found that the number and quality of rcts for using acupuncture in the treatment of cancer pain was too low to draw definite conclusions . 
a 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis found that ear acupuncture may be effective at reducing pain within 48 hours of its use ,  but the mean difference between the acupuncture and control groups was small . 
a 2007 review found that acupuncture was significantly better than sham acupuncture at treating chronic knee pain; the evidence was not conclusive due to the lack of large ,  high-quality trials . 
the results of reviews of acupuncture's effectiveness ,  however ,  have been inconclusive . 
a 2011 systematic review of systematic reviews  -lrb-  internationally and without language restrictions  -rrb-  found that serious complications following acupuncture continue to be reported . 
a 2013 systematic review found 31 cases of vascular injuries caused by acupuncture ,  three resulting in death . 
two separate 2016 cochrane reviews found that acupuncture could be useful in the prophylaxis of tension-type headaches and episodic migraines . 
a 2014 overview of systematic reviews found insufficient evidence to suggest that acupuncture is an effective treatment for postoperative nausea and vomiting  -lrb-  ponv  -rrb-  in a clinical setting . 
a 2014 systematic review found that while the evidence suggested acupuncture could be an effective treatment for postoperative gastroparesis ,  a firm conclusion could not be reached because the trials examined were of low quality . 
a 2012 review found that acupuncture has demonstrated benefit for the treatment of headaches ,  but that safety needed to be more fully documented in order to make any strong recommendations in support of its use . 
a 2013 systematic review found that acupuncture may be effective for nonspecific lower back pain ,  but the authors noted there were limitations in the studies examined ,  such as heterogeneity in study characteristics and low methodological quality in many studies . 
a 2013 meta-analysis found that acupuncture for chronic low back pain was cost-effective as a complement to standard care ,  but not as a substitute for standard care except in cases where comorbid depression presented . 
a 2013 systematic review found that the quantity and quality of available rcts for analysis were too low to draw valid conclusions for the effectiveness of acupuncture for cancer-related fatigue . 
a 2010 cochrane review found that acupuncture shows statistically significant benefit over sham acupuncture in the treatment of peripheral joint osteoarthritis; however ,  these benefits were found to be so small that their clinical significance was doubtful ,  and `` probably due at least partially to placebo effects from incomplete blinding '' . 
a 2013 review found  -lrb-  without restrictions regarding publication date ,  study type or language  -rrb-  295 cases of infections; mycobacterium was the pathogen in at least 96% . 
a 2012 review found a number of adverse events were reported after acupuncture in the uk's national health service  -lrb-  nhs  -rrb-  but most  -lrb-  95%  -rrb-  were not severe ,  though miscategorization and under-reporting may alter the total figures . 
the skill level of the acupuncturist may influence how painful the needle insertion is ,  and a sufficiently skilled practitioner may be able to insert the needles without causing any pain . 
a 2013 systematic review of the english-language case reports found that serious adverse events associated with acupuncture are rare ,  but that acupuncture is not without risk . 
a 2014 review in `` nature reviews cancer '' found that `` contrary to the claimed mechanism of redirecting the flow of `` qi '' through meridians ,  researchers usually find that it generally does not matter where the needles are inserted ,  how often  -lrb-  that is ,  no dose-response effect is observed  -rrb-  ,  or even if needles are actually inserted . 
acupuncture is generally only used in combination with other forms of treatment . 
a 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that acupuncture was `` associated with a significant reduction in sleep disturbances in women experiencing menopause-related sleep disturbances . `` 
a 2014 systematic review suggests that the nocebo effect of acupuncture is clinically relevant and that the rate of adverse events may be a gauge of the nocebo effect . 
when used on children ,  acupuncture is considered safe when administered by well-trained ,  licensed practitioners using sterile needles; however ,  a 2011 review found there was limited research to draw definite conclusions about the overall safety of pediatric acupuncture . 
a 2010 systematic review suggested that acupuncture is more than a placebo for commonly occurring chronic pain conditions ,  but the authors acknowledged that it is still unknown if the overall benefit is clinically meaningful or cost-effective . 
the under-performance of acupuncture in such trials may indicate that therapeutic effects are due entirely to non-specific effects ,  or that the sham treatments are not inert ,  or that systematic protocols yield less than optimal treatment . 
the `` aeneid '' explains that aeneas is one of the few trojans who were not killed or enslaved when troy fell . 
latinus ,  king of the latins ,  welcomed aeneas's army of exiled trojans and let them reorganize their lives in latium . 
the `` roman d'enéas '' addresses that charge ,  when queen amata opposes aeneas's marrying lavinia ,  claiming that aeneas loved boys . 
the history of aeneas was continued by roman authors . 
he is a main character in ursula k .  le guin's `` lavinia '' ,  a re-telling of the last six books of the `` aeneid '' told from the point of view of lavinia ,  daughter of king latinus of latium . 
the ballad ultimately alters aeneas's fate from traveling on years after dido's death to joining her as a spirit soon after her suicide . 
aeneas's consistent epithet in virgil and other latin authors is `` pius '' ,  a term that connotes reverence toward the gods and familial dutifulness . 
the legendary kings of britain – including king arthur – trace their family through a grandson of aeneas ,  brutus . 
aeneas and dido are the main characters of a 17th-century broadside ballad called `` the wandering prince of troy . `` 
the roman mythographer gaius julius hyginus  -lrb-  c .  64 bce – ce 17 -rrb- in his `` fabulae '' credits aeneas with killing 28 enemies in the trojan war . 
 ''amaranth '' derives from greek  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` unfading '' ,  with the greek word for `` flower '' ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  factoring into the word's development as `` amaranth '' . 
the taxonomy is further differentiated by sections within each of the subgenera . 
agamemnon was the commander-in-chief of the greeks during the trojan war . 
agamemnon's mare was named aetha . 
agamemnon gathered the reluctant greek forces to sail for troy . 
her jealousy of cassandra ,  and her wrath at the sacrifice of iphigenia and at agamemnon's having gone to war over helen of troy ,  are said to have been the motives for her crime . 
after the capture of troy ,  cassandra ,  the doomed prophetess and daughter of priam ,  fell to agamemnon's lot in the distribution of the prizes of war . 
the `` iliad '' tells the story about the quarrel between agamemnon and achilles in the final year of the war . 
finally ,  the prophet calchas announced that the wrath of the goddess could only be propitiated by the sacrifice of agamemnon's daughter iphigenia . 
in some later versions ,  clytemnestra herself does the killing ,  or they act together as accomplices ,  killing agamemnon in his own home . 
soon after march 1841, hasan ali shah set out for kerman . 
hasan ali shah's authority thereafter was not seriously challenged again . 
soon after the accession of muhammad shah qajar to the throne of his grandfather ,  fath ali shah ,  the imam hasan ali shah was appointed governor of kerman in 1835.
hasan ali shah was succeeded as imam by his eldest son aqa ali shah ,  who became aga khan ii . 
hasan ali shah soon proceeded to sindh ,  where he rendered further services to the british . 
aga khan iii was succeeded as aga khan by his grandson karim aga khan ,  who is the present imam of the ismaili muslims . 
the jubilees of sir sultan muhammad shah ,  aga khan iii ,  are well remembered . 
in india and later in pakistan ,  social development institutions were established ,  in the words of aga khan iii ,  `` for the relief of humanity '' . 
a solicitor brought the will of the aga khan iii from london to geneva and read it before the family:
sir sultan muhammed shah ,  aga khan iii  -lrb-  2 november 187711 july 1957 -rrb- was the 48th imam of the nizari ismaili religion . 
under the leadership of sir sultan muhammad shah ,  aga khan iii ,  the first half of the 20th century was a period of significant development for the ismā'īlī community . 
he was the father of three sons – george r .  agassiz  -lrb-  1861–1951 -rrb- ,  maximilian agassiz  -lrb-  1866–1943 -rrb- and rodolphe agassiz  -lrb-  1871–1933 -rrb- . 
alexander emmanuel rodolphe agassiz  -lrb-  december 17, 1835march 27, 1910 -rrb- ,  son of louis agassiz and stepson of elizabeth cabot agassiz ,  was an american scientist and engineer . 
agassiz served as a president of the national academy of sciences ,  which since 1913 has awarded the alexander agassiz medal in his memory . 
agassiz was born in neuchâtel ,  switzerland and immigrated to the united states with his father ,  louis ,  in 1849.
alexander agassiz is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of lizard ,  `` anolis agassizi . 
agathon  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  was an athenian tragic poet whose works have been lost . 
agathon was also a friend of euripides ,  another recruit to the court of archelaus of macedon . 
agathon has been thought to be the subject of `` lovers' lips '' ,  an epigram attributed to plato:
his body was embalmed in wax ,  and buried at sparta . 
agesilaus ii  -lrb-  ; `` agesilaos ''; c .  444/443 – c .  360 bc  -rrb-  ,  was a king  -lrb-  `` basileus ''  -rrb-  of the ancient greek city-state of sparta and a member of the eurypontid dynasty ruling from 398 to about 360 bc ,  during most of which time he was ,  in plutarch's words ,  `` as good as though commander and king of all greece , ``  and was for the whole of it greatly identified with his country's deeds and fortunes . 
in 394, while encamped on the plain of thebe ,  agesilaus was planning a campaign in the interior of asia minor ,  or even an attack on artaxerxes ii himself ,  when he was recalled to greece to fight in the corinthian war between sparta and the combined forces of athens ,  thebes ,  corinth ,  argos and several minor states . 
agesilaus is first recorded as king during the suppression of the conspiracy of cinadon ,  shortly after 398 bc . 
according to plutarch ,  agesilaus said upon leaving asia minor `` i have been driven out by 10,000 persian archers '' ,  a reference to `` archers ''  -lrb-  `` toxotai ''  -rrb-  the greek nickname for the darics from their obverse design ,  because that much money had been paid to politicians in athens and thebes in order to start a war against sparta . 
antonio agliardi  -lrb-  4 september 183219 march 1915 -rrb- was an italian roman catholic cardinal ,  archbishop ,  and papal diplomat . 
agliardi was born at cologno al serio ,  in what is now the province of bergamo . 
agnes and philip had two children: philip i ,  count of boulogne and mary ,  were legitimized by the pope in 1201 at the request of the king . 
in june 1196 agnes married philip ii of france ,  who had repudiated his second wife ingeborg of denmark in 1193.
augustus was proud of agrippina . 
in ad 18, agrippina left for the eastern provinces with her family . 
sejanus did not begin his final attack on agrippina until after the death of livia in ad 29.
agrippina the elder  -lrb-  latin: ''vipsania agrippina ''; classical latin:  ,  c .  14 bc – ad 33 -rrb- ,  commonly referred to as `` agrippina the elder ''  -lrb-  latin: `` agrippina maior ''  -rrb-  ,  was a prominent member of the julio-claudian dynasty . 
images of agrippina from this period are the most lifelike . 
she and her daughter ,  agrippina the younger ,  are both described as being equally ambitious for their sons . 
he notes the death of agrippina's mother ,  who starved herself to death amidst her exile in ad 14, linking her death to tiberius' disdain for her . 
agrippina's funerary urn still survives  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
agrippina has been depicted in many works of art . 
agrippina was born in 14 bc to marcus vipsanius agrippa and julia the elder ,  before their return to rome in 13 bc . 
in an example of agrippina assuming `` auctoritas '' ,  he says:
the deaths of agrippina's older sons elevated her youngest son caligula to the position of successor and he became `` princeps '' when tiberius died in ad 37.
agrippina was fiercely independent ,  a trait she shared with her mother . 
tacitus also records serious tension between agrippina and livia . 
instead ,  agrippina followed the model of livia in promoting the careers of her children . 
in ad 27, agrippina found herself placed under house arrest in her suburban villa outside herculaneum . 
nero was exiled to pontia and she was exiled to the island of pandateria ,  where she would remain until her death by starvation in ad 33.
on 18 may ad 14, her one-year-old son gaius was sent by augustus from rome to join her in gaul . 
they were both exiled; nero to pontia where he was killed or encouraged to commit suicide in ad 31, and agrippina to the island of pandateria  -lrb-  the same place her mother was exiled to  -rrb-  . 
agrippina was the first daughter and fourth living child of agrippina the elder and germanicus . 
in ad 59 agrippina was executed on the orders of her son ,  the emperor nero . 
being the emperor's sister gave agrippina some influence . 
agrippina and nero would see each other on short visits . 
the power struggle between agrippina and her son had begun . 
in the first months of nero's reign agrippina controlled her son and the empire . 
claudius lifted the exiles of agrippina and livilla . 
after agrippina's death ,  suetonius says that nero examined agrippina's corpse and discussed her good and bad points . 
agrippina between 55 and 58 became very watchful and had a critical eye over her son . 
maternally ,  agrippina descended directly from augustus . 
germanicus ,  agrippina's father ,  was a very popular general and politician . 
agrippina and claudius married on new year's day ,  49.
claudius was agrippina's paternal uncle and third husband . 
agrippina the younger  -lrb-  latin: `` julia agrippina ''; 6 november ad 15 – 23 march ad 59 -rrb- ,  also referred to as agrippina minor  -lrb-  `` minor '' ,  which is latin for ``  ''the younger '' ''  -rrb-  was a roman empress and one of the more prominent women in the julio-claudian dynasty . 
news of agrippina's survival reached nero so he sent three assassins to kill her . 
he made it look as if agrippina had committed suicide after her plot to kill nero had been uncovered . 
she left italy and ,  on agrippina's orders ,  committed suicide . 
agrippina was named a priestess of the cult of the deified claudius . 
american chinese cuisine is a style of chinese cuisine developed by americans of chinese descent . 
with the continuing success of american chinese cuisine ,  including its portrayal to mainland chinese audiences through the medium of american television sitcoms ,  american chinese restaurants have opened in china itself . 
these names make it evident that the american broccoli ,  carrot ,  and onion are not indigenous to china ,  and therefore are less common in the traditional cuisines of china . 
the dishes served in many north american chinese restaurants are adapted to american tastes and often differ significantly from those found in china . 
it’s adapted .  .  .  to be blander ,  thicker and sweeter for the american public '' . 
after the assassination of nader shah afshar in 1747, ahmad shah durrani was chosen as king of afghanistan . 
durrani was born as ahmed khan . 
ahmad shah durrani accused sultan shah of having caused the afaqi brothers to die . 
ahmad shah durrani vacated delhi soon after the battle . 
the dzungar khanate then conquered the tarim basin in 1680, setting up the afaqi khoja as their puppet ruler . 
durrani died on 16 october 1772 in kandahar province . 
the qing crushed and annihilated the dzungars in the dzungar genocide . 
nader shah had been enlisting the abdalis in his army since around 1729.
the dzungar buddhists brought back the aqtaghliq afaqi khoja burhan-ud-din and his brother khan khoja and installed them as puppet rulers in kashgar . 
during nader shah's invasion of india in 1739, abdali also accompanied him and stayed some days in the red fort of delhi . 
the abdali regiment was part of nader shah's military during his invasion of the mughal empire in 1738.
durrani then sent envoys to beijing to discuss the situation regarding the afaqi khojas . 
aikin never married ,  and died at hoxton in london in 1854.
he was founder of the chemical society of london in 1841, being its first treasurer and ,  between 1843 and 1845, second president . 
arthur aikin ,  fls ,  fgs  -lrb-  19 may 177315 april 1854 -rrb- was an english chemist ,  mineralogist and scientific writer ,  and was a founding member of the chemical society  -lrb-  now the royal society of chemistry  -rrb-  . 
a silk spinning moth ,  the ailanthus silkmoth  -lrb-  `` samia cynthia ''  -rrb-  ,  lives on `` ailanthus '' leaves ,  and yields a silk more durable and cheaper than mulberry silk ,  but inferior to it in fineness and gloss . 
the genus is native from east asia south to northern australasia . 
this also appears in the `` acta sanctorum '' . 
this was published by j .  mabillon in the `` acta sanctorum ordinis sancti benedicti ''  -lrb-  paris ,  1668–1701 -rrb- . 
the relative order of akkadian kings is clear . 
the akkadian empire  -lrb-    -rrb-  was the first ancient empire of mesopotamia ,  centered in the city of akkad and its surrounding region ,  also called akkad in ancient mesopotamia in the bible . 
the akkadian empire reached its political peak between the 24th and 22nd centuries bc ,  following the conquests by its founder sargon of akkad . 
likewise ,  material that is thought to be akkadian continues to be in use into the ur iii period . 
the bible refers to akkad in  ,  which states that the beginning of nimrod's kingdom was in the land of akkad . 
many later texts from the successor states of assyria and babylonia also deal with the akkadian empire . 
the akkadian period is contemporary with: eb iv  -lrb-  in israel  -rrb-  ,  eb iva and ej iv  -lrb-  in syria  -rrb-  ,  and eb iiib  -lrb-  in turkey .   -rrb- 
ajax's mother's name was eriopis . 
after ajax's death ,  his spirit dwelt in the island of leuce . 
other accounts of ajax's death are offered by philostratus and the scholiast on lycophron . 
he is also referred to as `` telamonian ajax ''  -lrb-   ,  in etruscan recorded as `` aivas tlamunus ''  -rrb-  ,  `` greater ajax '' ,  or `` ajax the great '' ,  which distinguishes him from ajax ,  son of oileus  -lrb-  ajax the lesser  -rrb-  . 
ajax's half-brother teucer stood trial before his father for not bringing ajax's body or famous weapons back . 
in sophocles' play `` ajax '' ,  a famous retelling of ajax's demise ,  after the armor is awarded to odysseus ,  ajax feels so insulted that he wants to kill agamemnon and menelaus . 
according to hyginus ,  in total ,  ajax killed 28 people at troy . 
in the `` iliad '' ,  ajax is notable for his abundant strength and courage ,  seen particularly in two fights with hector . 
as the `` iliad '' comes to a close ,  ajax and the majority of other greek warriors are alive and well . 
under strong pressure from stilicho ,  the roman senate consented to promise its payment . 
alaric began his career under the gothic soldier gainas ,  and later joined the roman army . 
during the fourth century ,  the roman emperors commonly employed `` foederati '': irregular troops under roman command ,  but organized by tribal structures . 
he is best known for his sack of rome in 410, which marked a decisive event in the decline of the roman empire . 
stilicho also claimed to be the guardian of arcadius ,  causing much rivalry between the western and eastern courts . 
rome ,  for so long victorious against its enemies ,  was now at the mercy of its foreign conquerors . 
in 401 alaric invaded italy ,  but was defeated by stilicho at pollentia  -lrb-  modern pollenza  -rrb-  on april6, 402.
he accordingly led them across the julian alps and ,  in september 408, stood before the walls of rome  -lrb-  now with no capable general like stilicho as a defender  -rrb-  and began a strict blockade . 
nonetheless ,  the eastern emperor arcadius appointed alaric magister militum  -lrb-  `` master of the soldiers ''  -rrb-  in illyricum . 
the gothic soldiers then defected to alaric ,  increasing the size of his force to around 30,000 men ,  and joined his march on rome to avenge their murdered families . 
alaric struck first at the eastern empire . 
the  -lrb-  alaric's mountain  -rrb-  near carcassonne is named after the visigoth king . 
herwig wolfram opens his chapter on the eighth visigothic king ,  `` alaric's reign gets no full treatment in the sources ,  and the little they do contain is overshadowed by his death in the battle of vouillé and the downfall of the toulosan kingdom . `` 
with amalaric's death in 531, the visigothic kingdom entered an extended period of unrest which lasted until leovigild assumed the throne in 568.
alaric ii  -lrb-   ,  `` ruler of all ''; august 507 -rrb- ,  also known as alarik ,  alarich ,  and alarico in spanish and portuguese or alaricus in latin — succeeded his father euric as king of the visigoths in toulouse on december 28, 484; he was the great-grandson of the more famous alaric i ,  who sacked rome in 410.
albert was beatified in 1622.
st .  albert's feast day is november 15.
albert is known for his commentary on the musical practice of his times . 
albert's version of hylomorphism is very similar to the aristotelian doctrine . 
most modern knowledge of aristotle was preserved and presented by albert . 
albert's writings collected in 1899 went to thirty-eight volumes . 
albert's view was highly valued by the catholic church and his peers . 
albert mentions friendship in his work ,  `` de bono '' ,  as well as presenting his ideals and morals of friendship in the very beginning of `` tractatus ii '' . 
albert's activity ,  however ,  was more philosophical than theological  -lrb-  see scholasticism  -rrb-  . 
albert devoted the last tractatus of `` de bono '' to a theory of justice and natural law . 
in the centuries since his death ,  many stories arose about albert as an alchemist and magician . 
johann eduard erdmann considers albert greater and more original than his pupil aquinas . 
alboin  -lrb-  530sjune 28, 572 -rrb- was king of the lombards from about 560 until 572.
it was in this palace that alboin was killed on june 28, 572.
alboin came to the throne after the death of his father ,  sometime between 560 and 565.
there have been several artistic depictions of events from alboin's life including peter paul rubens' `` alboin and rosamunde ''  -lrb-  1615 -rrb-; charles landseer's `` assassination of alboin ,  king of the lombards ''  -lrb-  1856 -rrb-; and fortunino matania's illustration `` rosamund captive before king alboin of the lombards ''  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- . 
alboin first distinguished himself on the battlefield in a clash with the gepids . 
alboin was probably born in the 530s in pannonia ,  the son of audoin and his wife ,  rodelinda . 
the period of alboin's reign as king in pannonia following the death of his father ,  audoin ,  was one of confrontation and conflict between the lombards and their main neighbors ,  the gepids . 
alboin was assassinated on june 28, 572, in a coup d'état instigated by the byzantines . 
during that time alboin turned his attention to tuscany ,  but signs of factionalism among his supporters and alboin's diminishing control over his army increasingly began to manifest themselves . 
alboin's death had a lasting impact ,  as it deprived the lombards of the only leader they had that could have kept together the newborn germanic entity . 
alboin's problems in maintaining control over his people worsened during the siege of ticinum . 
these saxons were tributaries to the frankish king sigebert ,  and their participation indicates that alboin had the support of the franks for his venture . 
a sign of this anxiety can also be seen in the decision taken by alboin to ravage pannonia ,  which created a safety zone between the lombards and the avars . 
alboin's remains were allegedly buried beneath the palace steps . 
the road followed by alboin to reach italy has been the subject of controversy ,  as is the length of the trek . 
an account of the war by the byzantine theophylact simocatta sentimentalises the reasons behind the conflict ,  claiming it originated with alboin's vain courting and subsequent kidnapping of cunimund's daughter rosamund ,  that alboin proceeded then to marry . 
it has been speculated that alboin's migration could have been partly the result of a call from surviving ostrogoths in italy . 
in 567 the allies made their final move against cunimund ,  with alboin invading the gepids' lands from the northwest while bayan attacked from the northeast . 
afonso de albuquerque was born in 1453 in alhandra ,  near lisbon . 
afonso de albuquerque had a bastard son with an unrecorded woman . 
on 16 december 1515, afonso de albuquerque died within sight of goa . 
afonso returned home in july 1504, and was well received by king manuel i . 
king manuel i of portugal was belatedly convinced of afonso's loyalty ,  and endeavoured to atone for his lack of confidence in afonso by heaping honours upon his son ,  brás de albuquerque  -lrb-  1500–1580 -rrb- ,  whom he renamed `` afonso '' in memory of the father . 
he was succeeded by duarte de lemos ,  but left for cochin and then for portugal ,  leaving his fleet to afonso . 
soon after the failed attack ,  afonso assembled a fleet of 23 ships and 1200 men . 
afonso explained to his armies why the portuguese wanted to capture malacca:
afonso de albuquerque pioneered trade relations with thailand ,  and was as such the first recorded european to contact thailand . 
three months later ,  on 25 november afonso reappeared at goa with a renovated fleet . 
brás afonso de albuquerque ,  or braz in the old spelling ,  was born in 1500 and died in 1580.
in january 1510, obeying the orders from the king and aware of the absence of zamorin ,  afonso advanced on calicut . 
afonso arranged for the shipping of many órfãs d'el-rei to portuguese malacca . 
on 10 september 1512, afonso sailed from cochin to goa with fourteen ships carrying 1,700 soldiers . 
they had lost no opportunity in stirring up the jealousy of king manuel against him ,  insinuating that afonso intended to usurp power in portuguese india . 
in 1513, at cannanore ,  afonso was visited by a persian ambassador from shah ismail i ,  who had sent ambassadors to gujarat ,  ormuz and bijapur . 
on 20 november 1511 afonso sailed from malacca to the coast of malabar on the old `` flor de la mar '' carrack that had served to support the conquest of malacca . 
on the voyage the `` flor de la mar '' was wrecked in a storm ,  and afonso barely escaped drowning . 
afonso de albuquerque was a prolific writer ,  having sent numerous letters to the king during his governorship ,  covering topics from minor issues to major strategies . 
on 4 november 1509, afonso became the second governor of the state of india ,  a position he would hold until his death . 
afonso's early training is described by diogo barbosa machado: `` “d . 
afonso's life ended on a bitter note ,  with a painful and ignominious close . 
held up by the monsoon and with few forces available ,  afonso had to wait for the arrival of reinforcement fleets headed by his nephew d .  garcia de noronha ,  and jorge de mello pereira . 
at the same time ,  afonso refused approaches from opponents of the viceroy ,  who encouraged him to seize power . 
in february 1513, while mateus was in portugal ,  afonso sailed to the red sea with a force of about 1000 portuguese and 400 malabaris . 
there he was the first european to arrive ,  establishing amicable relations between the kingdom of portugal and the court of the king of siam ramathibodi ii ,  returning with a siamese envoy bearing gifts and letters to afonso and the king of portugal . 
the broad outlines of the poet's life are well known . 
alcaeus of mytilene  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` alkaios ho mutilēnaios ''; – 6th century bc  -rrb-  was a lyric poet from the greek island of lesbos who is credited with inventing the alcaic stanza . 
alcamenes  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an ancient greek sculptor of lemnos and athens ,  who flourished in the 2nd half of the 5th century bc . 
it is safer to judge him by the sculptural decoration of the parthenon ,  in which he must almost certainly have taken a share under the direction of phidias . 
alcmene was also called electryone  -lrb-  ἠλεκτρυώνην  -rrb-  ,  a patronymic name as a daughter of electryon . 
there are two accounts of alcmene's death . 
according to ovid's `` metamorphoses '' ,  while in labour ,  alcmene was having great difficulty giving birth to such a large child . 
in homer's `` iliad '' ,  when alcmene was about to give birth to heracles ,  zeus announced to all the gods that on that day a child by zeus himself ,  would be born and rule all those around him . 
after the death of amphitryon ,  alcmene married rhadamanthys ,  son of zeus ,  and lived with him in exile at ocaleae in boeotia . 
2754: winter ,  j .  g .  ,  'a new fragment on the life of homer' `` tapa '' 56  -lrb-  1925 -rrb- 120–129   -rrb-  . 
alcidamas  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  of elaea ,  in aeolis ,  greek sophist and rhetorician ,  flourished in the 4th century bc . 
this would become the motto for the aldine press . 
today ,  the antique books printed by the aldine press in venice are referred to as `` aldines '' . 
works published from the greeks . 
the press enjoyed a monopoly of works printed in greek in the republic of venice ,  effectively giving it copyright protection . 
some sources state that following king edward the confessor's death in 1066, it was ealdred who crowned harold godwinson as king of england . 
he worked to bring one of the king's relatives ,  edward the exile ,  back to england from hungary to secure an heir for the childless king . 
ealdred crowned william king on christmas day 1066.
in 1058 he undertook a pilgrimage to jerusalem ,  the first bishop from england to do so . 
ealdred was an advisor to king edward the confessor ,  and was often involved in the royal government . 
ealdred  -lrb-  or aldred; died 11 september 1069 -rrb- was abbot of tavistock ,  bishop of worcester ,  and archbishop of york in anglo-saxon england . 
by 1073 there were only two englishmen in episcopal sees ,  and by the time of william's death in 1087, there was only one ,  wulfstan ii of worcester . 
in 1054 king edward sent ealdred to germany to obtain emperor henry iii's help in returning edward the exile ,  son of edmund ironside ,  to england . 
the king again employed ealdred as a diplomat in 1056, when he assisted earls harold and leofric in negotiations with the welsh . 
ealdred became involved with the see of ramsbury after its bishop herman got into a dispute with king edward over the movement of the seat of his bishopric to malmesbury abbey . 
earl godwin's rebellion against the king in 1051 came as a blow to ealdred ,  who was a supporter of the earl and his family . 
alexander i of epirus  -lrb-  ; c .  362 bc – 331 bc  -rrb-  ,  also known as alexander molossus  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a king of epirus  -lrb-  343/2–331 bc  -rrb-  of the aeacid dynasty . 
during the wedding in 336 bc ,  philip was assassinated by pausanias of orestis . 
he was a native of smyrna of humble origin ,  but gave himself out to be the son of antiochus iv epiphanes and laodice iv and heir to the seleucid throne . 
demetrius soter's son demetrius ii profited by the opportunity to regain the throne . 
these events appear to refer to the early part of 368 bc . 
alexander was murdered by the brothers of his wife ,  thebe ,  as it was said that she lived in fear of her husband and hated alexander's cruel and brutal character . 
in 367 bc alexander carried out a massacre of the citizens of scotussa . 
alexander  -lrb-    -rrb-  was `` tagus '' or despot of pherae in thessaly ,  and ruled from 369 to c .  356 bc . 
alexander ii was a king of epirus ,  and the son of pyrrhus and lanassa ,  the daughter of the sicilian tyrant agathocles . 
he succeeded his father as king in 272 bc ,  and continued the war which his father had begun with antigonus ii gonatas ,  whom he succeeded in driving from the kingdom of macedon . 
he was elected grand duke of lithuania on the death of his father  -lrb-  1492 -rrb- ,  and king of poland on the death of his brother john i albert  -lrb-  1501 -rrb- . 
alexander i jagiellon  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   -lrb-  5 august 1461 – 19 august 1506 -rrb- of the house of jagiellon was the grand duke of lithuania and later also king of poland . 
while the third oldest brother ,  john i albert was chosen by the polish nobility  -lrb-  `` szlachta ''  -rrb-  to be the next king of poland ,  the lithuanians instead elected alexander to be their next grand duke . 
bismarck failed to do what was expected of him by the russian emperor . 
alexander iii  -lrb-  ; 1845 1894 -rrb- was the emperor of russia ,  king of poland ,  and grand duke of finland from until his death on  . 
his russia fought no wars . 
alexander iii had six children  -lrb-  five of whom survived to adulthood  -rrb-  of his marriage with princess dagmar of denmark ,  also known as marie feodorovna . 
grand duke alexander alexandrovich was born on 10 march 1845 at the winter palace in saint petersburg ,  russian empire ,  the second son and third child of emperor alexander ii and his first wife maria alexandrovna  -lrb-  née princess marie of hesse  -rrb-  . 
on his deathbed the previous tsesarevich was said to have expressed the wish that his fiancée ,  princess dagmar of denmark ,  should marry his successor . 
after a performance of the ballet `` tsar kandavl '' at the mariinsky theatre ,  i first caught sight of the emperor . 
alexander had better relationships with his other brothers: alexei  -lrb-  whom he made rear admiral and then a grand admiral of the russian navy  -rrb-  ,  sergei  -lrb-  whom he made governor of moscow  -rrb-  and paul . 
some differences had first appeared during the franco-prussian war ,  when alexander ii supported the cabinet of berlin while the tsesarevich made no effort to conceal his sympathies for the french . 
he made it clear that his autocracy would not be limited . 
in return for the russian support which had enabled him to create the german empire ,  it was thought that he would help russia to solve the eastern question in accordance with russian interests ,  but to the surprise and indignation of the cabinet of saint petersburg he confined himself to acting the part of `` honest broker '' at the congress ,  and shortly afterwards contracted an alliance with austria-hungary for the purpose of counteracting russian designs in eastern europe . 
in more ordinary cases tsar alexander iii could be at once kind ,  simple ,  and even almost homely . 
following his father's assassination ,  alexander iii was advised that it would be difficult for him to be kept safe at the winter palace . 
under heavy guard he would make occasional visits into st .  petersburg ,  but even then he would stay in the anichkov palace ,  as opposed to the winter palace . 
alexander was ,  like his brothers edgar and david ,  a notably pious king . 
on the death of edgar in 1107 he succeeded to the scottish crown; but ,  in accordance with edgar's instructions ,  their brother david was granted an appanage in southern scotland . 
alexander i  -lrb-  medieval gaelic: `` alaxandair mac maíl coluim ''; modern gaelic: `` alasdair mac mhaol chaluim ''; c .  1078 – 23 april 1124 -rrb- ,  posthumously nicknamed the fierce ,  was the king of scotland from 1107 to his death . 
he was the younger brother of king edgar ,  who was unmarried ,  and his brother's heir presumptive by 1104  -lrb-  and perhaps earlier  -rrb-  . 
he spent time in england  -lrb-  john of england knighted him at clerkenwell priory in 1213 -rrb- before succeeding to the kingdom on the death of his father on 4 december 1214, being crowned at scone on 6 december the same year . 
joan died in march 1238 in essex . 
diplomacy further strengthened the reconciliation by the marriage of alexander to henry's sister joan of england on 18 june or 25 june 1221.
he was born at haddington ,  east lothian ,  the only son of the scottish king william the lion and ermengarde of beaumont . 
the scottish forces reached the south coast of england at the port of dover where in september 1216, alexander paid homage to the pretender prince louis of france for his lands in england ,  chosen by the barons to replace king john . 
alexander was born on 14 august 1876 to king milan and queen natalie of serbia . 
king alexander and queen draga were buried in the crypt of st .  mark's church ,  belgrade . 
in 1894 the young king brought his father ,  milan ,  back to serbia and ,  in 1898, appointed him commander-in-chief of the serbian army . 
alexander i or aleksandar obrenović  -lrb-  ; 14 august 187611 june 1903 -rrb- was king of serbia from 1889 to 1903 when he and his wife ,  queen draga ,  were assassinated by a group of army officers ,  led by captain dragutin dimitrijević . 
in 1889, king milan unexpectedly abdicated and withdrew to private life ,  proclaiming alexander king of serbia under a regency until he should attain his majority at eighteen years of age . 
alexander iii  -lrb-  medieval gaelic: `` alaxandair mac alaxandair ''; modern gaelic: `` alasdair mac alasdair ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  4 september 1241 – 19 march 1286 -rrb- was king of scots from 1249 until his death in 1286.
alexander had married margaret  -lrb-  his 4th cousin by henry i of england  -rrb-  ,  daughter of king henry iii of england and eleanor of provence ,  on 25 december 1251.
in 1886, a monument to alexander iii was erected at the approximate location of his death in kinghorn . 
she died in 1275, after they had had three children . 
this school is known as alexandrists . 
 ''on the soul ''  -lrb-  `` de anima ''  -rrb-  is a treatise on the soul written along the lines suggested by aristotle in his own `` de anima '' . 
 ''on fate '' is a treatise in which alexander argues against the stoic doctrine of necessity . 
the `` mantissa '' was probably not written by alexander in its current form ,  but much of the actual material may be his . 
there are also several extant original writings by alexander . 
his principal sources are the `` physics ''  -lrb-  book 7 -rrb- ,  `` metaphysics ''  -lrb-  book 12 -rrb- ,  and the pseudo-aristotelian `` on the universe '' . 
severus alexander  -lrb-  ; ; c . 208 - 19 march 235 -rrb- was roman emperor from 222 to 235 and the last emperor of the severan dynasty . 
as emperor ,  alexander's peacetime reign was prosperous . 
the emperor returned to rome and celebrated a triumph in 233.
alexander's death at the hands of his troops can also be seen as the heralding of a new role for roman emperors . 
although the senate declared the emperor and his rule damned upon the report of his death and the ascension of a replacement emperor ,  alexander was deified after the death of maximinus in 238.
he was also the second-youngest ever sole legal roman emperor during the existence of the united empire ,  the youngest being gordian iii . 
born between around 207 or 208 severus alexander became emperor when he was around 14 years old ,  making him the youngest emperor in rome's history ,  until the ascension of gordian iii . 
his mother julia mamaea was in the same tent with alexander and soon fell victim to the same group of assassins . 
alexander was the heir to his cousin ,  the 18-year-old emperor who had been murdered along with his mother julia soaemias ,  by his own guards ,  who ,  as a mark of contempt ,  had their remains cast into the tiber river . 
alexander's mother ,  julia mamaea ,  asked for origen to tutor alexander in christianity . 
the roman army hailed alexander as emperor on 13 march 222, immediately conferring on him the titles of augustus ,  `` pater patriae '' and `` pontifex maximus '' . 
as word of the invasion spread ,  the emperor took the front line and went to battle against the germanic invaders . 
the name was one of the titles  -lrb-  `` epithets ''  -rrb-  given to the greek goddess hera and as such is usually taken to mean `` one who comes to save warriors '' . 
alexander is a male given name ,  and a less common surname . 
alexander was the son of satyrus and stratocleia ,  and was a native of pleuron in aetolia ,  although he spent the greater part of his life at alexandria ,  where he was reckoned one of the seven tragic poets who constituted the tragic pleiad . 
the judean civil war initially began after the conquest of gaza by jannaeus around 96 bc . 
this victory gained judean control over the mediterranean outlet of the nabatean trade routes . 
from his conquests to expand the kingdom to a bloody civil war ,  alexander's reign has been generalized as cruel and oppressive with never ending conflict . 
alexander jannaeus  -lrb-  also known as alexander jannai/yannai;  ,  born jonathan alexander  -rrb-  was the second hasmonean king of judaea from 103 to 76 bc . 
upon his death ,  his widow ,  salome alexandra had alexander and his brothers released from prison . 
according to the orthodox thomism of the catholic church ,  aristotle rightly regarded reason as a facility of the individual soul . 
alexios was the son of the domestic of the schools john komnenos and anna dalassene ,  and the nephew of isaac i komnenos  -lrb-  emperor 1057–1059 -rrb- . 
by the time alexios ascended the throne ,  the seljuqs had taken most of asia minor . 
under michael vii doukas `` parapinakes ''  -lrb-  1071–1078 -rrb- and nikephoros iii botaneiates  -lrb-  1078–1081 -rrb- ,  he was also employed ,  along with his elder brother isaac ,  against rebels in asia minor ,  thrace ,  and in epirus . 
in 1074, western mercenaries led by roussel de bailleul rebelled in asia minor ,  but alexios successfully subdued them by 1076.
as a measure intended to keep the support of the doukai ,  alexios restored constantine doukas ,  the young son of michael vii and maria ,  as co-emperor and a little later betrothed him to his own first-born daughter anna ,  who moved into the mangana palace with her fiancé and his mother . 
in spite of the success of the first crusade ,  alexios also had to repel numerous attempts on his territory by the seljuqs in 1110–1117.
during this time ,  alexios was rumored to be the lover of empress maria of alania ,  the daughter of king bagrat iv of georgia ,  who had been successively married to michael vii doukas and his successor nikephoros iii botaneiates ,  and who was renowned for her beauty . 
alexios' last years were also troubled by anxieties over the succession . 
also `` hippeis ''  -lrb-  316 bc  -rrb-   -lrb-  in which he referred to the decree of sophocles against the philosophers  -rrb-  ,  `` pyraunos ''  -lrb-  312 bc  -rrb-  ,  `` pharmakopole ''  -lrb-  306 bc  -rrb-   ,  `` hypobolimaios ''  -lrb-  306 bc  -rrb-  ,  and `` ankylion '' . 
alexis  -lrb-  ; c .  375 – c .  275 bc  -rrb-  was a greek comic poet of the middle comedy period . 
it was said he had a son ,  called stephanus ,  who also wrote comedies . 
alexios ii komnenos or alexius ii comnenus  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  10 september 1169october 1183 -rrb- was byzantine emperor from 1180 to 1183.
friends of the young alexios ii now tried to form a party against the empress mother and the `` prōtosebastos ''; alexios ii's half-sister maria ,  wife of caesar john  -lrb-  renier of montferrat  -rrb-  ,  stirred up riots in the streets of the capital . 
alexios iii angelos  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  1211 -rrb- was byzantine emperor from march 1195 to july 17/18, 1203.
isaac ii ,  drawn from his prison and robed once more in the imperial purple ,  received his son ,  alexios iv ,  in state . 
alexios iii angelos was the second son of andronikos doukas angelos and euphrosyne kastamonitissa . 
here alexios iii eventually surrendered ,  with euphrosyne ,  to marquis boniface of montferrat ,  who was establishing himself as ruler of the kingdom of thessalonica . 
his younger brother isaac was threatened with execution under orders of andronikos i ,  their first-cousin once-removed ,  on september 11, 1185.
the timing of the deaths of the deposed emperors and of kanabos ,  and their relation to the coronation of alexios v are problematic . 
alexios v doukas  -lrb-  ;  december 1204 -rrb- ,  in latinised spelling alexius v ducas ,  was byzantine emperor from 5 february to 12 april 1204, during the second and final siege of constantinople by the participants of the fourth crusade . 
alexios v and his companions eventually reached mosynopolis ,  which had been occupied by the deposed emperor alexios iii angelos and his followers . 
alexios v was the last byzantine emperor to reign in constantinople before the establishment of the latin empire ,  which controlled the city for the next 57 years ,  until it was recovered by the nicaean emperor michael viii palaiologos in 1261.
at about this time alexios v attempted to destroy the crusader fleet with fire-ships ,  but to little effect . 
the young alexei was brought up by his mother ,  who fostered an atmosphere of disdain towards his father ,  the tsar . 
alexei petrovich romanov  -lrb-  28 february 1690 – 7 july 1718 -rrb- was a russian tsarevich . 
alexei died after interrogation under torture ,  and his son peter alexeyevich became the new heir apparent . 
jackson declined to press charges . 
jackson's quick temper was notorious . 
jackson met with polk ,  robert armstrong ,  and andrew jackson donelson in his study . 
they came to live with the jacksons after the death of their father . 
jackson ,  his mother ,  and his brothers lived with jackson's aunt and uncle in the waxhaws region ,  and jackson received schooling from two nearby priests . 
the creeks coined their own name for jackson ,  `` jacksa chula harjo '' or `` jackson ,  old and fierce . `` 
jackson ran again in 1828, defeating adams in a landslide . 
jackson used rip raps as a retreat . 
in the spring of 1822, jackson suffered a physical breakdown . 
jackson was a freemason ,  initiated at harmony lodge no . 
jackson has appeared on several postage stamps . 
the jacksons also acted as guardians for eight other children . 
jackson invaded florida on march 15, 1818, capturing pensacola . 
in 1836, jackson established the ten-hour day in national shipyards . 
jackson appointed six justices to the supreme court . 
andrew jackson was born on march 15, 1767 in the waxhaws region of the carolinas . 
to end this speculation ,  jackson in 1836 had issued a specie circular .  .  . `` 
in the 20th century ,  jackson was written about by many admirers . 
jackson's attempt to purchase texas from mexico for $5,000,000 failed . 
jackson's populism earned him the nickname `` king mob . `` 
jackson supported a revision to tariff rates known as the tariff of 1832.
jackson was severely wounded by jesse with a gunshot to the shoulder . 
jackson agreed to provide boats and other provisions for the expedition . 
rachel jackson was also a frequent target of attacks ,  and was widely accused of bigamy ,  a reference to the controversial situation of her marriage with jackson . 
throughout his lifetime jackson may have owned as many as 300 slaves . 
in may 1830, jackson discovered that calhoun had asked president monroe to censure jackson for his invasion of spanish florida in 1818 while calhoun was serving as secretary of war . 
jackson departed from the hermitage on january 19 and arrived in washington on february 11.
the first recorded physical attack on a u . s .  president was directed at jackson . 
because both jefferson and jackson were slave owners ,  as well as because of jackson's indian removal policies ,  many state party organizations have renamed the dinners . 
jackson believed in the ability of the people to `` arrive at right conclusions . `` 
after the election ,  jackson resigned his senate seat and returned to tennessee . 
jackson was a lean figure ,  standing at tall ,  and weighing between on average . 
thanks to jackson's victory at new orleans ,  the american government felt that it could safely ignore that provision and it kept the lands that jackson had acquired . 
jackson remains one of the most studied and controversial figures in american history . 
jackson had three adopted sons: theodore ,  an indian about whom little is known ,  andrew jackson jr .  ,  the son of rachel's brother severn donelson ,  and lyncoya ,  a creek indian orphan adopted by jackson after the battle of tallushatchee . 
shortly afterward ,  the `` globe '' announced that jackson would stand for reelection . 
when they immigrated to north america in 1765, jackson's parents probably landed in philadelphia . 
in 1838, jackson became an official member of the first presbyterian church in nashville . 
at biddle's direction ,  the bank poured thousands of dollars into a campaign to defeat jackson ,  seemingly confirming jackson's view that it interfered in the political process . 
following the war ,  jackson remained in command of troops on the southern border of the u . s . 
in his will ,  jackson left his entire estate to andrew jackson jr .  except for specifically enumerated items that were left to various friends and other family members . 
after the sevier affair and the duel ,  jackson was looking for a way to salvage his reputation . 
rachel had been under extreme stress during the election ,  and often struggled while jackson was away . 
the french accepted jackson's statements as sincere and in february 1836, reparations were paid . 
jackson has been a supporting character in a number of historical films and television productions . 
johnson had three goals in reconstruction . 
johnson returned home after the special session concluded . 
johnson returned home when his state took up the issue of secession . 
johnson notified congress of stanton's suspension and grant's interim appointment . 
johnson was unexpectedly victorious ,  albeit with a narrower margin than in 1853.
as military governor ,  johnson sought to eliminate rebel influence in the state . 
one of johnson's final acts as military governor was to certify the results . 
this issue was especially important to johnson because of his own humble beginnings . 
on the afternoon of april 14, 1865, lincoln and johnson met for the first time since the inauguration . 
when tennessee did so ,  congress immediately seated its proposed delegation ,  embarrassing johnson . 
nevertheless ,  johnson emerged as running mate for lincoln's reelection bid in 1864.
in addition ,  according to david o .  stewart in his book on johnson's impeachment ,  `` the violence and poverty that oppressed the south would galvanize the opposition to johnson '' . 
johnson traveled to washington to be sworn in ,  although according to gordon-reed ,  `` in light of what happened on march 4, 1865, it might have been better if johnson had stayed in nashville . `` 
andrew johnson was born in raleigh ,  north carolina ,  on december 29, 1808, to jacob johnson  -lrb-  1778–1812 -rrb- and mary  -lrb-  `` polly ''  -rrb-  mcdonough  -lrb-  1783–1856 -rrb- ,  a laundress . 
upon taking office ,  johnson faced the question of what to do with the confederacy . 
johnson continued his opposition to spending ,  chairing a committee to control it . 
the `` nashville union '' termed this `` henry-mandering ''; lamented johnson ,  `` i have no political future . `` 
polly johnson eventually remarried ,  to turner doughtry ,  who was as poor as she was . 
the burial ground was dedicated as the andrew johnson national cemetery in 1906, and with his home and tailor's shop ,  is part of the andrew johnson national historic site . 
johnson left north carolina for tennessee ,  traveling mostly on foot . 
johnson blamed the democrats for giving only lukewarm support to the national union movement . 
johnson's mother apprenticed her son william to a tailor ,  james selby . 
returning to tennessee after his presidency ,  johnson sought political vindication ,  and gained it in his eyes when he was elected to the senate again in 1875, making johnson the only former president to serve in the senate . 
even with the republican victory in november 1866, johnson considered himself in a strong position . 
in greeneville ,  johnson established a successful tailoring business in the front of his home . 
in 1840, johnson was selected as a presidential elector for tennessee ,  giving him more statewide publicity . 
andrew johnson  -lrb-  december 29, 1808 july 31, 1875 -rrb- was the 17th president of the united states ,  serving from 1865 to 1869.
after failing to win the 1868 democratic presidential nomination ,  johnson left office in 1869.
johnson sought nomination by the 1868 democratic national convention in new york in july 1868.
johnson was born in poverty in raleigh ,  north carolina ,  and never attended school . 
the turn of the 20th century saw the first significant historical evaluations of johnson . 
trefousse states that johnson wanted to `` induce lincoln not to be too lenient with traitors ''; gordon-reed agrees . 
congress refused to count tennessee's electoral votes ,  but lincoln and johnson did not need them ,  having won in most states that had voted ,  and easily secured the election . 
johnson's first reconstruction actions were two proclamations ,  with the unanimous backing of his cabinet ,  on may 29.
in june 1866, johnson signed the southern homestead act into law ,  believing that the legislation would assist poor whites . 
congress was reluctant to confront the president ,  and initially only sought to fine-tune johnson's policies towards the south . 
johnson's first tenure in the senate came to a conclusion in march 1862 when lincoln appointed him military governor of tennessee . 
in 1969, solzhenitsyn was expelled from the union of writers . 
instead ,  solzhenitsyn received his prize at the 1974 ceremony after he had been expelled from the soviet union . 
all of solzhenitsyn's sons became us citizens . 
on 12 february 1974, solzhenitsyn was arrested and deported the next day from the soviet union to frankfurt ,  west germany and stripped of his soviet citizenship . 
these would be the last of his works published in the soviet union until 1990.
on 8 august 1971, solzhenitsyn was poisoned with what was later determined to be ricin ,  but survived . 
solzhenitsyn became a supporter of vladimir putin who said he shared solzhenitsyn's critical view towards the russian revolution . 
solzhenitsyn was born in kislovodsk ,  rsfsr  -lrb-  now in stavropol krai ,  russia  -rrb-  . 
russian and world leaders paid tribute to solzhenitsyn following his death . 
solzhenitsyn died of heart failure near moscow on 3 august 2008, at the age of 89.
the aleksandr solzhenitsyn center supports explorations into the life and writings of the author and hosts the official english-language site dedicated to aleksandr solzhenitsyn . 
after khrushchev's secret speech in 1956, solzhenitsyn was freed from exile and exonerated . 
over the next 17 years ,  solzhenitsyn worked on his dramatized history of the russian revolution of 1917, `` the red wheel '' . 
solzhenitsyn made an unsuccessful attempt ,  with the help of tvardovsky ,  to get his novel `` cancer ward '' legally published in the soviet union . 
even though `` the gulag archipelago '' was not published in the soviet union ,  it was extensively criticized by the party-controlled soviet press . 
on 7 april 1940, while at the university ,  solzhenitsyn married natalia alekseevna reshetovskaya . 
aberdeen  -lrb-  ;  ,  ; ;   -rrb-  is a city in northeast scotland . 
aberdeen is represented in the parliament of the united kingdom by three constituencies: aberdeen north and aberdeen south which are wholly within the aberdeen city council area ,  and gordon ,  which includes a large area of the aberdeenshire council area . 
in the scottish parliament ,  the city is represented by three constituencies with different boundaries: aberdeen central and aberdeen donside are wholly within the aberdeen city council area . 
the aberdeen area has seen human settlement for at least 8,000 years . 
the city extends to  ,  and includes the former burghs of old aberdeen ,  new aberdeen ,  woodside and the royal burgh of torry to the south of river dee . 
aberdeen features an oceanic climate  -lrb-  köppen `` cfb ''  -rrb-  . 
aberdeen is locally governed by aberdeen city council ,  which comprises forty-five councillors who represent the city's wards and is headed by the lord provost . 
for the additional confusion regarding popes named john ,  see pope john  -lrb-  numbering  -rrb-  . 
the list of popes and antipopes in the `` annuario pontificio '' attaches the following note to the name of pope leo viii  -lrb-  963–965 -rrb-:
an antipope  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a person who ,  in opposition to the one who is generally seen as the legitimately elected pope ,  makes a significantly accepted competing claim to be the pope ,  the bishop of rome and leader of the catholic church . 
the period in which antipopes were most numerous was during the struggles between the popes and the holy roman emperors of the 11th and 12th centuries . 
the decline in wild fish stocks has increased the demand for farmed fish . 
some carnivorous and omnivorous farmed fish species are fed wild forage fish . 
the farming of fish is the most common form of aquaculture . 
hawaiians constructed oceanic fish ponds . 
worldwide ,  the most important fish species used in fish farming are ,  in order ,  carp ,  salmon ,  tilapia ,  and catfish . 
many of these interactions and effects cause stress in the fish ,  which can be a major factor in facilitating fish disease . 
further ,  in current aquaculture practice ,  products from several pounds of wild fish are used to produce one pound of a piscivorous fish like salmon . 
however ,  before any of this can be done researchers must study every aspect of the fish's lifecycle ,  including the amount of ammonia and nitrate the fish will tolerate in the water ,  what to feed the fish during each stage of its lifecycle ,  the stocking rate that will produce the healthiest fish ,  etc . 
another impact aquaculture production can have on wild fish is the risk of fish escaping from coastal pens ,  where they can interbreed with their wild counterparts ,  diluting wild genetic stocks . 
to satisfy this requirement ,  more than 50 percent of the world fish oil production is fed to farmed salmon . 
fish that are higher on the food chain are less efficient sources of food energy . 
sea ranching involves raising fish in a hatchery for a brief time and then releasing them into marine waters for further development ,  whereupon the fish are recaptured when they have matured . 
farmed salmon consume more wild fish than they generate as a final product ,  although the efficiency of production is improving . 
collectively these california farms produce 4.5 million kilograms of fish each year . 
escaped fish can become invasive ,  out-competing native species . 
in some cases anaesthetics may be used in small doses to calm fish before transport . 
particular kinds of aquaculture include fish farming ,  shrimp farming ,  oyster farming ,  mariculture ,  algaculture  -lrb-  such as seaweed farming  -rrb-  ,  and the cultivation of ornamental fish . 
farming of carnivorous species like salmon and shrimp leads to a high demand for forage fish to match the nutrition they get in the wild . 
romans bred fish in ponds and farmed oysters in coastal lagoons before 100 ce . 
fish waste is organic and composed of nutrients necessary in all components of aquatic food webs . 
in 2016, mass fish kill events impacted salmon farmers along chile's coast and the wider ecology . 
however ,  finding alternative sources of protein and oil for fish feed is necessary so the aquaculture industry can grow sustainably; otherwise ,  it represents a great risk for the over-exploitation of forage fish . 
biological control methods to manage parasites are already being used ,  such as cleaner fish  -lrb-  e . g . 
models are being used to help with spatial planning and siting of fish farms in order to minimize impact . 
recirculating aquaculture systems  -lrb-  ras  -rrb-  recycle water by circulating it through filters to remove fish waste and food and then recirculating it back into the tanks . 
by the 1920s ,  the american fish culture company of carolina ,  rhode island ,  founded in the 1870s was one of the leading producers of trout . 
during the 1940s ,  they had perfected the method of manipulating the day and night cycle of fish so that they could be artificially spawned year around . 
the resistance of organism growth on copper alloy nets also provides a cleaner and healthier environment for farmed fish to grow and thrive . 
ammonia ,  a nitrogen excretion product ,  is highly toxic to fish at accumulated levels ,  particularly when oxygen concentrations are low . 
although carnivorous farmed fish represented only 13 percent of aquaculture production by weight in 2000, they represented 34 percent of aquaculture production by value . 
as the salmon farming industry expands ,  it requires more wild forage fish for feed ,  at a time when seventy five percent of the worlds monitored fisheries are already near to or have exceeded their maximum sustainable yield . 
