most ancient egyptians were farmers tied to the land . 
the ancient egyptian military was responsible for defending egypt against foreign invasion ,  and for maintaining egypt's domination in the ancient near east . 
ancient egyptian has 25 consonants similar to those of other afro-asiatic languages . 
ancient egypt was a civilization of ancient north africa ,  concentrated along the lower reaches of the nile river in the place that is now the country egypt . 
the ancient egyptians placed a great value on hygiene and appearance . 
the ancient egyptians produced art to serve functional purposes . 
slavery was known in ancient egypt ,  but the extent and prevalence of its practice are unclear . 
ancient egyptian was a synthetic language ,  but it became more analytic later on . 
the ancient egyptians engaged in trade with their foreign neighbors to obtain rare ,  exotic goods not found in egypt . 
the medical problems of the ancient egyptians stemmed directly from their environment . 
narmer had egyptian pottery produced in canaan and exported back to egypt . 
ancient egyptians were among the first to use minerals such as sulfur as cosmetic substances . 
it was dated to the middle kingdom of egypt by extrapolating dates of ancient sites constructed along its course . 
in 332 bc ,  alexander the great conquered egypt with little resistance from the persians and was welcomed by the egyptians as a deliverer . 
ancient egyptian mathematicians knew the pythagorean theorem as an empirical formula . 
the egyptians created their own alphabet and decimal system . 
by the second dynasty at latest ,  ancient egyptian trade with byblos yielded a critical source of quality timber not found in egypt . 
ancient egyptian physicians were renowned in the ancient near east for their healing skills ,  and some ,  such as imhotep ,  remained famous long after their deaths . 
the story of sinuhe ,  written in middle egyptian ,  might be the classic of egyptian literature . 
the history of ancient egypt occurred as a series of stable kingdoms ,  separated by periods of relative instability known as intermediate periods: the old kingdom of the early bronze age ,  the middle kingdom of the middle bronze age and the new kingdom of the late bronze age . 
farming in egypt was dependent on the cycle of the nile river . 
even before the old kingdom ,  the ancient egyptians had developed a glassy material known as faience ,  which they treated as a type of artificial semi-precious stone . 
hunting would have been common for egyptians ,  and this is also the period when many animals were first domesticated . 
the wealthy members of ancient egyptian society enjoyed hunting and boating as well . 
the ancient egyptians enjoyed a variety of leisure activities ,  including games and music . 
egyptian cuisine remained remarkably stable over time; indeed ,  the cuisine of modern egypt retains some striking similarities to the cuisine of the ancients . 
in 1977, an ancient north-south canal dating to the middle kingdom of egypt was discovered extending from lake timsah to the ballah lakes . 
coptic is still used in the liturgy of the egyptian orthodox church ,  and traces of it are found in modern egyptian arabic . 
land management was crucial in ancient egypt because taxes were assessed based on the amount of land a person owned . 
egypt reached the pinnacle of its power in the new kingdom ,  ruling much of nubia and a sizable portion of the near east ,  after which it entered a period of slow decline . 
the architecture of ancient egypt includes some of the most famous structures in the world: the great pyramids of giza and the temples at thebes . 
in technology ,  medicine ,  and mathematics ,  ancient egypt achieved a relatively high standard of productivity and sophistication . 
in the new kingdom ,  a series of pharaohs used the standing egyptian army to attack and conquer kush and parts of the levant . 
the success of ancient egyptian civilization came partly from its ability to adapt to the conditions of the nile river valley for agriculture . 
the ancient egyptians maintained an elaborate set of burial customs that they believed were necessary to ensure immortality after death . 
they inaugurated a period of economic and cultural renaissance known as the middle kingdom . 
the ancient egyptians could fabricate a wide variety of objects from glass with great skill ,  but it is not clear whether they developed the process independently . 
in 2008, ice-t and black silver toured together as black ice ,  and released an album together called `` urban legends ''
while the group only recorded one album together as the analog brothers ,  a few bootlegs of its live concert performances ,  including freestyles with original lyrics ,  have occasionally surfaced online after `` pimp to eat '' ,  the analog brothers continued performing together in various line ups kool keith and marc live joined with jacky jasper to release two albums as khm marc live rapped with ice t's group smg marc also formed a group with black silver called live black ,  but while five of their tracks were released on a demo cd sold at concerts ,  live black's first album has yet to be released
motor neuron diseases affect both children and adults . 
motor neuron diseases  -lrb-  mnds  -rrb-  are a group of neurodegenerative disorders that selectively affect motor neurons ,  the cells which control voluntary muscles of the body . 
motor neuron disease describes a collection of clinical disorders ,  characterized by progressive muscle weakness and the degeneration of the motor neuron on electrophysiological testing . 
impure abjads have characters for some vowels ,  optional vowel diacritics ,  or both . 
the first abjad to gain widespread usage was the phoenician abjad . 
canadian syllabics differ from other abugidas in that the vowel is indicated by rotation of the consonantal symbol ,  with each vowel having a consistent orientation . 
in a syllabary ,  a grapheme denotes a complete syllable ,  that is ,  either a lone vowel sound or a combination of a vowel sound with one or more consonant sounds . 
according to the formulations of daniels ,  abjads differ from alphabets in that only consonants ,  not vowels ,  are represented among the basic graphemes . 
tāna of the maldives has dependent vowels and a zero vowel sign ,  but no inherent vowel . 
consonantal scripts  -lrb-  `` abjads ''  -rrb-  are normally written without indication of many vowels . 
indic scripts indicate vowels through dependent vowel signs  -lrb-  diacritics  -rrb-  around the consonants ,  often including a sign that explicitly indicates the lack of a vowel . 
thus it is the rime  -lrb-  vowel  -rrb-  that is basic to the system . 
however ,  it retains the features of having an inherent vowel /a/ and having distinct initial vowel letters . 
however ,  the other vowels were indicated with full letters ,  not diacritics or modification ,  so the system was essentially an alphabet that did not bother to write the most common vowel . 
several systems of shorthand use diacritics for vowels ,  but they do not have an inherent vowel ,  and are thus more similar to thaana and kurdish script than to the brahmic scripts . 
vowel diacritics may appear above ,  below ,  to the left ,  to the right ,  or around the consonant . 
the arabic scripts used for kurdish in iraq and for uyghur in xinjiang ,  china ,  as well as the hebrew script of yiddish ,  are fully vowelled ,  but because the vowels are written with full letters rather than diacritics  -lrb-  with the exception of distinguishing between /a/ and /o/ in the latter  -rrb-  and there are no inherent vowels ,  these are considered alphabets ,  not abugidas . 
the first complication is syllables that consist of just a vowel  -lrb-  v  -rrb-  . 
that is ,  the vowel diacritic and virama are both written after the consonants for the whole syllable . 
in a true abugida ,  the lack of distinctive marking may result from the diachronic loss of the inherent vowel ,  e . g . 
most other indic abugidas can only indicate a very limited set of final consonants with diacritics ,  such as or  ,  if they can indicate any at all . 
in the uk and australia ,  `` a '' was in the top 100 albums of 2013.
two different compilation albums of abba songs have been released . 
by 1978 abba were one of the biggest bands in the world . 
nine abba albums made their way into the top half of the `` billboard '' 200 album chart ,  with seven of them reaching the top 50 and four reaching the top 20.
between 1967 and 1975, fältskog released five studio albums . 
it also topped the `` billboard '' adult contemporary chart ,  abba's first american number-one single on any chart . 
in january 1977, abba embarked on their first major tour . 
the track would set the stage for abba's foray into disco with their next album . 
benny andersson has on several occasions performed old abba songs . 
the ps2 version features 20 abba songs ,  while 25 songs feature on the ps3 version . 
abba  -lrb-    -rrb-  are a swedish pop group formed in stockholm in 1972 by agnetha fältskog ,  björn ulvaeus ,  benny andersson and anni-frid lyngstad . 
the australian tour and its subsequent `` abba: the movie '' produced some abba lore ,  as well . 
lyngstad's second solo album after abba was called `` shine '' ,  produced by steve lillywhite . 
fältskog and lyngstad sang the abba song `` the way old friends do '' before they were joined on stage by andersson and ulvaeus . 
in december 1977, abba followed up `` arrival '' with the more ambitious fifth album ``  '' ,  released to coincide with the debut of `` abba: the movie '' . 
in march 1976, the band released the compilation album `` greatest hits '' . 
the group was represented by anni-frid lyngstad and benny andersson . 
in 1996, she released her autobiography ,  `` as i am '' ,  and a compilation album featuring her solo hits alongside some abba classics . 
in 1997, an abba tribute group was formed ,  the abba teens ,  which was subsequently renamed the a-teens to allow the group some independence . 
the album ,  which featured other guest vocalists ,  reached number 17 in the swedish charts . 
cher ,  who appeared in the movie ,  also released `` dancing queen '' ,  an album full of abba covers ,  in september 2018.
 ''abba oro: grandes éxitos '' ,  the spanish equivalent of `` abba gold: greatest hits '' ,  was released in 1999.
in november 2008, all eight studio albums ,  together with a ninth of rare tracks ,  was released as `` the albums '' . 
in 2005, all four members of abba appeared at the stockholm premiere of the musical `` mamma mia ! 
the compilation album ``  '' ,  originally released in 1992, returned to number-one in the uk album charts for the fifth time on 3 august 2008.
abba were honoured at the of the eurovision song contest in 2005, when their hit `` waterloo '' was chosen as the best song in the competition's history . 
after abba formed ,  she recorded another successful album in 1975, `` frida ensam '' ,  which included a swedish rendition of `` fernando '' ,  a hit on the swedish radio charts before the english version was released . 
 '' ,  in stockholm ,  at which benny andersson and björn ulvaeus were also present . 
the same year the members of abba went their separate ways ,  the french production of a `` tribute '' show  -lrb-  a children's tv musical named `` abbacadabra '' using 14 abba songs  -rrb-  spawned new interest in the group's music . 
in sweden ,  the growing recognition of the legacy of andersson and ulvaeus resulted in the 1998 `` b & b concerts '' ,  a tribute concert  -lrb-  with swedish singers who had worked with the songwriters through the years  -rrb-  showcasing not only their abba years ,  but hits both before and after abba . 
the album ,  gold - greatest hits ,  was released in the united states in 1993.
in 1987, andersson also released his first solo album on his own label ,  mono music ,  called ``  ''klinga mina klockor '' ''  -lrb-  `` ring my bells ''  -rrb-  ,  all new material inspired by swedish folk music – and followed it with his second album titled `` november 1989 '' . 
during their active career ,  from 1972 to 1982, abba placed twenty singles on the `` billboard '' hot 100, fourteen of which made the top 40  -lrb-  13 on the cashbox top 100 -rrb- and ten of which made the top 20 on both charts . 
 ''thank you for the music '' has become one of the best loved and best known abba songs without being released as a single during the group's lifetime . 
the song returned to the top 20 of the uk singles chart in august that year ,  this time peaking at number 16.
on 4 july 2008, all four abba members were reunited at the swedish premiere of the film `` mamma mia ! ``  . 
also in 1980, abba recorded a compilation of spanish-language versions of their hits called `` gracias por la música '' . 
after abba disbanded in december 1982, andersson and ulvaeus achieved success writing music for the stage ,  while lyngstad and fältskog pursued solo careers with mixed success . 
the group also enjoyed significant success in latin america ,  and recorded a collection of their hit songs in spanish . 
this was first written as `` björn ,  benny ,  agnetha & frida '' ,  but was subsequently crossed out with `` abba '' written in large letters on top . 
during the band's heyday the highest album chart position they had ever achieved in america was number 14.
 ''lay all your love on me '' was abba's fourth number-one single on a `` billboard '' chart ,  topping the hot dance club play chart . 
in may 2013, fältskog released a solo album entitled `` a '' through universal international . 
andersson has also written music for a documentary film about olof palme ,  re-recording the track `` sorgmarsch ''  -lrb-  `` dirge ''  -rrb-  from his last album throughout the film . 
abba has never officially announced the end of the group ,  but it has long been considered dissolved . 
fältskog's second english-language solo album ,  `` eyes of a woman '' ,  was released in march 1985.
nevertheless ,  `` arrival '' finally became a true breakthrough release for abba on the us album market where it peaked at number 20 on the `` billboard '' 200 chart and was certified gold by riaa . 
both female members of abba pursued solo careers on the international scene after their work with the group . 
there were four kinds of allegiances  -lrb-  `` rittson v stordy ''  -lrb-  1855 -rrb- 3 sm & g 230; `` de geer v stone ''  -lrb-  1882 -rrb- 22 ch d 243; `` isaacson v durant ''  -lrb-  1886 -rrb- 54 lt 684; `` gibson ,  gavin v gibson '' 1913 3 kb 379; `` joyce v dpp '' 1946 ac 347; `` collingwood v pace ''  -lrb-  1661 -rrb- o bridg 410; `` lane v bennett ''  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- 1 m & w 70; `` lyons corp v east india co ''  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- 1 moo pcc 175; `` birtwhistle v vardill ''  -lrb-  1840 -rrb- 7 cl & fin 895; `` r v lopez ,  r v sattler ''  -lrb-  1858 -rrb- dears & b 525; ex p brown  -lrb-  1864 -rrb- 5 b & s 280 -rrb-;
 -lrb-  c  -rrb-  `` ligeantia localis '' ,  by operation of law ,  when a friendly alien enters the country ,  because so long as they are in the country they are within the sovereign's protection ,  therefore they owe the sovereign a local obedience or allegiance  -lrb-  `` r v cowle ''  -lrb-  1759 -rrb- 2 burr 834; `` low v routledge ''  -lrb-  1865 -rrb- 1 ch app 42; `` re johnson ,  roberts v attorney-general '' 1903 1 ch 821; `` tingley v muller '' 1917 2 ch 144; `` rodriguez v speyer '' 1919 ac 59; `` johnstone v pedlar '' 1921 2 ac 262; `` r v tucker ''  -lrb-  1694 -rrb- show parl cas 186; `` r v keyn ''  -lrb-  1876 -rrb- 2 ex d 63; `` re stepney election petn ,  isaacson v durant ''  -lrb-  1886 -rrb- 17 qbd 54 -rrb-;
allegiance is the tie which binds the subject to the sovereign in return for that protection which the sovereign affords the subject . 
at common law ,  allegiance is a true and faithful obedience of the subject due to his sovereign . 
denization ,  or `` ligeantia acquisita '' ,  appears to be threefold  -lrb-  `` thomas v sorrel ''  -lrb-  1673 -rrb- 3 keb 143 -rrb-;
an alien ,  coming into a colony also became ,  temporarily a subject of the crown ,  and acquired rights both within and beyond the colony ,  and these latter rights could not be affected by the laws of that colony  -lrb-  `` routledge v low ''  -lrb-  1868 -rrb- lr 3 hl 100; 37 lj ch 454; 18 lt 874; 16 wr 1081, hl; `` reid v maxwell ''  -lrb-  1886 -rrb- 2 tlr 790; `` falcon v famous players film co '' 1926 2 kb 474 -rrb- . 
as the subject owes to his king his true and faithful allegiance and obedience ,  so the sovereign
allegiance is owed both to the sovereign as a natural person and to the sovereign in the political capacity  -lrb-  `` re stepney election petition ,  isaacson v durant ''  -lrb-  1886 -rrb- 17 qbd 54  -lrb-  per lord coleridge cj  -rrb-   -rrb-  . 
the devices ran the newton os . 
a chain of dedicated newton only stores called newton source existed from 1994 until 1998.
with the messagepad 120 with newton os 2.0, the newton keyboard by apple became available ,  which can also be used via the dongle on newton devices with a newton interconnect port ,  most notably the apple messagepad 2000/2100 series ,  as well as the apple emate 300.
newton devices featuring newton os 2.1 or higher can be used with the screen turned horizontally  -lrb-  `` landscape ''  -rrb-  as well as vertically  -lrb-  `` portrait ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2009, cnet compared an apple messagepad 2000 to an iphone ,  and the newton was still declared better . 
the newton was also used in healthcare applications ,  for example in collecting data directly from patients . 
however ,  users wrote similar programs which could evaluate mathematical formulas using the newton os intelligent assistant ,  a unique part of every newton device . 
later releases of the newton operating system retained the original recognizer for compatibility ,  but added a hand-printed-text-only  -lrb-  not cursive  -rrb-  recognizer ,  called `` rosetta '' ,  which was developed by apple ,  included in version 2.0 of the newton operating system ,  and refined in newton 2.1.
later versions of newton os offered improved handwriting recognition ,  quite possibly a leading reason for the continued popularity of the devices among newton users . 
van vogt '' both personally and professionally . 
concerning van vogt's writing ,  knight said:
in november 1944, van vogt and hull moved to hollywood; van vogt would spend the rest of his life in california . 
van vogt's first wife ,  edna mayne hull ,  died in 1975.
after more than a decade of running their dianetics center ,  hull and van vogt closed it in 1961.
critical opinion about the quality of van vogt's work is sharply divided . 
some of van vogt's more well-known work was still produced using the fix-up method . 
at the same time ,  in his fiction ,  van vogt was consistently sympathetic to absolute monarchy as a form of government . 
in increasingly frail health ,  van vogt's final short story appeared in 1986.
by 1938, van vogt decided to switch to writing science fiction ,  a genre he enjoyed reading . 
van vogt would marry lydia bereginsky in 1979; they remained together until his death . 
these sympathies were the subject of much critical discussion during van vogt's career ,  and afterwards . 
contemporary reviews were lukewarm at best ,  and van vogt thereafter returned to science fiction . 
kournikova entered the 1997 australian open as world no . 
at the french open ,  kournikova made it to the third round before losing to world no . 
fedorov claimed he and kournikova were married in 2001, and divorced in 2003.
in 2003, anna kournikova collected her first grand slam match victory in two years at the australian open . 
kournikova opened her 2000 season winning the gold coast open doubles tournament partnering with julie halard . 
kournikova plays right-handed with a two-handed backhand . 
in 1998, kournikova broke into the wta's top 20 rankings for the first time ,  when she was ranked no . 
kournikova ,  10 years younger than bure ,  was 18 years old at the time . 
57 in the end of the season . 
kournikova and wilkison defeated jimmy arias and chanda rubin ,  and then kournikova and novacek defeated rubin and wilkison . 
at the start of the 1999 season ,  kournikova advanced to the fourth round in singles before losing to mary pierce . 
anna kournikova and martina hingis were presented with the wta award for doubles team of the year . 
at the us open ,  she lost in the second round to the eleventh seed irina spîrlea . 
she did not return for season 13.
kournikova's two grand slam doubles titles came in 1999 and 2002, both at the australian open in the women's doubles event with partner martina hingis . 
alfons maria jakob  -lrb-  2 july 1884 in aschaffenburg/bavaria – 17 october 1931 in hamburg  -rrb-  was a german neurologist who worked in the field of neuropathology . 
jakob made a lecture tour of the united states  -lrb-  1924 -rrb- and south america  -lrb-  1928 -rrb- ,  of which ,  he wrote a paper on the neuropathology of yellow fever . 
agnosticism is the view that the existence of god ,  of the divine or the supernatural is unknown and unknowable . 
in `` why i am an agnostic ''  -lrb-  c .  1889 -rrb- he claims that agnosticism is `` the very reverse of atheism '' . 
agnosticism is criticized from a variety of standpoints . 
being a scientist ,  above all else ,  huxley presented agnosticism as a form of demarcation . 
according to the philosopher william l .  rowe ,  `` agnosticism is the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to justify either the belief that god exists or the belief that god does not exist '' . 
according to philosopher william l .  rowe ,  in this strict sense ,  agnosticism is the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to justify either the belief that god exists or the belief that god does not exist . 
bertrand russell  -lrb-  1872-1970 -rrb- declared `` why i am not a christian '' in 1927, a classic statement of agnosticism . 
theistic critics claim that agnosticism is impossible in practice ,  since a person can live only either as if god did not exist  -lrb-  `` etsi deus non-daretur ''  -rrb-  ,  or as if god did exist  -lrb-  `` etsi deus daretur ''  -rrb-  . 
huxley identified agnosticism not as a creed but rather as a method of skeptical ,  evidence-based inquiry . 
a .  j .  ayer ,  theodore drange ,  and other philosophers see both atheism and agnosticism as incompatible with ignosticism on the grounds that atheism and agnosticism accept `` a deity exists '' as a meaningful proposition that can be argued for or against . 
in 1939, russell gave a lecture on `` the existence and nature of god '' ,  in which he characterized himself as an atheist . 
smith rejects agnosticism as a third alternative to theism and atheism and promotes terms such as agnostic atheism  -lrb-  the view of those who do not `` believe '' in the existence of any deity ,  but do not claim to `` know '' if a deity does or does not exist  -rrb-  and agnostic theism  -lrb-  the view of those who do not claim to `` know '' of the existence of any deity ,  but still `` believe '' in such an existence  -rrb-  . 
nearly all of the argon in the earth's atmosphere is radiogenic argon-40, derived from the decay of potassium-40 in the earth's crust . 
in the universe ,  argon-36 is by far the most common argon isotope ,  as it is the most easily produced by stellar nucleosynthesis in supernovas . 
argon is also used in fluorescent glow starters . 
in the united states ,  arsenic is most commonly found in the ground waters of the southwest . 
physical ,  chemical ,  and biological methods have been used to remediate arsenic contaminated water . 
some canadians are drinking water that contains inorganic arsenic . 
the main use of arsenic is in alloying with lead . 
this may find applications in areas where the potable water is extracted from underground aquifers . 
arsenic forms colorless ,  odorless ,  crystalline oxides aso  -lrb-  `` white arsenic ''  -rrb-  and aso which are hygroscopic and readily soluble in water to form acidic solutions . 
it oxidises readily in air to form arsenic trioxide and water ,  and analogous reactions take place with sulfur and selenium instead of oxygen . 
organic arsenic compounds may ,  however ,  occur where waters are significantly impacted by industrial pollution . 
around one-third of the world’s population drinks water from groundwater resources . 
the toxicity of arsenic to insects ,  bacteria ,  and fungi led to its use as a wood preservative . 
arsenic also occurs in various organic forms in the environment . 
chaff-based filters have recently been shown to reduce the arsenic content of water to 3 µg/l . 
the presence of sulfur is another factor that affects the transformation of arsenic in natural water . 
arsenic was also used in various agricultural insecticides and poisons . 
a broad variety of sulfur compounds of arsenic are known . 
in 2000, bacteria were discovered that employ a version of photosynthesis in the absence of oxygen with arsenites as electron donors ,  producing arsenates  -lrb-  just as ordinary photosynthesis uses water as electron donor ,  producing molecular oxygen  -rrb-  . 
it is also a poor electrical conductor . 
the three most common arsenic allotropes are gray ,  yellow ,  and black arsenic ,  with gray being the most common . 
this process may be an arsenic detoxification mechanism for the bacteria . 
a few species of bacteria are able to use arsenic compounds as respiratory metabolites . 
when organic carbon is present in water ,  bacteria are fed by directly reducing as -lrb-  v  -rrb-  to as -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  or by reducing the element at the binding site ,  releasing inorganic arsenic . 
the united states' environmental protection agency states that all forms of arsenic are a serious risk to human health . 
these three have been used as agricultural insecticides and poisons . 
a large variety of organoarsenic compounds are known . 
this study has important implications for potable water and health concerns relating to inorganic arsenic . 
under some conditions ,  the arsenic in chicken feed is converted to the toxic inorganic form . 
using the high specific surface area of feo nanocrystals ,  the mass of waste associated with arsenic removal from water has been dramatically reduced . 
four allotropes of antimony are known: a stable metallic form and three metastable forms  -lrb-  explosive ,  black and yellow  -rrb-  . 
several thioantimonides are known ,  such as and  . 
isotopes that are lighter than the stable sb tend to decay by β decay ,  and those that are heavier tend to decay by β decay ,  with some exceptions . 
the earliest known description of the metal in the west was written in 1540 by vannoccio biringuccio . 
antimony trioxide is formed when antimony is burnt in air . 
antimony forms two series of halides: and  . 
reaction of aluminium bromide and actinium oxide yields actinium tribromide:
actinium is a chemical element with symbol ac and atomic number 89.
the most significant isotopes for chemistry are ac ,  ac ,  and ac . 
actinium metal has been prepared by the reduction of actinium fluoride with lithium vapor in vacuum at a temperature between 1100 and 1300 °c . 
actinium is a soft ,  silvery-white ,  radioactive ,  metallic element . 
actinium trichloride is obtained by reacting actinium hydroxide or oxalate with carbon tetrachloride vapors at temperatures above 960 °c . 
mixing monosodium phosphate  -lrb-  nahpo  -rrb-  with a solution of actinium in hydrochloric acid yields white-colored actinium phosphate hemihydrate  -lrb-  acpo·0.5ho  -rrb-  ,  and heating actinium oxalate with hydrogen sulfide vapors at 1400 °c for a few minutes results in a black actinium sulfide acs . 
the isotopes of actinium range in atomic weight from 206 u  -lrb-    -rrb-  to 236 u  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
actinium reacts rapidly with oxygen and moisture in air forming a white coating of actinium oxide that impedes further oxidation . 
actinium trifluoride can be produced either in solution or in solid reaction . 
actinium hydride was obtained by reduction of actinium trichloride with potassium at 300 °c ,  and its structure was deduced by analogy with the corresponding lah hydride . 
about 19 isotopes and 8 nuclear isomers are known for americium . 
therefore ,  any primordial americium  -lrb-  americium that was present on earth during its formation  -rrb-  should have decayed by now . 
metallic americium is obtained by reduction from its compounds . 
initial experiments yielded four americium isotopes: am ,  am ,  am and am . 
scarcity and high price yet hinder application of americium as a nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors . 
americium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol am and atomic number 95.
americium readily reacts with oxygen and dissolves well in acids . 
americium is used in the most common type of household smoke detector ,  which uses am in the form of americium dioxide as its source of ionizing radiation . 
americium often enters landfills from discarded smoke detectors . 
an alternative is the reduction of americium dioxide by metallic lanthanum or thorium:
another known form of solid tetravalent americium chloride is kamf . 
americium is a relatively soft radioactive metal with silvery appearance . 
the longest-lived and most common isotopes of americium ,  am and am ,  have half-lives of 432.2 and 7,370 years ,  respectively . 
another proposed space-related application of americium is a fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion . 
americium is an artificial element of recent origin ,  and thus does not have a biological requirement . 
halides of americium are known for the oxidation states +2, +3 and +4, where the +3 is most stable ,  especially in solutions . 
three americium oxides are known ,  with the oxidation states +2  -lrb-  amo  -rrb-  ,  +3  -lrb-  amo  -rrb-  and +4  -lrb-  amo  -rrb-  . 
americium has been produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors for decades ,  and kilograms of its am and am isotopes have been accumulated by now . 
the obtained am can be used for generating heavier americium isotopes by further neutron capture inside a nuclear reactor . 
americium is not synthesized directly from uranium – the most common reactor material – but from the plutonium isotope pu . 
americium is produced mostly artificially in small quantities ,  for research purposes . 
the amount of americium in a typical new smoke detector is 1 microcurie  -lrb-  37 kbq  -rrb-  or 0.29 microgram . 
the transuranic elements from americium to fermium occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at oklo ,  but no longer do so . 
it undergoes alpha decay to the extremely long-lived bismuth-209.
astatine's alpha decay energies follow the same trend as for other heavy elements . 
astatine is an extremely radioactive element; all its isotopes have short half-lives of 8.1 hours or less ,  decaying into other astatine isotopes ,  bismuth ,  polonium or radon . 
astatine-210 and lighter isotopes exhibit beta plus decay  -lrb-  positron emission  -rrb-  ,  astatine-216 and heavier isotopes exhibit beta  -lrb-  minus  -rrb-  decay ,  and astatine-212 decays via both modes ,  while astatine-211 undergoes electron capture . 
astatine is the rarest naturally occurring element . 
the name was also chosen to continue the tradition of the four stable halogens ,  where the name referred to a property of the element . 
the bismuth  -lrb-  or sometimes bismuth trioxide  -rrb-  target is dissolved in ,  for example ,  concentrated nitric or perchloric acid . 
there are 39 known isotopes of astatine ,  with atomic masses  -lrb-  mass numbers  -rrb-  of 191–229.
the latter figure means that astatine may  -lrb-  at least  -rrb-  be metallic in the liquid state on the basis that elements with a heat of vaporization greater than ~42 kj/mol are metallic when liquid; diatomic iodine ,  with a value of 41.71 kj/mol ,  falls just short of the threshold figure . 
astatine has 24 known nuclear isomers ,  which are nuclei with one or more nucleons  -lrb-  protons or neutrons  -rrb-  in an excited state . 
they can enable the production of astatine in a specific oxidation state and may have greater applicability in experimental radiochemistry . 
the total amount of astatine in the earth's crust  -lrb-  quoted mass 2.36 × 10 grams  -rrb-  is estimated to be less than one gram at any given time . 
astatine is a radioactive chemical element with symbol at and atomic number 85.
although astatine-210 has a slightly longer half-life ,  it is wholly unsuitable because it usually undergoes beta plus decay to the extremely toxic polonium-210.
only a few compounds with metals have been reported ,  in the form of astatides of sodium ,  palladium ,  silver ,  thallium ,  and lead . 
atoms of the same element have the same number of protons ,  called the atomic number . 
because of the definition of the unified atomic mass unit ,  each carbon-12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12 u ,  and so a mole of carbon-12 atoms weighs exactly 0.012 kg . 
the heaviest stable atom is lead-208, with a mass of  . 
elements 43, 61, and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes . 
the electrons of an atom are attracted to the protons in an atomic nucleus by this electromagnetic force . 
in the case of tin oxides ,  one tin atom will combine with either one or two oxygen atoms . 
by definition ,  any two atoms with an identical number of `` protons '' in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element . 
that it is equal to the atomic nuclear charge remains the accepted atomic model today . 
the number of protons in the nucleus defines to what chemical element the atom belongs: for example ,  all copper atoms contain 29 protons . 
isotopes were then explained as elements with the same number of protons ,  but different numbers of neutrons within the nucleus . 
the development of the mass spectrometer allowed the mass of atoms to be measured with increased accuracy . 
if this modifies the number of protons in a nucleus ,  the atom changes to a different chemical element . 
however ,  the hydrogen-1 atom has no neutrons and the hydron ion has no electrons . 
the actual mass of an atom at rest is often expressed using the unified atomic mass unit  -lrb-  u  -rrb-  ,  also called dalton  -lrb-  da  -rrb-  . 
the large majority of an atom's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up . 
every atom is composed of a nucleus and one or more electrons bound to the nucleus . 
protons have a positive charge and a mass 1,836 times that of the electron ,  at  . 
an example of use of a mass number is `` carbon-12, '' which has 12 nucleons  -lrb-  six protons and six neutrons  -rrb-  . 
all known isotopes of elements with atomic numbers greater than 82 are radioactive ,  although the radioactivity of element 83  -lrb-  bismuth  -rrb-  is so slight as to be practically negligible . 
the electrons in an atom are attracted to the protons in the nucleus by the electromagnetic force . 
some examples of infertile non-arable land being turned into fertile arable land are:
land incapable of being cultivated for production of crops can sometimes be converted to arable land . 
agricultural land that is not arable according to the fao definition above includes: other non-arable land includes land that is not suitable for any agricultural use . 
aluminium nitride  -lrb-  aln  -rrb-  is the only nitride known for aluminium . 
the resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99% . 
aluminium is named after alumina ,  or aluminium oxide in modern nomenclature . 
the electronegativity of aluminium is 1.61  -lrb-  pauling scale  -rrb-  . 
aluminium is the most widely used non-ferrous metal . 
of aluminium isotopes ,  only one is stable: al . 
the hall–heroult process produces aluminium with a purity of above 99% . 
in contrast ,  the earth's mantle is only 2.38% aluminium by mass . 
although aluminium is a common and widespread element ,  not all aluminium minerals are economically viable sources of the metal . 
a free aluminium atom has a radius of 143 pm . 
the history of aluminium has been shaped by usage of alum . 
the oxides and sulfates are the most useful compounds of aluminium . 
attempts to produce aluminium metal date back to 1760.
even then ,  aluminium was still not of great purity and produced aluminium differed in properties by sample . 
aluminium has a stacking-fault energy of approximately 200 mj/m . 
it can be produced from lithium hydride and aluminium trichloride:
the conversion of alumina to aluminium metal is achieved by the hall–héroult process . 
the aluminium can was invented in 1956 and employed as a storage for drinks in 1958.
bauxite is converted to aluminium oxide by the bayer process . 
aluminium is the most common material for the fabrication of superconducting qubits . 
modern production of the aluminium metal is based on the bayer and hall–héroult processes . 
aluminium or aluminum is a chemical element with symbol al and atomic number 13.
aluminium carbide  -lrb-  alc  -rrb-  is made by heating a mixture of the elements above  . 
the video shows several members brandishing their german passports as a demonstration of their german citizenship to skeptical and unaccepting 'ethnic' germans . 
advanced chemistry is a german hip hop group from heidelberg ,  a scenic city in baden-württemberg ,  south germany . 
in their undertaking of social and political issues ,  the band introduced the term `` afro-german '' into the context of german hip hop ,  and the theme of race is highlighted in much of their music . 
influenced by north american socially conscious rap and the native tongues movement ,  advanced chemistry is regarded as one of the main pioneers in german hip hop . 
the church of england was the established church not only in england ,  but in its trans-oceanic colonies . 
the anglican communion is the third largest christian communion . 
the church of nigeria opposed the episcopal church's decision as well as the church of england's approval for civil partnerships . 
in addition to other member churches ,  the churches of the anglican communion are in full communion with the old catholic churches of the union of utrecht and the scandinavian lutheran churches of the porvoo communion in europe ,  the india-based malankara mar thoma syrian and malabar independent syrian churches and the philippine independent church ,  also known as the aglipayan church . 
the anglican church of australia does not have an official position on homosexuality . 
others ,  for example the church of ireland ,  the scottish and american episcopal churches have official names which do not include `` anglican '' . 
this controversy produced the free church of england and ,  in the united states and canada ,  the reformed episcopal church . 
 -lrb-  see anglican realignment  -rrb- 
as mentioned above ,  the anglican communion has no international juridical organisation . 
thus the only member churches of the present anglican communion existing by the mid-18th century were the church of england ,  its closely linked sister church the church of ireland  -lrb-  which also separated from roman catholicism under henry viii  -rrb-  and the scottish episcopal church which for parts of the 17th and 18th centuries was partially underground  -lrb-  it was suspected of jacobite sympathies  -rrb-  . 
the church of england has always thought of itself not as a new foundation but rather as a reformed continuation of the ancient `` english church ''  -lrb-  `` ecclesia anglicana ''  -rrb-  and a reassertion of that church's rights . 
gafcon ,  or a fellowship of conservative anglican churches ,  has appointed 'missionary bishops' in response to the disagreements with the perceived liberalisation in the anglican churches in north america and europe . 
the anglican communion has no official legal existence nor any governing structure which might exercise authority over the member churches . 
depending on their geological origin ,  islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as `` oceanic islands '' ,  `` continental fragments '' ,  and `` continental islands '' . 
an archipelago  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  sometimes called an island group or island chain ,  is a chain ,  cluster or collection of islands ,  or sometimes a sea containing a small number of scattered islands . 
the farallon islands off the coast of california are an example . 
michel foucault argues in his essay `` what is an author ? `` 
the person who inherits the copyright is not the author ,  but enjoys the same legal benefits . 
an author is the creator or originator of any written work such as a book or play ,  and is thus also a writer . 
an author's book must earn the advance before any further royalties are paid . 
the author receives the rest of the money made . 
the relationship between the author and the editor ,  often the author's only liaison to the publishing company ,  is often characterized as the site of tension . 
barthes challenges the idea that a text can be attributed to any single author . 
the more specific phrase published author refers to an author  -lrb-  especially but not necessarily of books  -rrb-  whose work has been independently accepted for publication by a reputable publisher  ,  versus a self-publishing author or an unpublished one . 
instead ,  readers should allow a text to be interpreted in terms of the language as `` author '' . 
an author's contract may specify ,  for example ,  that they will earn 10% of the retail price of each book sold . 
markov was an atheist . 
markov and his younger brother vladimir andreevich markov  -lrb-  1871–1897 -rrb- proved the markov brothers' inequality . 
a primary subject of his research later became known as markov chains and markov processes . 
andrey markov was born on 14 june 1856 in russia . 
in existentialist philosophy ,  the term `` angst '' carries a specific conceptual meaning . 
angst means fear or anxiety  -lrb-  `` anguish '' is its latinate equivalent ,  and `` anxious , ``  `` anxiety '' are of similar origin  -rrb-  . 
anxiety can be either a short-term `` state '' or a long-term `` trait '' . 
anxiety is distinguished from fear ,  which is an appropriate cognitive and emotional response to a perceived threat . 
fear is short lived ,  present focused ,  geared towards a specific threat ,  and facilitating escape from threat; anxiety ,  on the other hand ,  is long-acting ,  future focused ,  broadly focused towards a diffuse threat ,  and promoting excessive caution while approaching a potential threat and interferes with constructive coping . 
</poem>
</poem>
 ''the world of pooh '' won the lewis carroll shelf award in 1958.
milne served in both world wars ,  joining the british army in world war i ,  and was a captain of the british home guard in world war ii . 
not yet known as pooh ,  he made his first appearance in a poem ,  `` teddy bear , ``  published in `` punch '' magazine in february 1924 and republished in `` when we were very young '' . 
the original manuscripts for `` winnie the pooh '' and `` the house at pooh corner '' are archived separately at trinity college library ,  cambridge . 
the fictional hundred acre wood of the pooh stories derives from five hundred acre wood in ashdown forest in east sussex ,  south east england ,  where the pooh stories were set . 
that same year a uk poll saw winnie the pooh voted onto the list of icons of england . 
he also wrote in the poem `` vespers '': <poem> ''oh ! 
milne is most famous for his two `` pooh '' books about a boy named christopher robin after his son ,  christopher robin milne ,  and various characters inspired by his son's stuffed animals ,  most notably the bear named winnie-the-pooh . 
in 2005, winnie the pooh generated $6 billion ,  a figure surpassed by only mickey mouse . 
after the war ,  he wrote a denunciation of war titled `` peace with honour ''  -lrb-  1934 -rrb- ,  which he retracted somewhat with 1940's `` war with honour '' . 
the club has ties with former football club alumni because both were established by buenos aires english high school students . 
former players still alive of alumni football club and descendants of other players already dead gave their permission to use the name `` alumni '' . 
asociación alumni ,  usually just alumni ,  is an argentine rugby union club located in tortuguitas ,  greater buenos aires . 
where the symbol formula_18 stands for the formula formula_1 with the term formula_20 substituted for formula_21.
a deductive system consists of a set formula_39 of logical axioms ,  a set formula_40 of non-logical axioms ,  and a set formula_41 of `` rules of inference '' . 
a system is said to be complete if ,  for all formulas formula_1,
this means that ,  for any variable symbol formula_14 the formula formula_15 can be regarded as an axiom . 
we have a language formula_27 where formula_28 is a constant symbol and formula_29 is a unary function and the following axioms:
formula_43 that is ,  for any statement that is a `` logical consequence '' of formula_40 there actually exists a `` deduction '' of the statement from formula_40.
the standard structure is formula_35 where formula_36 is the set of natural numbers ,  formula_29 is the successor function and formula_28 is naturally interpreted as the number 0.
in the modern view axioms may be any set of formulas ,  as long as they are not known to be inconsistent . 
in propositional logic it is common to take as logical axioms all formulae of the following forms ,  where formula_1, formula_2, and formula_3 can be any formulae of the language and where the included primitive connectives are only `` formula_4 '' for negation of the immediately following proposition and `` formula_5 '' for implication from antecedent to consequent propositions:
a set of axioms should also be non-redundant; an assertion that can be deduced from other axioms need not be regarded as an axiom . 
non-logical axioms are formulas that play the role of theory-specific assumptions . 
note that `` completeness '' has a different meaning here than it does in the context of gödel's first incompleteness theorem ,  which states that no `` recursive '' ,  `` consistent '' set of non-logical axioms formula_40 of the theory of arithmetic is `` complete '' ,  in the sense that there will always exist an arithmetic statement formula_1 such that neither formula_1 nor formula_49 can be proved from the given set of axioms . 
these are certain formulas in a formal language that are universally valid ,  that is ,  formulas that are satisfied by every assignment of values . 
there is thus ,  on the one hand ,  the notion of `` completeness of a deductive system '' and on the other hand that of `` completeness of a set of non-logical axioms '' . 
the formalist project suffered a decisive setback ,  when in 1931 gödel showed that it is possible ,  for any sufficiently large set of axioms  -lrb-  peano's axioms ,  for example  -rrb-  to construct a statement whose truth is independent of that set of axioms . 
each of these patterns is an `` axiom schema '' ,  a rule for generating an infinite number of axioms . 
this section gives examples of mathematical theories that are developed entirely from a set of non-logical axioms  -lrb-  axioms ,  henceforth  -rrb-  . 
any axiom is a statement that serves as a starting point from which other statements are logically derived . 
non-logical axioms are often simply referred to as `` axioms '' in mathematical discourse . 
in the attic–ionic dialect of ancient greek ,  long alpha fronted to  -lrb-  eta  -rrb-  . 
alpha  -lrb-  uppercase  ,  lowercase ;  ,  `` álpha '' ,  `` álfa ''  -rrb-  is the first letter of the greek alphabet . 
letters that arose from alpha include the latin a and the cyrillic letter а . 
in doric and aeolic ,  long alpha is preserved in all positions . 
in ancient greek ,  alpha was pronounced and could be either phonemically long  -lrb-  aː  -rrb-  or short  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  . 
toffler said:
power also said he was inspired by toffler's works . 
he continued the theme in `` the third wave '' in 1980.
alvin toffler was born on october 4, 1928, in new york city ,  and raised in brooklyn . 
toffler was an associate editor of `` fortune '' magazine . 
he and his wife heidi toffler ,  who collaborated with him for most of his writings ,  moved on to examining the reaction to changes in society with another best-selling book ,  `` the third wave '' in 1980.
in the mid-1960s ,  the tofflers began five years of research on what would become `` future shock '' ,  published in 1970.
toffler graduated from new york university in 1950 as an english major ,  though by his own account he was more focused on political activism than grades . 
 ''they were depression-era literary intellectuals , ``  toffler said ,  `` and they always talked about exciting ideas . `` 
in january 2014, marvel confirmed that `` the amazing spider-man '' would be relaunched on april 30, 2014, starting from issue #1, with peter parker as spider-man once again . 
marvel began `` the amazing spider-man '' anew with vol . 
bagley penciled the flagship spider-man title from 1991 to 1996.
 ''the amazing spider-man '' #200  -lrb-  jan .  1980 -rrb- featured the return and death of the burglar who killed spider-man's uncle ben . 
stern wrote `` the kid who collects spider-man '' in `` the amazing spider-man '' #248  -lrb-  january 1984 -rrb- ,  a story which ranks among his most popular . 
the amazing spider-man is an american comic book series published by marvel comics ,  featuring the fictional superhero spider-man as its main protagonist . 
 ''the amazing spider-man '' has been the character's flagship series for his first fifty years in publication ,  and was the only monthly series to star spider-man until `` peter parker ,  the spectacular spider-man '' in 1976, although 1972 saw the debut of `` marvel team-up '' ,  with the vast majority of issues featuring spider-man along with a rotating cast of other marvel characters . 
several spin-off series debuted in the 1970s: `` marvel team-up '' in 1972, and `` the spectacular spider-man '' in 1976.
straczynski gave spider-man a new profession ,  having parker teach at his former high school . 
the title was relaunched in april 2014, starting fresh from issue #1, after the `` goblin nation '' story arc published in `` the superior spider-man '' and `` superior spider-man team-up '' . 
with #389, writer j .  m .  dematteis ,  whose spider-man credits included the 1987 `` kraven's last hunt '' story arc and a 1991–1993 run on `` the spectacular spider-man '' ,  took over the title . 
most of spider-man's key villains and supporting characters were introduced during this time . 
in late 2015, `` the amazing spider-man '' was relaunched again with a new volume with issue #1 following the 2015 `` secret wars '' event . 
issues #361-363  -lrb-  april–june 1992 -rrb- introduced carnage ,  a second symbiote nemesis for spider-man . 
some 1,800 people were evacuated to antigua . 
nearly everyone on the island was evacuated to antigua . 
the island of antigua was explored by christopher columbus in 1493 and named for the church of santa maría la antigua . 
in the years before antigua and barbuda's independence ,  standard english was widely spoken in preference to antiguan creole . 
antigua and barbuda  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a country in the west indies in the americas ,  lying between the caribbean sea and the atlantic ocean . 
antigua and barbuda remains a member of the commonwealth and elizabeth ii is the country's queen and head of state . 
antigua has a population of  ,  mostly made up of people of west african ,  british ,  and madeiran descent . 
the islands became an independent state within the commonwealth of nations on 1 november 1981, with elizabeth ii as the first queen of antigua and barbuda . 
lying near each other  -lrb-  the main barbuda airport is less than 0.5° of latitude ,  or 30 nautical miles ,  north of the main antigua airport  -rrb-  ,  antigua and barbuda are in the middle of the leeward islands ,  part of the lesser antilles ,  roughly at 17°n of the equator . 
azincourt  -lrb-  ; historically ,  agincourt in english  -rrb-  is a commune in the pas-de-calais department in northern france . 
hitler's order ,  by its terms ,  deprived speer of any power to interfere with the decree ,  and speer went to confront hitler ,  reiterating that the war was lost . 
speer placed his department at the disposal of the `` wehrmacht '' . 
speer was to be replaced by his own subordinate ,  karl-otto saur . 
in 1937, hitler appointed speer as with the rank of undersecretary of state in the reich government . 
hitler instead presented göring with the `` fait accompli '' of speer's appointment . 
speer overcame these difficulties by centralizing power over the war economy in himself . 
speer was under significant psychological pressure during this period of his life . 
during his testimony ,  speer accepted responsibility for the nazi regime's actions . 
speer also oversaw the construction of buildings for the `` wehrmacht '' and `` luftwaffe '' . 
the following morning ,  speer left the `` führerbunker ''; hitler curtly bade him farewell . 
speer described this as his most beautiful work ,  and as the only one that stood the test of time . 
in 1940, joseph stalin proposed that speer pay a visit to moscow . 
when the commission was completed ,  speer returned to mannheim and remained there as hitler took office in january 1933.
in 1931, speer surrendered his position as tessenow's assistant and moved to mannheim . 
speer was taken to several internment centres for nazi officials and interrogated . 
hitler appointed speer as head of the chief office for construction ,  which placed him nominally on hess's staff . 
according to speer ,  while he was successful in this debate ,  hitler had also won ,  `` because he wanted and needed me back in his corner ,  and he got me '' . 
in april ,  speer's rivals for power succeeded in having him deprived of responsibility for construction . 
the asteraceae may represent as much as 10% of autochthonous flora in many regions of the world . 
compositae is an older  -lrb-  but still valid  -rrb-  name that refers to the `` composite '' nature of the capitula ,  which consist of  -lrb-  few to  -rrb-  many individual flowers . 
it is the 16th-largest family of flowering plants ,  with more than 3,700 species in 434 genera including such well-known and economically important plants such as ajwain ,  angelica ,  anise ,  asafoetida ,  caraway ,  carrot ,  celery ,  chervil ,  coriander ,  cumin ,  dill ,  fennel ,  hemlock ,  lovage ,  cow parsley ,  parsley ,  parsnip and sea holly ,  as well as silphium ,  a plant whose identity is unclear and which may be extinct . 
the seeds may be used in cuisine ,  as with coriander  -lrb-  `` coriandrum sativum ''  -rrb-  ,  fennel  -lrb-  `` foeniculum vulgare ''  -rrb-  ,  cumin  -lrb-  `` cuminum cyminum ''  -rrb-  ,  and caraway  -lrb-  `` carum carvi ''  -rrb-  . 
apiaceae or umbelliferae is a family of mostly aromatic flowering plants named after the type genus `` apium '' and commonly known as the celery ,  carrot or parsley family ,  or simply as umbellifers . 
with robert morison's 1672 `` plantarum umbelliferarum distribution nova '' it became the first group of plants for which a systematic study was published . 
other notable cultivated apiaceae include chervil  -lrb-  `` anthriscus cerefolium ''  -rrb-  ,  angelica  -lrb-  `` angelica '' spp . 
an oligodendrocyte can myelinate up to 50 axons . 
the axonal region or compartment ,  includes the axon hillock ,  the initial segment ,  the rest of the axon ,  and the axon telodendria ,  and axon terminals . 
there are two types of axons in the nervous system: myelinated and unmyelinated axons . 
axons are classified in two systems . 
this axonal transport is provided for in the axoplasm . 
the axon hillock is the area formed from the cell body of the neuron as it extends to become the axon . 
during axonal development ,  the activity of pi3k is increased at the tip of destined axon . 
growing axons move through their environment via the growth cone ,  which is at the tip of the axon . 
axons are covered by a membrane known as an axolemma; the cytoplasm of an axon is called axoplasm . 
the axonal initial segment  -lrb-  ais  -rrb-  is a structurally and functionally separate microdomain of the axon . 
cells called guidepost cells assist in the guidance of neuronal axon growth . 
in the nervous system ,  axons may be myelinated ,  or unmyelinated . 
an axon is one of two types of cytoplasmic protrusions from the cell body of a neuron; the other type is a dendrite . 
in addition to propagating action potentials to axonal terminals ,  the axon is able to amplify the action potentials ,  which makes sure a secure propagation of sequential action potentials toward the axonal terminal . 
other synapses appear as terminals at the ends of axonal branches . 
the aramaic alphabet was an ancestor to the nabataean alphabet and the later arabic alphabet . 
formerly ,  hebrew had been written using an alphabet closer in form to that of phoenician ,  the paleo-hebrew alphabet . 
the ancient aramaic alphabet is adapted from the phoenician alphabet and became distinct from it by the 8th century bc . 
the earliest inscriptions in the aramaic language use the phoenician alphabet . 
the hebrew and nabataean alphabets ,  as they stood by the roman era ,  were little changed in style from the imperial aramaic alphabet . 
the development of cursive versions of aramaic also led to the creation of the syriac ,  palmyrene and mandaic alphabets ,  which formed the basis of the historical scripts of central asia ,  such as the sogdian and mongolian alphabets . 
the syriac aramaic alphabet was added to the unicode standard in september 1999, with the release of version 3.0.
the widespread usage of achaemenid aramaic in the middle east led to the gradual adoption of the aramaic alphabet for writing hebrew . 
 ''american shot '' is a translation of a phrase from french film criticism ,  ``  ''plan américain '' '' and refers to a medium-long  -lrb-  `` knee ''  -rrb-  film shot of a group of characters ,  who are arranged so that all are visible to the camera . 
one of the other main reasons why french critics called it 'american shot' was its frequent use in westerns . 
adem can progress to ms . 
the pathology of adem is very similar to that of ms with some differences . 
adem has an abrupt onset and a monophasic course . 
it has been found that anti-mog auto-antibodies are related to this kind of adem
being an acute monophasic illness ,  eae is far more similar to adem than ms . 
the average time to recover from adem flare-ups is one to six months . 
plaques in the white matter in ms are sharply delineated ,  while the glial scar in adem is smooth . 
nevertheless ,  adem does occur in adults ,  and can also be clinically multiphasic . 
the relationship between adem and anti-mog associated encephalomyelitis is currently under research . 
relapses following adem are reported in up to a quarter of patients ,  but the majority of these 'multiphasic' presentations following adem likely represent ms .  adem is also distinguished by a loss of consciousness ,  coma and death ,  which is very rare in ms ,  except in severe cases . 
typically ,  adem appears in children following an antigenic challenge and remains monophasic . 
it may account for 40% of ataxias of unknown origin and 15% of all ataxias . 
the term cerebellar ataxia is used to indicate ataxia that is due to dysfunction of the cerebellum . 
malfunction of the sodium-potassium pump may be a factor in some ataxias . 
there may also be tremor of the head and trunk  -lrb-  titubation  -rrb-  in individuals with cerebellar ataxia . 
cerebellar ataxia can have many causes despite normal neuroimaging . 
the treatment of ataxia and its effectiveness depend on the underlying cause . 
the term sensory ataxia is employed to indicate ataxia due to loss of proprioception ,  the loss of sensitivity to the positions of joint and body parts . 
peripheral neuropathies may cause generalised or localised sensory ataxia  -lrb-  e . g . 
gluten ataxia is a proposed condition ,  wherein someone has an otherwise unexplained  -lrb-  idiopathic  -rrb-  ataxia and also has serological testing for iga anti-transglutaminase antibodies . 
the term `` vestibular ataxia '' is employed to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the vestibular system ,  which in acute and unilateral cases is associated with prominent vertigo ,  nausea and vomiting . 
ghb accumulates in the nervous system and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological dysfunction . 
 ''abdul ''  -lrb-  `` abd al ''  -rrb-  is a common arabic name component  -lrb-  meaning `` servant of the ''  -rrb-  but never a name by itself . 
 ''haḍra '' is also the name of the sufi dhikr . 
however abdul is a common arabic prefix meaning `` servant '' and `` al '' is arabic for `` the '' ,  and if `` hazra '' means `` he prohibited '' ,  `` he fenced in '' or `` great lord '' ,  then the name would mean `` servant of the prohibited '' ,  `` servant of the fenced in '' ,  or `` servant of the great lord '' which would make sense considering his role ,  even if it is not a proper arabic name . 
the name may have been invented by lovecraft himself or the phillips' family lawyer albert baker . 
at the center of the area they discover the nameless city  -lrb-  the setting of the lovecraft story of the same name  -rrb-  and in derleth's text the domain of the great old one hastur . 
 ''abdul alhazred '' is not a real arabic name ,  and seems to contain the arabic definite article morpheme `` al- '' twice in a row  -lrb-  anomalous in terms of arabic grammar  -rrb-  . 
king was made earl of lovelace in 1838, ada thereby becoming countess of lovelace . 
ada described her approach as `` poetical science '' and herself as an `` analyst  -lrb-  & metaphysician  -rrb- ``  . 
derleth was roman catholic . 
derleth wrote more than 150 short stories and more than 100 books during his lifetime . 
important as was derleth's work to rescue h . p . 
derleth was a correspondent and friend of h .  p .  lovecraft – when lovecraft wrote about `` le comte d'erlette '' in his fiction ,  it was in homage to derleth . 
derleth also wrote many historical novels ,  as part of both the `` sac prairie saga '' and the `` wisconsin saga '' . 
the son of william julius derleth and rose louise volk ,  derleth grew up in sauk city ,  wisconsin . 
detective fiction represented another substantial body of derleth's work . 
 ''walden west '' ,  published in 1961, is considered by many derleth's finest work . 
derleth can also be considered a pioneering naturalist and conservationist in his writing . 
brian lumley cites the importance of derleth to his own lovecraftian work ,  and contends in a 2009 introduction to derleth's work that he was ``  .  .  . one of the first ,  finest ,  and most discerning editors and publishers of macabre fiction . `` 
with longtime friend donald wandrei ,  derleth in 1939 founded arkham house . 
following lovecraft's death ,  derleth wrote a number of stories based on fragments and notes left by lovecraft . 
august william derleth  -lrb-  february 24, 1909 – july 4, 1971 -rrb- was an american writer and anthologist . 
a close literary relative of the `` sac prairie saga '' was derleth's `` wisconsin saga '' ,  which comprises several historical novels . 
at publication ,  `` the detroit news '' wrote: `` certainly with this book mr .  derleth may be added to the american writers of distinction . `` 
jim stephens ,  editor of `` an august derleth reader '' ,   -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  argues: `` what derleth accomplished .  .  . was to gather a wisconsin mythos which gave respect to the ancient fundament of our contemporary life . `` 
derleth `` was '' more optimistic than lovecraft in his conception of the mythos ,  but we are dealing with a difference more of degree than kind . 
the romans ,  however ,  had built roads along the mountain passes ,  which continued to be used through the medieval period to cross the mountains and roman road markers can still be found on the mountain passes . 
conrad gessner was the first naturalist to ascend the mountains in the 16th century ,  to study them ,  writing that in the mountains he found the `` theatre of the lord '' . 
celtic tribes settled in switzerland between 1500 and 1000 bc . 
scorpions can be found in the italian alps . 
some high mountain villages are car free either because of inaccessibility or by choice . 
forty percent of the glaciation in austria has disappeared since 1850, and 30% of that in switzerland . 
the 18th and 19th centuries saw an influx of naturalists ,  writers ,  and artists ,  in particular ,  the romantics ,  followed by the golden age of alpinism as mountaineers began to ascend the peaks . 
in the 19th century ,  the monasteries built in the high alps during the medieval period to shelter travellers and as places of pilgrimage ,  became tourist destinations . 
the first british mont blanc ascent was in 1788; the first female ascent in 1819.
with the opening of the gotthard base tunnel on june 1, 2016 it bypasses the gotthard tunnel built in the 19th century and realizes the first flat route through the alps . 
in emosson in valais ,  switzerland ,  dinosaur tracks were found in the 1970s ,  dating probably from the triassic period . 
the saint gotthard pass crosses from central switzerland to ticino; in 1882 the saint gotthard railway tunnel was opened connecting lucerne in switzerland ,  with milan in italy . 
the term may be common to italo-celtic ,  because the celtic languages have terms for high mountains derived from `` alp '' . 
the great st bernard hospice ,  built in the 9th or 10th centuries ,  at the summit of the great saint bernard pass was shelter for travellers and place for pilgrims since its inception; by the 19th century it became a tourist attraction with notable visitors such as author charles dickens and mountaineer edward whymper . 
by the 6th century bc ,  the celtic la tène culture was well established . 
the highest pass in the alps is the col de l'iseran in savoy  -lrb-  france  -rrb-  at  ,  followed by the stelvio pass in northern italy at ; the road was built in the 1820s . 
christianity was established in the region by the romans ,  and saw the establishment of monasteries and churches in the high regions . 
in the first half of the 20th century the olympic winter games were held three times in alpine venues: the 1924 winter olympics in chamonix ,  france; the 1928 winter olympics in st .  moritz ,  switzerland; and the 1936 winter olympics in garmisch-partenkirchen ,  germany . 
this may be consistent with the theory that in greek `` alpes '' is a name of non-indo-european origin  -lrb-  which is common for prominent mountains and mountain ranges in the mediterranean region  -rrb-  . 
much of the alpine region was gradually settled by germanic tribes ,   -lrb-  lombards ,  alemanni ,  bavarii ,  and franks  -rrb-  from the 6th to the 13th centuries mixing with the local celtic tribes . 
in the high villages people live in homes built according to medieval designs that withstand cold winters . 
series of lower mountain ranges run parallel to the main chain of the alps ,  including the french prealps in france and the jura mountains in switzerland and france . 
the countries with the greatest alpine territory are switzerland ,  france  -lrb-  21.4%  -rrb-  ,  austria  -lrb-  28.7% of the total area  -rrb-  and italy  -lrb-  27.2%  -rrb-  . 
human interference has nearly exterminated the trees in many areas ,  and ,  except for the beech forests of the austrian alps ,  forests of deciduous trees are rarely found after the extreme deforestation between the 17th and 19th centuries . 
in the 17th century about 2500 people were killed by an avalanche in a village on the french-italian border; in the 19th century 120 homes in a village near zermatt were destroyed by an avalanche . 
some of the valleys are quite arid such as the aosta valley in italy ,  the maurienne in france ,  the valais in switzerland ,  and northern tyrol . 
the largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes are the alpine ibex ,  which have been sighted as high as  . 
the alpine region area contains about a hundred peaks higher than  . 
german ski troops were trained for the war ,  and battles were waged in mountainous areas such as the battle at riva ridge in italy ,  where the american 10th mountain division encountered heavy resistance in february 1945.
while mont blanc was first climbed in 1786, most of the alpine four-thousanders were climbed during the second half of the 19th century; the ascent of the matterhorn in 1865 marked the end of the golden age of alpinism . 
the areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff . 
the highest portion of the range is divided by the glacial trough of the rhône valley ,  from mont blanc to the matterhorn and monte rosa on the southern side ,  and the bernese alps on the northern . 
the alpine area fluctuates greatly because of regional fluctuations in tree lines . 
in the 18th century four chamonix men almost made the summit of mont blanc but were overcome by altitude sickness and snowblindness . 
camus's first significant contribution to philosophy was his idea of the absurd . 
many writers have addressed the absurd ,  each with his or her own interpretation of what the absurd is and what comprises its importance . 
to distinguish his ideas ,  scholars sometimes refer to the paradox of the absurd ,  when referring to `` camus' absurd '' . 
camus then became associated with the french anarchist movement . 
the novel was an autobiographical work about his childhood in algeria . 
from 1955 to 1956, camus wrote for `` l'express '' . 
camus's understanding of the absurd promotes public debate; his various offerings entice us to think about the absurd and offer our own contribution . 
he was rejected by the french army because of his tuberculosis . 
albert camus  -lrb-  ; ; 7 november 1913 – 4 january 1960 -rrb- was a french philosopher ,  author ,  and journalist . 
albert camus was born on 7 november 1913 in mondovi  -lrb-  present-day dréan  -rrb-  ,  in french algeria . 
if a man chose to believe in religion – that the meaning of life was to ascend to heaven ,  or some similar afterlife ,  that he committed philosophical suicide by trying to escape the absurd . 
camus concludes that we must instead `` entertain '' both death and the absurd ,  while never agreeing to their terms . 
behind the scenes ,  he began to work for imprisoned algerians who faced the death penalty . 
if we accept that life has no meaning and therefore no value ,  should we kill ourselves ? 
the anarchist andré prudhommeaux first introduced him at a meeting in 1948 of the `` cercle des étudiants anarchistes ''  -lrb-  anarchist student circle  -rrb-  as a sympathiser familiar with anarchist thought . 
when the algerian war began in 1954, camus was confronted with a moral dilemma . 
his early thoughts appeared in his first collection of essays ,  `` l'envers et l'endroit ''  -lrb-  `` betwixt and between  -rrb- ``  in 1937.
camus joined the french communist party in early 1935, seeing it as a way to `` fight inequalities between europeans and 'natives' in algeria . `` 
he was interred next to agatha christie . 
in late 1926, archie asked agatha for a divorce . 
in april 1901, at age 10, she wrote her first poem ,  `` the cowslip '' . 
during the second world war ,  christie wrote two novels ,  `` curtain '' and `` sleeping murder '' ,  intended as the last cases of these two great detectives ,  hercule poirot and miss marple . 
in 1993, hicks founded the agatha christie society and became its first president . 
agatha's mother clara had been born in belfast in 1854 to captain frederick boehmer and mary ann west as the couple's only daughter . 
hannah later released a second poirot mystery ,  `` closed casket '' ,  in 2016.
agatha mary clarissa miller was born on 15 september 1890 into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in torquay ,  devon . 
the couple's first child ,  margaret frary miller  -lrb-  1879–1950 -rrb- ,  was born in torquay ,  where the couple were renting lodgings . 
poirot is the only fictional character to date to be given an obituary in `` the new york times '' ,  following the publication of `` curtain '' . 
agatha christie limited remains the owner of the worldwide rights for over 80 of christie's novels and short stories ,  19 plays ,  and nearly 40 tv films . 
dame agatha mary clarissa christie ,  lady mallowan ,   -lrb-  née miller; 15 september 1890 – 12 january 1976 -rrb- was an english writer . 
the society is now chaired and managed by agatha christie's great-grandson james prichard . 
by the end of the 1930s ,  christie wrote in her diary that she was finding poirot `` insufferable '' ,  and by the 1960s she felt that he was `` an egocentric creep '' . 
murders '' starring john malkovich and rupert grint began filming in june 2018 for later broadcast . 
these publications came on the heels of the success of the film version of `` murder on the orient express '' in 1974.
in 2013, the christie family gave their `` full backing '' to the release of a new poirot story ,  `` the monogram murders '' ,  which was written by british author sophie hannah . 
public reaction at the time was largely negative ,  supposing a publicity stunt or an attempt to frame her husband for murder . 
she was survived by her only child ,  rosalind hicks  -lrb-  1919–2004 -rrb- ,  and only grandson ,  mathew prichard . 
after the war ,  agatha and archie christie settled in a flat at 5 northwick terrace in st .  john's wood ,  northwest london . 
dame agatha christie died on 12 january 1976 at age 85 from natural causes at her home winterbrook house which was located in winterbrook ,  wallingford ,  oxfordshire . 
the novel is believed to be based on the cholera epidemic that killed a large percentage of oran's population in 1849 following french colonization ,  but the novel is placed in the 1940s . 
the plague  -lrb-  french: la peste  -rrb-  is a novel by albert camus ,  published in 1947, that tells the story of a plague sweeping the french algerian city of oran . 
by focusing on cases and not on theory ,  those engaged in moral debate increase the possibility of agreement . 
