the zebrafish  -lrb-  `` danio rerio ''  -rrb-  is a freshwater fish belonging to the minnow family  -lrb-  cyprinidae  -rrb-  of the order cypriniformes . 
after a few months ,  the adult fish reaches reproductive maturity  -lrb-  bottom panel  -rrb-  . 
the zebrafish was referred to in scientific literature as `` brachydanio rerio '' for many years until its reassignment to the genus `` danio '' . 
the italian government decided on a military solution to force ethiopia to abide by the italian version of the treaty . 
by late 1895, italian forces had advanced deep into ethiopian territory . 
in 1889, the italians signed the treaty of wuchale with then `` negus '' menelik of shewa . 
this system describes a ball rolling down a curve with shape formula_2, and has three steady-states: formula_3, formula_4, and formula_5.
the final state of the system can be either formula_3 or formula_14, depending on the initial conditions . 
in a dynamical system ,  bistability means the system has two stable equilibrium states . 
where formula_18 is the output ,  and formula_19 is the parameter ,  acting as the input . 
it is often associated with hysteresis in such systems . 
in the mathematical language of dynamic systems analysis ,  one of the simplest bistable systems is
after the barrier has been reached ,  the system will relax into the other minimum state in a time called the relaxation time . 
the appearance of a bistable region can be understood for the model system  formula_15 which undergoes a supercritical pitchfork bifurcation with bifurcation parameter formula_16.
lomborg is gay and a vegetarian . 
in 2015, lomborg described the center's funding as `` a little more than $1m a year .  .  . from private donations '' ,  of which lomborg himself was paid $775,000 in 2012.
the rulings of the danish authorities in 2003–2004 left lomborg's critics frustrated . 
bjørn lomborg  -lrb-  ; born 6 january 1965 -rrb- is a danish author and president of his think tank ,  copenhagen consensus center . 
lomborg spent a year as an undergraduate at the university of georgia ,  earned an m . a . 
in 2009, `` business insider '' cited lomborg as one of `` the 10 most-respected global warming skeptics '' . 
later ,  lomborg's interests shifted to the use of statistics in the environmental arena . 
 ''the lomborg deception '' ,  a book by howard friel ,  claims to offer a `` careful analysis '' of the ways in which lomborg has `` selectively used  -lrb-  and sometimes distorted  -rrb-  the available evidence '' ,  and that the sources lomborg provides in the footnotes do not support—and in some cases are in direct contradiction to—lomborg's assertions in the text of the book; lomborg has denied these claims in a public response . 
bjørn lomborg released a documentary feature film ,  `` cool it '' ,  on 12 november 2010 in the us . 
lomborg claimed vindication as a result of msti's decision to set aside the original finding of dcsd . 
lomborg's approach evolved in directions more compatible with action to restrain climate change . 
in 2014, the government of australia offered the university of western australia $4 million to establish a `` consensus centre '' with lomborg as director . 
the islanders were also tortured by the dutch . 
the competition largely destroyed the value of the banda islands to the dutch . 
the dutch followed the portuguese to banda but were to have a much more dominating and lasting presence . 
the butchering and beheadings were carried out by the japanese for the dutch . 
the bandanese chiefs were tortured by the dutch and japanese . 
ironically though ,  it was this lack of ports which brought the dutch to trade at banda instead of the clove islands of ternate and tidore . 
in singapore ,  captain spencer informed cole that over 700 regular dutch troops may be located in the bandas . 
the dutch slaughtered the defenders ,  and afterwards strengthened the fort ,  renaming it 'fort revenge' . 
fort belgica ,  one of many forts built by the dutch east india company ,  is one of the largest remaining european forts in indonesia . 
the dutch carved 68 parcels out of the islands after the enslavement and slaughter of the natives . 
the original club logo was first featured in the broncos' inaugural season in the premiership in 1988 and was used until 1999.
the club won the inaugural season of the competition ,  defeating the sydney roosters by 34–12 in the grand final . 
the club records the highest annual revenue of all nrl clubs – $a32.8m for the 2012 financial year – and is one of the most valuable clubs of any code in australia ,  worth over $42 million . 
the club record attendance for a regular season match is 58,593, set against the st .  george dragons in the final round of the 1993 season . 
in the 2018 nrl season ,  brisbane finished in 6th place on the table at the end of the regular season . 
in the inaugural 1988 season ,  the club's jersey design featured the top third being gold ,  the middle being alternating hoops of maroon and white and the bottom third being maroon . 
as a result ,  the traditional maroon and white colours of queensland along with gold ,  symbolizing the queensland sunshine , 
the club first tasted premiership success in 1992, and again in 1993, defeating the st .  george dragons in both years at sydney football stadium . 
the broncos missing the finals now means that every club has missed the finals at least once since the 2002 season . 
in february 2011, it was announced that ivan henjak was to be sacked from the club ,  only three weeks before the beginning of the season . 
their 2010 season started moderately: a 30–24 win against north queensland ,  a 14–22 loss to canberra ,  and a 48–16 hammering by the warriors on 28 march 2010.
as the brisbane lions ,  the club won its first afl premiership in the 2001 afl grand final ,  defeating essendon 15.18  -lrb-  108 -rrb- to 12.10  -lrb-  82 -rrb- . 
coach leigh matthews resigned at the end of the season after 10 seasons and 3 premierships with the club . 
the lions are one of the most successful afl clubs of the 21st century ,  having appeared in four consecutive afl grand finals from 2001 to 2004 and winning three premierships  -lrb-  2001, 2002, 2003 -rrb- . 
the 2004 season saw brisbane remain in the top portion of the ladder for most of the season . 
in their first year as a combined club the lions made the finals ,  finishing in eighth position after being defeated by the st kilda football club in a qualifying final . 
the lions began the 2006 season optimistically ,  but injuries again plagued the club ,  whose players recorded an afl record total of 200 matches lost to injury for the season . 
the club is based at the gabba . 
the other soldiers went out the southeast corner and shot four more civilians ,  killing two . 
on 18 january 1972, brian faulkner ,  prime minister of northern ireland ,  banned all parades and marches in northern ireland until the end of the year . 
the soldiers went through the car park and out the other side . 
two investigations have been held by the british government . 
bloody sunday ,  sometimes called the bogside massacre ,  was an incident on 30 january 1972 in the bogside area of derry ,  northern ireland ,  when british soldiers shot 28 unarmed civilians during a protest march against internment . 
all of the soldiers responsible insisted that they had shot at ,  and hit ,  gunmen or bomb-throwers . 
ira activity also increased across northern ireland with thirty british soldiers being killed in the remaining months of 1971, in contrast to the ten soldiers killed during the pre-internment period of the year . 
about ten minutes had elapsed between the time soldiers drove into the bogside and the time the last of the civilians was shot . 
another group of people fled into the car park of glenfada park ,  which was also a courtyard-like area surrounded by flats . 
soon after his death ,  bruno and his companions were venerated as martyrs and bruno was soon after canonized . 
it was said that braunsberg was named after st bruno . 
before leaving for poland ,  bruno consecrated a bishop for the pechenegs . 
bruno was from a noble family of querfurt  -lrb-  now in saxony-anhalt  -rrb-  . 
the origin of the stage name bo diddley is unclear . 
many songs  -lrb-  for example ,  `` hey bo diddley '' and `` who do you love ? ``   -rrb- 
chess records included diddley's cover of `` sixteen tons '' on the 1960 album `` bo diddley is a gunslinger '' . 
bo diddley died on june 2, 2008, of heart failure at his home in archer ,  florida . 
bo diddley gave different accounts of how he began to use this rhythm . 
in november 2009, the guitar used by bo diddley in his final stage performance sold for $60,000 at auction . 
the record was released in march 1955, and the a-side ,  `` bo diddley '' ,  became a number one r&b hit . 
the documentary film ``  '' by director phil ranstrom features bo diddley's last on-camera interview . 
bo diddley achieved numerous accolades in recognition of his significant role as one of the founding fathers of rock and roll . 
the `` bo diddley beat '' is essentially the clave rhythm ,  one of the most common bell patterns found in sub-saharan african music traditions . 
the album title `` surfing with bo diddley '' derived from his influence on surf guitarists rather than surfing per se . 
in 1989, diddley entered into a licensing agreement with the sportswear brand nike . 
in the uk ,  `` uncut '' magazine included his 1957 debut album ,  `` bo diddley '' ,  in its listing of the '100 music ,  movie & tv moments that have changed the world' . 
in 2005, bo diddley celebrated his 50th anniversary in music with successful tours of australia and europe and with coast-to-coast shows across north america . 
also in the early 1970s ,  the soundtrack of the ground-breaking animated film `` fritz the cat '' contained his song `` bo diddley '' ,  in which a crow idly finger-pops to the track . 
at the age of 12, lugosi dropped out of school . 
in 1917, lugosi married ilona szmik . 
the studio then rehired lugosi to star in new films . 
lugosi was also the subject of `` bela lugosi's dead '' ,  the first single by the english band bauhaus . 
lugosi did attempt to break type by auditioning for other roles . 
to lugosi's disappointment ,  however ,  his role in this film was that of a mute ,  with no dialogue . 
 ''abbott and costello meet frankenstein '' was bela lugosi's last `` a '' movie . 
lugosi played dracula for a second and last time on film in `` abbott and costello meet frankenstein ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- . 
lugosi's first film appearance was in the movie `` az ezredes ''  -lrb-  `` the colonel '' ,  1917 -rrb- . 
after playing small parts on the stage in his native hungary ,  lugosi got his first role in a film in 1917.
a number of factors began to work against lugosi's career in the mid-1930s . 
different prominent actors were considered before browning cast lugosi for the role ,  but the film was a hit . 
on 26 june 1931, lugosi became a naturalized united states citizen . 
the theatrical play `` lugosi - the shadow of the vampire ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is based on lugosi's life ,  telling the story of his life as he became typecast as dracula and as his drug addiction worsened . 
the cape lugosi wore in `` dracula ''  -lrb-  1931 -rrb- survives today in the ownership of universal studios . 
a statue of lugosi was erected on one of the corners of the vajdahunyad castle in budapest . 
in 1979, the `` lugosi v .  universal pictures '' decision by the california supreme court held that lugosi's personality rights could not pass to his heirs ,  as a copyright would have . 
he is himself captured by vornoff and lobo . 
the struggle between vornoff and the octopus was filmed at griffith park . 
the film is considered to have wood's biggest budget  -lrb-  $70,000 -rrb- . 
vornoff is absent from the later film ,  but there are references to the activities of `` the mad doctor '' . 
lugosi's fee for the film is estimated to have been 1000 dollars . 
this was bela lugosi's last speaking role in a feature film . 
kelton is the only character to appear in all three films . 
lobo rescues her . 
the film combines elements of science fiction and horror fiction ,  genres which were frequently combined in films of the 1950s . 
both the working title `` bride of the atom '' and the final title `` bride of the monster '' allude to the earlier film `` bride of frankenstein ''  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- . 
bertrand russell ,  the first to discuss the paradox in print ,  attributed it to g .  g .  berry  -lrb-  1867–1928 -rrb- ,  a junior librarian at oxford's bodleian library . 
the first biathlon world championships  -lrb-  bwch  -rrb-  was held in 1958, with individual and team contests for men . 
prahlad jani is an indian sadhu who says he has lived without food and water for more than 70 years . 
inedia  -lrb-  latin for `` fasting ''  -rrb-  or breatharianism is the belief that it is possible for a person to live without consuming food . 
brooks claims to have found `` four major deterrents '' which prevented him from living without food: `` people pollution '' ,  `` food pollution '' ,  `` air pollution '' and `` electro pollution '' . 
in the documentary `` no way to heaven '' the swiss chemist michael werner claims to have followed the directions appearing on jasmuheen's books ,  living for several years without food . 
the case has attracted criticism ,  both after the 2003 tests and the 2010 tests . 
some breatharians have submitted themselves to medical testing ,  including a hospital's observation of indian mystic prahlad jani appearing to survive without food or water for 15 days ,  and an israeli breatharian appearing to survive for eight days on a television documentary . 
jasmuheen challenged the results of the program ,  saying ,  `` look ,  6,000 people have done this around the world without any problem . `` 
jasmuheen has denied any responsibility for the deaths . 
belfast zoo is owned by belfast city council . 
belfast has over forty public parks . 
by the early 1800s belfast was a major port . 
in 2004, belfast had the lowest owner occupation rate in northern ireland at 54% . 
the area of belfast local government district is  . 
belfast is home to one of the biggest british ice hockey clubs ,  the belfast giants . 
other hospitals in belfast include the mater hospital in north belfast and the children's hospital . 
over 2.2 million passengers flew between belfast and london in 2009.
for elections to the european parliament ,  belfast is within the northern ireland constituency . 
ethnic minority communities have been in belfast since the 1930s . 
as northern ireland's capital city ,  belfast is host to the northern ireland assembly at stormont ,  the site of the devolved legislature for northern ireland . 
belfast has been the capital of northern ireland since its establishment in 1921 following the government of ireland act 1920.
in 1920–22, belfast became the capital of the new entity of northern ireland as the island of ireland was partitioned . 
the name belfast is derived from the irish ' ,  which was later spelt ' . 
peace has boosted the numbers of tourists coming to belfast . 
the site of belfast has been occupied since the bronze age . 
belfast is the home of the `` belfast telegraph '' ,  `` irish news '' ,  and `` the news letter '' ,  the oldest english-language newspaper in the world still in publication . 
the belfast giants are a huge brand in northern ireland and their increasing stature in the game led to the belfast giants playing the boston bruins of the nhl on 2 october 2010 at the odyssey arena in belfast ,  losing the game 5–1.
belfast city council is the local council with responsibility for the city . 
belfast holds the record for northern ireland's warmest night time minimum ,  at whitehouse on 14 august 2001.
although `` bt '' derives from `` belfast '' ,  the bt postcode area extends across the whole of northern ireland . 
belfast is home to over twenty gaelic football and hurling clubs . 
the majority of the estimated 5,000 muslims and 200 hindu families living in northern ireland live in the greater belfast area . 
belfast  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a city in the united kingdom and the capital city of northern ireland ,  on the banks of the river lagan on the east coast of ireland . 
belfast suffered greatly in the troubles ,  and in the 1970s and 1980s was one of the world's most dangerous cities . 
the belfast naturalists' field club was founded in 1863 and is administered by national museums and galleries of northern ireland . 
belfast is at the western end of belfast lough and at the mouth of the river lagan giving it the ideal location for the shipbuilding industry that once made it famous . 
belfast has a longstanding underground club scene which was established in the early 1980s . 
at the 2001 census ,  the population was 276,459, while 579,554 people lived in the wider belfast metropolitan area . 
the first nationalist lord mayor of belfast was alban maginness of the sdlp ,  in 1997.
belfast's population is evenly split between its protestant and catholic residents . 
around this time ,  the linen trade in northern ireland blossomed and by the middle of the 18th century ,  one fifth of all the linen exported from ireland was shipped from belfast . 
belfast has four teams in rugby's all-ireland league: belfast harlequins in division 1b; and instonians ,  queen's university and malone in division 2a . 
the ulster orchestra ,  based in belfast ,  is northern ireland's only full-time symphony orchestra and is well renowned in the united kingdom . 
it is also sometimes called `` black mica '' as opposed to `` white mica ''  -lrb-  muscovite  -rrb-  – both form in the same rocks ,  and in some instances side-by-side . 
the largest documented single crystals of biotite were approximately sheets found in iveland ,  norway . 
glimmerite is an igneous rock composed mostly of dark mica  -lrb-  usually biotite ,  but also phlogopite  -rrb-  . 
within the church ,  young reorganized the relief society for women  -lrb-  1867 -rrb- ,  and he created organizations for young women  -lrb-  1869 -rrb- and young men  -lrb-  1875 -rrb- . 
young also led the foundings of the precursors to the university of utah and brigham young university . 
though polygamy was practiced by young's predecessor joseph smith ,  the practice is often associated with young . 
in 1856, young organized an efficient mail service . 
the school broke off from the university of deseret and became brigham young academy ,  the precursor to brigham young university . 
one of the more controversial teachings of young was the adam–god doctrine . 
a bronze marker was placed at the grave site june 10, 1938, by members of the young men and young women organizations ,  which he founded . 
young was the longest-serving president of the lds church in history ,  having served for 29 years . 
burns suppers may be formal or informal . 
since then ,  suppers have been held on or about 25 january . 
however ,  in principle ,  celebrations may be held at any other time of the year . 
the men drink a toast to the women's health . 
formal suppers follow a standard order . 
foreign guests may also be invited to sing or say works from their land . 
it came to be called the selkirk grace because burns was said to have delivered it at a dinner given by the earl of selkirk . 
bryson wrote about some of his experiences from this trip in his book ``  '' . 
in october 2010, it was announced that bryson would step down at the end of 2011.
the case was settled out of court ,  with part of the settlement being that bryson not discuss it . 
in 2003, in conjunction with world book day ,  british voters chose bryson's book `` notes from a small island '' as that which best sums up british identity and the state of the nation . 
bryson started writing independently and in 1990 their fourth child ,  samuel ,  was born . 
in 2006 frank cownie ,  the mayor of des moines ,  awarded bryson the key to the city and announced that october 21, 2006 would be known as `` bill bryson ,  the thunderbolt kid ,  day '' . 
with the royal society of chemistry the bill bryson prize for science communication was established in 2005.
bryson was born in des moines ,  iowa ,  the son of agnes mary  -lrb-  née mcguire  -rrb-  and sports journalist bill bryson sr .  his mother was of irish descent . 
although able to apply for british citizenship ,  bryson said in 2010 that he had declined a citizenship test ,  declaring himself `` too cowardly '' to take it . 
both appeared on the band's 1994 album `` higher power '' ,  which was released under the shortened name `` big audio '' . 
for 1991's `` the globe '' ,  only jones remained from the original incarnation of big audio dynamite ,  and the band was now called `` big audio dynamite ii '' . 
big audio dynamite  -lrb-  later known as big audio dynamite ii and big audio ,  and often abbreviated bad  -rrb-  are an english band formed in london in 1984 by mick jones ,  the former lead guitarist of the clash . 
in 2011, the band embarked on a reunion tour . 
can be seen as a forerunner to big audio dynamite in much the same way london ss can be seen as an early incarnation of the clash . 
just a year later he acquired the bentley business itself . 
barnato received £42,000 for his shares in bentley motors . 
in 2003, bentley's two-door convertible ,  the bentley azure ,  ceased production ,  and bentley introduced a second line ,  bentley continental gt ,  a large luxury coupé powered by a w12 engine built in crewe . 
in the same year bentley confirmed that it would continue racing . 
rolls-royce took over the assets of bentley motors  -lrb-  1919 -rrb- ltd and formed a subsidiary ,  bentley motors  -lrb-  1931 -rrb- ltd .  rolls-royce had acquired the bentley showrooms in cork street ,  the service station at kingsbury ,  the complex at cricklewood and the services of bentley himself . 
prominent models extend from the historic sports-racing bentley 4½ litre and bentley speed six; the more recent bentley r type continental ,  bentley turbo r ,  and bentley arnage; to its current model line—including the continental flying spur ,  continental gt ,  bentley bentayga and the mulsanne—which are marketed worldwide ,  with china as its largest market as of november 2012.
napier offered to buy bentley with the purchase to be final in november 1931.
from 1 january 2003 forward ,  volkswagen ag would be the sole provider of cars with the `` bentley '' marque . 
not even bentley himself knew the identity of the purchaser until the deal was completed . 
john steed in the television series `` the avengers '' also drove a bentley . 
the joining and eventual separation of bentley and rolls-royce followed a series of mergers and acquisitions ,  beginning with the 1931 purchase by rolls-royce of bentley ,  then in receivership . 
bentley sales continued to increase ,  and in 2005 8,627 were sold worldwide ,  3,654 in the united states . 
a new version of the bentley continental was introduced at the 2009 geneva motor show: the continental supersports . 
the bentley enterprise was always underfunded ,  but inspired by the 1924 le mans win by john duff and frank clement ,  barnato agreed to finance bentley's business . 
with renewed financial input ,  w .  o .  bentley was able to design another generation of cars . 
there are two living groups of hemichordates . 
traditionally ,  cephalochordata and craniata were grouped into the proposed clade `` euchordata '' ,  which would have been the sister group to tunicata/urochordata . 
all of the earliest chordate fossils have been found in the early cambrian chengjiang fauna ,  and include two species that are regarded as fish ,  which implies that they are vertebrates . 
chordate fossils have been found from as early as the cambrian explosion ,  541 million years ago . 
the chordata and ambulacraria together form the superphylum deuterostomia . 
a chordate  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an animal constituting the phylum chordata . 
it has also proved difficult to produce a detailed classification within the living chordates . 
however ,  molecular estimates of dates often disagree with each other and with the fossil record ,  and their assumption that the molecular clock runs at a known constant rate has been challenged . 
while it is structured so as to reflect evolutionary relationships  -lrb-  similar to a cladogram  -rrb-  ,  it also retains the traditional ranks used in linnaean taxonomy . 
as theron recalled in 2008:
theron ended their relationship in june 2015.
theron has two children ,  both adopted . 
theron split from townsend in january 2010.
in 2012, theron took on the role of villain in two-big budgeted films . 
after several months in the city ,  theron made her film debut with a non-speaking role in the horror film ``  ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- . 
charlize theron  -lrb-   ; ; born 7 august 1975 -rrb- is a south african and american actress and film producer . 
on 30 september 2005, theron received a star on the hollywood walk of fame . 
while filming `` the road '' ,  theron injured her vocal cords during the labour screaming scenes . 
in 2008, theron was named a united nations messenger of peace . 
although theron is fluent in english ,  her first language is afrikaans . 
theron was in a three-year relationship with singer stephan jenkins until october 2001.
theron began a relationship with irish actor stuart townsend after meeting him on the set of the 2002 film `` trapped '' . 
since the early 2000s ,  theron has ventured into film production with her company denver and delilah productions . 
as a child ,  theron had suffered from jaundice that caused dental problems . 
if the player to move has no legal move ,  the game is over; the result is either checkmate  -lrb-  a loss for the player with no legal move  -rrb-  if the king is in check ,  or stalemate  -lrb-  a draw  -rrb-  if the king is not . 
once in every game ,  each king can make a special move ,  known as `` castling '' . 
when a king is under immediate attack by one or two of the opponent's pieces ,  it is said to be in `` check '' . 
in casual games it is common to announce `` check '' when putting the opponent's king in check ,  but this is not required by the rules of chess ,  and is not usually done in tournaments . 
each piece has its own way of moving . 
chess960 has gained widespread popularity as well as some fide recognition . 
it was these concerns that stimulated chaplin to develop his new film . 
during 1915, chaplin became a cultural phenomenon . 
chaplin is the subject of a biographical film ,  `` chaplin ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- directed by richard attenborough ,  and starring robert downey jr .  in the title role and geraldine chaplin playing hannah chaplin . 
many of chaplin's film have had a dvd and blu-ray release . 
sennett also allowed chaplin to direct his next film himself after chaplin promised to pay $1,500  -lrb-  $ in dollars  -rrb-  if the film was unsuccessful . 
chaplin felt `` the gold rush '' was the best film he had made . 
chaplin has also been characterised in literary fiction . 
chaplin's legacy is managed on behalf of his children by the chaplin office ,  located in paris . 
when filming began at the end of 1928, chaplin had been working on the story for almost a year . 
charles spencer chaplin was born on 16 april 1889 to hannah chaplin  -lrb-  born hannah harriet pedlingham hill  -rrb-  and charles chaplin sr . 
chaplin returned to comedy for his next project . 
chaplin also strongly influenced the work of later comedians . 
filming began in november 1951, by which time chaplin had spent three years working on the story . 
before the divorce suit was filed ,  chaplin had begun work on a new film ,  `` the circus '' . 
in other tributes ,  a minor planet ,  3623 chaplin – discovered by soviet astronomer lyudmila karachkina in 1981 – is named after chaplin . 
before the creation of united artists ,  chaplin married for the first time . 
chaplin was deeply hurt by the negative reaction to the film ,  which turned out to be his last . 
for `` the immigrant '' ,  a 20 minute-short ,  chaplin shot 40,000 feet of film – enough for a feature-length . 
while making `` the gold rush '' ,  chaplin married for the second time . 
chaplin was nonetheless anxious about this decision and remained so throughout the film's production . 
their first son ,  charles spencer chaplin ,  jr .  ,  was born on 5 may 1925, followed by sydney earl chaplin on 30 march 1926.
chaplin's life has also been the subject of several stage productions . 
chaplin's compositions produced three popular songs . 
in 2013, two plays about chaplin premiered in finland: `` chaplin '' at the svenska teatern ,  and `` kulkuri ''  -lrb-  `` the tramp ''  -rrb-  at the tampere workers' theatre . 
chaplin's final home ,  manoir de ban in corsier-sur-vevey ,  switzerland ,  has been converted into a museum named `` chaplin's world '' . 
in 1976, chaplin was made a fellow of the british academy of film and television arts  -lrb-  bafta  -rrb-  . 
chaplin stated at its release ,  `` this is the picture that i want to be remembered by '' . 
chaplin wrote ,  directed ,  produced ,  edited ,  starred in ,  and composed the music for most of his films . 
chaplin spent five months on his next film ,  the two-reeler `` the idle class '' . 
although chaplin still had plans for future film projects ,  by the mid-1970s he was very frail . 
the british film institute has also established the charles chaplin research foundation ,  and the first international charles chaplin conference was held in london in july 2005.
chaplin's silent films typically follow the tramp's efforts to survive in a hostile world . 
the french film `` the price of fame ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- is a fictionalized account of the robbery of chaplin's grave . 
several of chaplin's films incorporate autobiographical elements ,  and the psychologist sigmund freud believed that chaplin `` always plays only himself as he was in his dismal youth '' . 
chaplin decided to hold the world premiere of `` limelight '' in london ,  since it was the setting of the film . 
chaplin finished editing `` city lights '' in december 1930, by which time silent films were an anachronism . 
chaplin received many awards and honours ,  especially later in life . 
it was a big success ,  and chaplin received considerable press attention . 
 ''city lights '' became chaplin's personal favourite of his films and remained so throughout his life . 
it was completed in january 1918, and chaplin was given freedom over the making of his pictures . 
as of july 2011, `` the world factbook '' consists of 267 entities . 
in researching the `` factbook '' ,  the cia uses the sources listed below . 
the world factbook ,  also known as the cia world factbook ,  is a reference resource produced by the central intelligence agency  -lrb-  cia  -rrb-  with almanac-style information about the countries of the world . 
many internet sites use information and images from the cia `` world factbook '' . 
the term `` country '' can refer to a sovereign state . 
 ''countries '' can refer both to sovereign states and to other political entities ,  while other times it can refer only to states . 
although not sovereign states ,  england ,  scotland ,  wales and northern ireland are countries  -lrb-  depending on context  -rrb-  ,  which collectively form the united kingdom—a sovereign state that is also commonly referred to as a country . 
the latest proclaimed state is south sudan in 2011.
the kingdom of the netherlands ,  a sovereign state ,  comprises four separate countries: netherlands ,  aruba ,  curaçao ,  and sint maarten . 
copenhagen is home to the university of copenhagen ,  the technical university of denmark ,  copenhagen business school and the it university of copenhagen . 
copenhagen  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the capital and most populous city of denmark . 
the copenhagen metro launched in 2002 serves central copenhagen while the copenhagen s-train ,  the lokaltog  -lrb-    -rrb-  and the coast line network serves and connects central copenhagen to outlying boroughs . 
copenhagen lost around 22,000 of its population of 65,000 to the plague in 1711.
copenhagen is one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the world . 
by 1661, copenhagen had asserted its position as capital of denmark and norway . 
copenhagen is in the oceanic climate zone  -lrb-  köppen: `` cfb ``   -rrb-  . 
the second battle of copenhagen  -lrb-  or the bombardment of copenhagen  -rrb-   -lrb-  16 august – 5 september 1807 -rrb- was from a british point of view a preemptive attack on copenhagen ,  targeting the civilian population in order to seize the dano-norwegian fleet . 
copenhagen's name reflects its origin as a harbour and a place of commerce . 
during the reign of christian iv between 1588 and 1648, copenhagen had dramatic growth as a city . 
the beaches are supplemented by a system of harbour baths along the copenhagen waterfront . 
with the establishment of the kalmar union  -lrb-  1397–1523 -rrb- between denmark ,  norway and sweden ,  by about 1416 copenhagen had emerged as the capital of denmark when eric of pomerania moved his seat to copenhagen castle . 
the northern part of amager and valby were also incorporated into the city of copenhagen in 1901–02.
geologically copenhagen lies in the northern part of denmark where the land is rising because of post-glacial rebound . 
the copenhagen-ringsted line will relieve traffic congestion in the corridor between roskilde and copenhagen . 
by the beginning of the 20th century ,  copenhagen had become a thriving industrial and administrative city . 
combinatorics is well known for the breadth of the problems it tackles . 
insofar as an area can be described by the types of problems it addresses ,  combinatorics is involved with
the function produced by deriving the squaring function turns out to be the doubling function . 
let be the squaring function . 
if a function is linear  -lrb-  that is ,  if the graph of the function is a straight line  -rrb-  ,  then the function can be written as  ,  where is the independent variable ,  is the dependent variable ,  is the `` y ''-intercept ,  and:
in more explicit terms the `` doubling function '' may be denoted by and the `` squaring function '' by  . 
a computation similar to the one above shows that the derivative of the squaring function is the doubling function . 
here is a particular example ,  the derivative of the squaring function at the input 3.
if the input of the function represents time ,  then the derivative represents change with respect to time . 
for this reason ,  the derivative is sometimes called the slope of the function  . 
the slope between these two points is
the `` derivative '' now takes the function  ,  defined by the expression ``  '' ,  as an input ,  that is all the information—such as that two is sent to four ,  three is sent to nine ,  four is sent to sixteen ,  and so on—and uses this information to output another function ,  the function  ,  as will turn out . 
the slope of the tangent line to the squaring function at the point  -lrb-  3, 9 -rrb- is 6, that is to say ,  it is going up six times as fast as it is going to the right . 
for example ,  if is a function that takes a time as input and gives the position of a ball at that time as output ,  then the derivative of is how the position is changing in time ,  that is ,  it is the velocity of the ball . 
laurent schwartz introduced distributions ,  which can be used to take the derivative of any function whatsoever . 
by newton's time ,  the fundamental theorem of calculus was known . 
communication  -lrb-  from latin `` communicare '' ,  meaning `` to share ''  -rrb-  is the act of conveying meanings from one entity or group to another through the use of mutually understood signs ,  symbols ,  and semiotic rules . 
ancient greek is also still being taught ,  but not as much as latin . 
ancient greek is the historical stage in the development of the greek language spanning the archaic  -lrb-  c .  8th to 6th centuries bc  -rrb-  ,  classical  -lrb-  c .  5th to 4th centuries bc  -rrb-  ,  and hellenistic  -lrb-  c .  3rd century bc to 6th century ad  -rrb-  periods of ancient greece and the ancient world . 
while latin was hugely influential ,  however ,  greek was barely studied ,  and greek literature survived almost solely in latin translation . 
greek sculpture is well known and we know the names of several ancient greek artists: for example ,  phidias . 
from the beginning of the 18th century ,  the study of greek became increasingly important relative to that of latin . 
latinized forms of ancient greek roots are used in many of the scientific names of species and in other scientific terminology . 
the language of ancient rome was latin ,  a member of the italic family of languages . 
ancient greek was the language of homer and of classical athenian historians ,  playwrights ,  and philosophers . 
ancient greece was the civilization belonging to the period of greek history lasting from the archaic period ,  beginning in the eighth century bc ,  to the roman conquest of greece after the battle of corinth in 146 bc . 
latin had an impact far beyond the classical world . 
the earliest surviving works of greek literature are epic poetry . 
the earliest surviving philosophy from ancient greece dates back to the 6th century bc ,  when according to aristotle thales of miletus was considered to have been the first greek philosopher . 
also ,  the greek religion extended out of greece and out to neighbouring islands . 
prior to the koine period ,  greek of the classical and earlier periods included several regional dialects . 
the renaissance led to the increasing study of both ancient literature and ancient history ,  as well as a revival of classical styles of latin . 
greek mythology is the body of myths and legends belonging to the ancient greeks concerning their gods and heroes ,  the nature of the world ,  and the origins and significance of their own cult and ritual practices . 
the earliest surviving latin authors ,  writing in old latin ,  include the playwrights plautus and terence . 
a reaction is said to be exothermic if the reaction releases heat to the surroundings; in the case of endothermic reactions ,  the reaction absorbs heat from the surroundings . 
for example ,  all atoms with 6 protons in their nuclei are atoms of the chemical element carbon ,  but atoms of carbon may have mass numbers of 12 or 13.
a chemical reaction is a transformation of some substances into one or more different substances . 
some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants . 
redox  -lrb-  `` red ''uction- ''ox ''idation  -rrb-  reactions include all chemical reactions in which atoms have their oxidation state changed by either gaining electrons  -lrb-  reduction  -rrb-  or losing electrons  -lrb-  oxidation  -rrb-  . 
a reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse . 
atoms sticking together in molecules or crystals are said to be bonded with one another . 
an `` ion '' is a charged species ,  an atom or a molecule ,  that has lost or gained one or more electrons . 
a reaction is feasible only if the total change in the gibbs free energy is negative ,  formula_2; if it is equal to zero the chemical reaction is said to be at equilibrium . 
a chemical reaction can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation . 
a chemical element is a pure substance which is composed of a single type of atom ,  characterized by its particular number of protons in the nuclei of its atoms ,  known as the atomic number and represented by the symbol `` z '' . 
that is ,  substances with a higher k are more likely to donate hydrogen ions in chemical reactions than those with lower k values . 
a `` compound '' is a pure chemical substance composed of more than one element . 
in this scheme each chemical substance is identifiable by a number known as its cas registry number . 
the type of chemical reactions a substance may undergo and the energy changes that may accompany it are constrained by certain basic rules ,  known as chemical laws . 
a chemical bond can be a covalent bond ,  an ionic bond ,  a hydrogen bond or just because of van der waals force . 
the atom is the basic unit of chemistry . 
it results in some energy exchange between the constituents of the reaction as well as with the system environment ,  which may be designed vessels—often laboratory glassware . 
the standard presentation of the chemical elements is in the periodic table ,  which orders elements by atomic number . 
the molecules/atoms of substance in an excited energy state are often much more reactive; that is ,  more amenable to chemical reactions . 
chemical reactions are governed by certain laws ,  which have become fundamental concepts in chemistry . 
a related concept free energy ,  which also incorporates entropy considerations ,  is a very useful means for predicting the feasibility of a reaction and determining the state of equilibrium of a chemical reaction ,  in chemical thermodynamics . 
an ionic bond is formed when a metal loses one or more of its electrons ,  becoming a positively charged cation ,  and the electrons are then gained by the non-metal atom ,  becoming a negatively charged anion . 
the sequence of steps in which the reorganization of chemical bonds may be taking place in the course of a chemical reaction is called its mechanism . 
english scientist john dalton proposed the modern theory of atoms; that all substances are composed of indivisible 'atoms' of matter and that different atoms have varying atomic weights . 
molecules are typically a set of atoms bound together by covalent bonds ,  such that the structure is electrically neutral and all valence electrons are paired with other electrons either in bonds or in lone pairs . 
in cell biology ,  the cytoplasm is all of the material within a cell ,  enclosed by the cell membrane ,  except for the cell nucleus . 
in plants ,  movement of the cytoplasm around vacuoles is known as cytoplasmic streaming . 
the cytoplasm is about 80% water and usually colorless . 
there has been research examining the motion of cytoplasmic particles independent of the nature of the cytoplasm . 
the cytoplasm ,  mitochondria and most organelles are contributions to the cell from the maternal gamete . 
the cytosol is the portion of the cytoplasm not contained within membrane-bound organelles . 
there has long been evidence that the cytoplasm behaves like a sol-gel . 
compare the usage `` the christ '' . 
mark  -lrb-  `` the beginning of the gospel of jesus christ ,  the son of god ''  -rrb-  identifies jesus as both christ and the son of god . 
the concept of christ as logos derives from : `` in the beginning was the word ,  and the word was with god ,  and the word was god . `` 
it is also used as a title ,  in the reciprocal use `` christ jesus '' ,  meaning `` the messiah jesus '' ,  and independently as `` the christ '' . 
the role of the christ in christianity originated from the concept of the messiah in judaism . 
the word . 
christ comes from  -lrb-  `` christos ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` anointed one '' . 
then states that: `` christ also loved the church ,  and gave himself up for it '' . 
he viewed christ as `` the one through whom salvation began '' and he saw the completion of christ's plan of salvation as his death and resurrection . 
there are also implicit claims to him being the christ in the words and actions of jesus . 
the pauline epistles are a source of some key christological connections; e . g .  ,  relates the love of christ to the knowledge of christ ,  and considers the love of christ as a necessity for knowing him . 
 ''christ '' ,  used by christians as both a name and a title ,  is synonymous with jesus . 
the spelling `` christ '' in english is attested from the 14th century . 
central europe is the region comprising the central part of europe . 
elements of unity for western and central europe were roman catholicism and latin . 
the main biomes of canada are:
canada has a diverse climate . 
the southernmost point of the canadian mainland is point pelee ,  ontario  . 
the northernmost point within the boundaries of canada is cape columbia ,  ellesmere island ,  nunavut  . 
volcanism has also occurred in the canadian shield . 
the geography of canada describes the geographic features of canada ,  the world's second largest country in total area . 
major elements are the yukon ,  columbia and fraser rivers . 
forestry has long been a major industry in canada . 
because of extensive glaciation ,  canada hosts more than two million lakes: of those that are entirely within canada ,  more than 31,000 are between in area ,  while 563 are larger than  . 
it also runs through parts of southern quebec . 
the canadian rockies are part of a major continental divide that extends north and south through western north america and western south america . 
rounding out the ten longest rivers within canada are the nelson ,  churchill ,  peace ,  fraser ,  north saskatchewan ,  ottawa ,  athabasca and yukon rivers . 
the hudson bay watershed drains over a third of canada . 
canada's abundance of natural resources is reflected in their continued importance in the economy of canada . 
the northern parts of alberta ,  manitoba and british columbia ,  most of northwest territories and nunavut ,  and parts of yukon are drained by the arctic watershed . 
the canadian shield is also called the mineral house . 
canada’s two longest rivers are the mackenzie ,  which empties into the arctic ocean and drains a large part of northwestern canada ,  and the st .  lawrence ,  which drains the great lakes and empties into the gulf of st .  lawrence . 
the churchill river and saint john river are other important elements of the atlantic watershed in canada . 
the headwaters of the yukon river ,  the largest and longest of the rivers on the pacific slope ,  lie in northern british columbia at atlin and teslin lakes . 
the canada 2016 census had a total population count of 35,151,728 individuals ,  making up approximately 0.5% of the world's total population . 
according to organisation for economic co-operation and development  -lrb-  oecd  -rrb- /world bank ,  the population in canada increased from 1990 to 2008 with 5.6 million and 20.4% growth in population ,  compared to 21.7% growth in the united states and 31.2% growth in mexico . 
canada has been dominated by two relatively centrist parties at the federal level ,  the centre-left liberal party of canada and the centre-right conservative party of canada . 
canada has placed emphasis on equality and inclusiveness for all its people . 
thus in 1931, the british parliament passed the statute of westminster ,  giving legal recognition to the autonomy of canada and other dominions . 
canada's governmental structure was originally established by the british parliament through the `` british north america act ''  -lrb-  now known as the `` constitution act ,  1867 ''  -rrb-  ,  but the federal model and division of powers were devised by canadian politicians . 
canada's housing sector is not stabilizing as quickly as anticipated . 
as of 2017, manufacturing accounts for 10% of canada's gdp ,  a relative decline of more than 5% of gdp since 2005.
canada is unusual among developed countries in the importance of the primary sector ,  with the logging and oil industries being two of canada's most important . 
the service sector in canada is vast and multifaceted ,  employing about three quarters of canadians and accounting for 70% of gdp . 
the education and health sectors are two of canada's largest ,  but both are largely under the influence of the government . 
canada is also one of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products ,  particularly of wheat and other grains . 
according to the oecd's annual economic survey of canada in june 2012, canada has experienced weak growth of multi-factor productivity  -lrb-  mfp  -rrb-  and has been declining further since 2002.
the economy of canada is a highly developed mixed economy with 10th largest gdp by nominal and 16th largest gdp by ppp in the world . 
the bank of canada issues its bank rate announcement through its monetary policy report which is released eight times a year . 
canada's combined exports and imports ranked 8th among all nations in 2006.
with the exception of a few island nations in the caribbean ,  canada is the only major parliamentary system in the western hemisphere . 
for instance one of canada's largest manufacturing industries is the pulp and paper sector ,  which is directly linked to the logging business . 
canada has a private to public  -lrb-  crown  -rrb-  property ratio of 60:40 and one of the highest levels of economic freedom in the world . 
great north western telegraph ,  facing bankruptcy ,  was taken over in 1915 by canadian northern . 
telegrams were sent through networks built by canadian pacific and canadian national . 
following the 1852 telegraph act ,  canada's first permanent transatlantic telegraph link was a submarine cable built in 1866 between ireland and newfoundland . 
in canada railways are served by standard gauge ,   ,  rails . 
in 2007, canada had a total of of freight and passenger railway ,  of which is electrified . 
see also track gauge in canada . 
transport canada enforces acts and regulations governing water transportation and safety . 
in 2005, the transportation sector made up 4.2% of canada's gdp ,  compared to 3.7% for canada's mining and oil and gas extraction industries . 
the transportation safety board of canada is responsible for maintaining transportation safety in canada by investigating accidents and making safety recommendations . 
transport canada oversees and regulates most aspects of transportation within federal jurisdiction ,  including interprovincial transport . 
hence roads are the dominant means of passenger and freight transport in canada . 
air transportation made up 9% of the transport sector's gdp generation in 2005.
canada's vehicles consumed a total of of gasoline and of diesel . 
the port of vancouver is the busiest port in canada ,  moving 68 million tonnes or 15% of canada's total in domestic and international shipping in 2003.
the government maintains an active divestiture programme ,  and after divestiture transport canada oversees only 17 canada port authorities for the 17 largest shipping ports . 
canada has of pipeline for transportation of crude and refined oil ,  and for liquefied petroleum gas . 
canada and the united states are the world's largest trading partners . 
as britain decided to disengage ,  fears of an american takeover played a role in the formation of the dominion of canada  -lrb-  1867 -rrb- ,  and canada's rejection of free trade  -lrb-  1911 -rrb- . 
