{"data": [{"title": "Liquid-crystal display", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A liquid-crystal display (LCD) is a flat-panel display or other electronically modulated optical device that uses the light-modulating properties of liquid crystals. Liquid crystals do not emit light directly, instead using a backlight or reflector to produce images in color or monochrome. LCDs are available to display arbitrary images (as in a general-purpose computer display) or fixed images with low information content, which can be displayed or hidden, such as preset words, digits, and seven-segment displays, as in a digital clock. They use the same basic technology, except that arbitrary images are made up of a large number of small pixels, while other displays have larger elements. LCDs can either be normally on (positive) or off (negative), depending on the polarizer arrangement. For example, a character positive LCD with a backlight will have black lettering on a background that is the color of the backlight, and a character negative LCD will have a black background with the letters being of the same color as the backlight. Optical filters are added to white on blue LCDs to give them their characteristic appearance.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a liquid-crystal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "LCDs are used in a wide range of applications, including LCD televisions, computer monitors, instrument panels, aircraft cockpit displays, and indoor and outdoor signage. Small LCD screens are common in portable consumer devices such as digital cameras, watches, calculators, and mobile telephones, including smartphones. LCD screens are also used on consumer electronics products such as DVD players, video game devices and clocks. LCD screens have replaced heavy, bulky cathode ray tube (CRT) displays in nearly all applications. LCD screens are available in a wider range of screen sizes than CRT and plasma displays, with LCD screens available in sizes ranging from tiny digital watches to very large television receivers. LCDs are slowly being replaced by OLEDs, which can be easily made into different shapes, and have a lower response time, wider color gamut, virtually infinite color contrast and viewing angles, lower weight for a given display size and a slimmer profile (because OLEDs use a single glass or plastic panel whereas LCDs use two glass panels; the thickness of the panels increases with size but the increase is more noticeable on LCDs) and potentially lower power consumption (as the display is only \"on\" where needed and there is no backlight). OLEDs, however, are more expensive for a given display size due to the very expensive electroluminescent materials or phosphors that they use. Also due to the use of phosphors, OLEDs suffer from screen burn-in and there is currently no way to recycle OLED displays, whereas LCD panels can be recycled, although the technology required to recycle LCDs is not yet widespread. Attempts to increase the lifespan of LCDs are quantum dot displays, which offer similar performance as an OLED display, but the Quantum dot sheet that gives these displays their characteristics can not yet be recycled.", "qas": [{"question": "what are some examples of lcd ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since LCD screens do not use phosphors, they rarely suffer image burn-in when a static image is displayed on a screen for a long time, e.g., the table frame for an airline flight schedule on an indoor sign. LCDs are, however, susceptible to image persistence. The LCD screen is more energy-efficient and can be disposed of more safely than a CRT can. Its low electrical power consumption enables it to be used in battery-powered electronic equipment more efficiently than CRTs can be. By 2008, annual sales of televisions with LCD screens exceeded sales of CRT units worldwide, and the CRT became obsolete for most purposes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each pixel of an LCD typically consists of a layer of molecules aligned between two transparent electrodes, and two polarizing filters (parallel and perpendicular), the axes of transmission of which are (in most of the cases) perpendicular to each other. Without the liquid crystal between the polarizing filters, light passing through the first filter would be blocked by the second (crossed) polarizer. Before an electric field is applied, the orientation of the liquid-crystal molecules is determined by the alignment at the surfaces of electrodes. In a twisted nematic (TN) device, the surface alignment directions at the two electrodes are perpendicular to each other, and so the molecules arrange themselves in a helical structure, or twist. This induces the rotation of the polarization of the incident light, and the device appears gray. If the applied voltage is large enough, the liquid crystal molecules in the center of the layer are almost completely untwisted and the polarization of the incident light is not rotated as it passes through the liquid crystal layer. This light will then be mainly polarized perpendicular to the second filter, and thus be blocked and the pixel will appear black. By controlling the voltage applied across the liquid crystal layer in each pixel, light can be allowed to pass through in varying amounts thus constituting different levels of gray. Color LCD systems use the same technique, with color filters used to generate red, green, and blue pixels.\nThe optical effect of a TN device in the voltage-on state is far less dependent on variations in the device thickness than that in the voltage-off state. Because of this, TN displays with low information content and no backlighting are usually operated between crossed polarizers such that they appear bright with no voltage (the eye is much more sensitive to variations in the dark state than the bright state). As most of 2010-era LCDs are used in television sets, monitors and smartphones, they have high-resolution matrix arrays of pixels to display arbitrary images using backlighting with a dark background. When no image is displayed, different arrangements are used. For this purpose, TN LCDs are operated between parallel polarizers, whereas IPS LCDs feature crossed polarizers. In many applications IPS LCDs have replaced TN LCDs, in particular in smartphones such as iPhones. Both the liquid crystal material and the alignment layer material contain ionic compounds. If an electric field of one particular polarity is applied for a long period of time, this ionic material is attracted to the surfaces and degrades the device performance. This is avoided either by applying an alternating current or by reversing the polarity of the electric field as the device is addressed (the response of the liquid crystal layer is identical, regardless of the polarity of the applied field).\nDisplays for a small number of individual digits or fixed symbols (as in digital watches and pocket calculators) can be implemented with independent electrodes for each segment. In contrast, full alphanumeric or variable graphics displays are usually implemented with pixels arranged as a matrix consisting of electrically connected rows on one side of the LC layer and columns on the other side, which makes it possible to address each pixel at the intersections. The general method of matrix addressing consists of sequentially addressing one side of the matrix, for example by selecting the rows one-by-one and applying the picture information on the other side at the columns row-by-row. \"For details on the various matrix addressing schemes see\" passive-matrix and active-matrix addressed LCDs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The origins and the complex history of liquid-crystal displays from the perspective of an insider during the early days were described by Joseph A. Castellano in \"Liquid Gold: The Story of Liquid Crystal Displays and the Creation of an Industry\".\nAnother report on the origins and history of LCD from a different perspective until 1991 has been published by Hiroshi Kawamoto, available at the IEEE History Center.\nA description of Swiss contributions to LCD developments, written by Peter J. Wild, can be found at the \"Engineering and Technology History Wiki\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1888, Friedrich Reinitzer (1858\u20131927) discovered the liquid crystalline nature of cholesterol extracted from carrots (that is, two melting points and generation of colors) and published his findings at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3, 1888 (F. Reinitzer: \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Kenntniss des Cholesterins, Monatshefte f\u00fcr Chemie (Wien) 9, 421\u2013441 (1888)\"). In 1904, Otto Lehmann published his work \"\"Fl\u00fcssige Kristalle\"\" (Liquid Crystals). In 1911, Charles Mauguin first experimented with liquid crystals confined between plates in thin layers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1922, Georges Friedel described the structure and properties of liquid crystals and classified them in 3 types (nematics, smectics and cholesterics). In 1927, Vsevolod Frederiks devised the electrically switched light valve, called the Fr\u00e9edericksz transition, the essential effect of all LCD technology. In 1936, the Marconi Wireless Telegraph company patented the first practical application of the technology, \"\"The Liquid Crystal Light Valve\"\". In 1962, the first major English language publication on the subject \"\"Molecular Structure and Properties of Liquid Crystals\"\", by Dr. George W. Gray. In 1962, Richard Williams of RCA found that liquid crystals had some interesting electro-optic characteristics and he realized an electro-optical effect by generating stripe-patterns in a thin layer of liquid crystal material by the application of a voltage. This effect is based on an electro-hydrodynamic instability forming what are now called \"Williams domains\" inside the liquid crystal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1964, George H. Heilmeier, then working at the RCA laboratories on the effect discovered by Williams achieved the switching of colors by field-induced realignment of dichroic dyes in a homeotropically oriented liquid crystal. Practical problems with this new electro-optical effect made Heilmeier continue to work on scattering effects in liquid crystals and finally the achievement of the first operational liquid-crystal display based on what he called the \"dynamic scattering mode\" (DSM). Application of a voltage to a DSM display switches the initially clear transparent liquid crystal layer into a milky turbid state. DSM displays could be operated in transmissive and in reflective mode but they required a considerable current to flow for their operation. George H. Heilmeier was inducted in the National Inventors Hall of Fame and credited with the invention of LCDs. Heilmeier's work is an IEEE Milestone. In the late 1960s, pioneering work on liquid crystals was undertaken by the UK's Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England. The team at RRE supported ongoing work by George William Gray and his team at the University of Hull who ultimately discovered the cyanobiphenyl liquid crystals, which had correct stability and temperature properties for application in LCDs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On December 4, 1970, the twisted nematic field effect (TN) in liquid crystals was filed for patent by Hoffmann-LaRoche in Switzerland, (Swiss patent No. 532 261) with Wolfgang Helfrich and Martin Schadt (then working for the Central Research Laboratories) listed as inventors. Hoffmann-La Roche then licensed the invention to the Swiss manufacturer Brown, Boveri & Cie which produced TN displays for wristwatches and other applications during the 1970s for the international markets including the Japanese electronics industry, which soon produced the first digital quartz wristwatches with TN-LCDs and numerous other products. James Fergason, while working with Sardari Arora and Alfred Saupe at Kent State University Liquid Crystal Institute, filed an identical patent in the United States on April 22, 1971. In 1971, the company of Fergason, ILIXCO (now LXD Incorporated), produced LCDs based on the TN-effect, which soon superseded the poor-quality DSM types due to improvements of lower operating voltages and lower power consumption. Tetsuro Hama and Izuhiko Nishimura of Seiko received a US patent dated February 1971, for an electronic wristwatch incorporating a TN-LCD. In 1972, the first wristwatch with TN-LCD was launched on the market: The Gruen Teletime which was a four digit display watch. The same year, the first active-matrix thin-film transistor (TFT) liquid-crystal display panel was prototyped in the United States by T. Peter Brody's team at Westinghouse, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1973, Sharp Corporation introduced the use of LCD displays for calculators, and then mass-produced TN LCD displays for watches in 1975. Other japanese companies soon took a leading position in the market of wristwatch like Seiko and its first 6-digit TN-LCD quartz wristwatch. A particular type of color LCD was invented by Japan's Sharp Corporation in the 1970s, receiving patents for their inventions, such as a patent by Shinji Kato and Takaaki Miyazaki in May 1975, and then improved by Fumiaki Funada and Masataka Matsuura in December 1975. TFT LCDs similar to the prototypes developed by a Westinghouse team in 1972 were patented in 1976 by a team at Sharp consisting of Fumiaki Funada, Masataka Matsuura, and Tomio Wada, then improved in 1977 by a Sharp team consisting of Kohei Kishi, Hirosaku Nonomura, Keiichiro Shimizu, and Tomio Wada. However, these TFT-LCDs were not yet ready for use in products, as problems with the materials for the TFTs were not yet solved.", "qas": [{"question": "what company introduced the use of blu-ray in 1975. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1983, researchers at Brown, Boveri & Cie (BBC) Research Center, Switzerland, invented the \"super-twisted nematic (STN) structure\" for passive matrix-addressed LCDs. H. Amstutz et al. were listed as inventors in the corresponding patent applications filed in Switzerland on July 7, 1983, and October 28, 1983. Patents were granted in Switzerland CH 665491, Europe EP 0131216, and many more countries. In 1980, Brown Boveri started a 50/50 joint venture with the Dutch Philips company, called Videlec. Philips had the required know-how to design and build integrated circuits for the control of large LCD panels. In addition, Philips had better access to markets for electronic components and intended to use LCDs in new product generations of hi-fi, video equipment and telephones. In 1984, Philips researchers Theodorus Welzen and Adrianus de Vaan invented a video speed-drive scheme that solved the slow response time of STN-LCDs, enabling high-resolution, high-quality, and smooth-moving video images on STN-LCDs. In 1985, Philips inventors Theodorus Welzen and Adrianus de Vaan solved the problem of driving high-resolution STN-LCDs using low-voltage (CMOS-based) drive electronics, allowing the application of high-quality (high resolution and video speed) LCD panels in battery-operated portable products like notebook computers and mobile phones. In 1985, Philips acquired 100% of the Videlec AG company based in Switzerland. Afterwards, Philips moved the Videlec production lines to the Netherlands. Years later, Philips successfully produced and marketed complete modules (consisting of the LCD screen, microphone, speakers etc.) in high-volume production for the booming mobile phone industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first color LCD televisions were developed as handheld televisions in Japan. In 1980, Hattori Seiko's R&D group began development on color LCD pocket televisions. In 1982, Seiko Epson released the first LCD television, the Epson TV Watch, a wristwatch equipped with a small active-matrix LCD television. Sharp Corporation introduced dot matrix TN-LCD in 1983. In 1984, Epson released the ET-10, the first full-color, pocket LCD television. The same year, Citizen Watch, introduced the Citizen Pocket TV, a 2.7-inch color LCD TV, with the first commercial TFT LCD display. In 1988, Sharp demonstrated a 14-inch, active-matrix, full-color, full-motion TFT-LCD. This led to Japan launching an LCD industry, which developed large-size LCDs, including TFT computer monitors and LCD televisions. Epson developed the 3LCD projection technology in the 1980s, and licensed it for use in projectors in 1988. Epson's VPJ-700, released in January 1989, was the world's first compact, full-color LCD projector.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the first color cartridges in japan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 11, 0)"}, {"question": "when was epson's released ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 11, 9)"}]}, {"context": "In 1990, under different titles, inventors conceived electro optical effects as alternatives to \"twisted nematic field effect LCDs\" (TN- and STN- LCDs). One approach was to use interdigital electrodes on one glass substrate only to produce an electric field essentially parallel to the glass substrates. To take full advantage of the properties of this \"In Plane Switching (IPS) technology\" further work was needed. After thorough analysis, details of advantageous embodiments are filed in Germany by Guenter Baur \"et al.\" and patented in various countries. The Fraunhofer Institute in Freiburg, where the inventors worked, assigns these patents to Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, a supplier of LC substances. In 1992, shortly thereafter, engineers at Hitachi work out various practical details of the IPS technology to interconnect the thin-film transistor array as a matrix and to avoid undesirable stray fields in between pixels. Hitachi also improved the viewing angle dependence further by optimizing the shape of the electrodes (\"Super IPS\"). NEC and Hitachi become early manufacturers of active-matrix addressed LCDs based on the IPS technology. This is a milestone for implementing large-screen LCDs having acceptable visual performance for flat-panel computer monitors and television screens. In 1996, Samsung developed the optical patterning technique that enables multi-domain LCD. Multi-domain and In Plane Switching subsequently remain the dominant LCD designs through 2006. In the late 1990s, the LCD industry began shifting away from Japan, towards South Korea and Taiwan.", "qas": [{"question": "what did engineers create in 1990, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 2007 the image quality of LCD televisions surpassed the image quality of cathode-ray-tube-based (CRT) TVs. In the fourth quarter of 2007, LCD televisions surpassed CRT TVs in worldwide sales for the first time. LCD TVs were projected to account 50% of the 200\u00a0million TVs to be shipped globally in 2006, according to Displaybank. In October 2011, Toshiba announced 2560\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01600 pixels on a 6.1-inch (155\u00a0mm) LCD panel, suitable for use in a tablet computer, especially for Chinese character display.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since LCD panels produce no light of their own, they require external light to produce a visible image. In a transmissive type of LCD, this light is provided at the back of the glass stack and is called the backlight. While passive-matrix displays are usually not backlit (e.g. calculators, wristwatches), active-matrix displays almost always are. Over the last years (1990\u00a0\u2014 2017), the LCD backlight technologies have strongly been emerged by lighting companies such as Philips, Lumileds (a Philips subsidiary) and more.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The common implementations of LCD backlight technology are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today, most LCD screens are being designed with an LED backlight instead of the traditional CCFL backlight, while that backlight is dynamically controlled with the video information (dynamic backlight control). The combination with the dynamic backlight control, invented by Philips researchers Douglas Stanton, Martinus Stroomer and Adrianus de Vaan, simultaneously increases the dynamic range of the display system (also marketed as HDR, high dynamic range television.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The LCD backlight systems are made highly efficient by applying optical films such as prismatic structure to gain the light into the desired viewer directions and reflective polarizing films that recycle the polarized light that was formerly absorbed by the first polarizer of the LCD (invented by Philips researchers Adrianus de Vaan and Paulus Schaareman), generally achieved using so called DBEF films manufactured and supplied by 3M. These polarizers consist of a large stack of uniaxial oriented birefringent films that reflect the former absorbed polarization mode of the light. Such reflective polarizers using uniaxial oriented polymerized liquid crystals (birefringent polymers or birefringent glue) are invented in 1989 by Philips researchers Dirk Broer, Adrianus de Vaan and Joerg Brambring. The combination of such reflective polarizers, and LED dynamic backlight control make today's LCD televisions far more efficient than the CRT-based sets, leading to a worldwide energy saving of 600 TWh (2017), equal to 10% of the electricity consumption of all households worldwide or equal to 2 times the energy production of all solar cells in the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to the LCD layer that generates the desired high resolution images at flashing video speeds using very low power electronics in combination with these excellent LED based backlight technologies, LCD technology has become the dominant display technology for products such as televisions, desktop monitors, notebooks, tablets, smartphones and mobile phones. Although competing OLED technology is pushed to the market, such OLED displays does not feature the HDR capabilities like LCDs in combination with 2D LED backlight technologies have, reason why the annual market of such LCD-based products is still growing faster (in volume) than OLED-based products while the efficiency of LCDs (and products like portable computers, mobile phones and televisions) may even be further improved by preventing the light to be absorbed in the colour filters of the LCD. Although until today such reflective colour filter solutions are not yet implemented by the LCD industry and did not made it further than laboratory prototypes, such reflective colour filter solutions still likely will be implemented by the LCD industry to increase the performance gap with OLED technologies).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A standard television receiver screen, an LCD panel today in 2017, has over six million pixels, and they are all individually powered by a wire network embedded in the screen. The fine wires, or pathways, form a grid with vertical wires across the whole screen on one side of the screen and horizontal wires across the whole screen on the other side of the screen. To this grid each pixel has a positive connection on one side and a negative connection on the other side. So the total amount of wires needed is 3 x 1920 going vertically and 1080 going horizontally for a total of 6840 wires horizontally and vertically. That's three for red, green and blue and 1920 columns of pixels for each color for a total of 5760 wires going vertically and 1080 rows of wires going horizontally. For a panel that is 28.8 inches (73 centimeters) wide, that means a wire density of 200 wires per inch along the horizontal edge. The LCD panel is powered by LCD drivers that are carefully matched up with the edge of the LCD panel at the factory level. These same principles apply also for smart phone screens that are so much smaller than TV screens. LCD panels typically use thinly-coated metallic conductive pathways on a glass substrate to form the cell circuitry to operate the panel. It is usually not possible to use soldering techniques to directly connect the panel to a separate copper-etched circuit board. Instead, interfacing is accomplished using either adhesive plastic ribbon with conductive traces glued to the edges of the LCD panel, or with an elastomeric connector, which is a strip of rubber or silicone with alternating layers of conductive and insulating pathways, pressed between contact pads on the LCD and mating contact pads on a circuit board.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Monochrome and later color passive-matrix LCDs were standard in most early laptops (although a few used plasma displays) and the original Nintendo Game Boy until the mid-1990s, when color active-matrix became standard on all laptops. The commercially unsuccessful Macintosh Portable (released in 1989) was one of the first to use an active-matrix display (though still monochrome). Passive-matrix LCDs are still used in the 2010s for applications less demanding than laptop computers and TVs, such as inexpensive calculators. In particular, these are used on portable devices where less information content needs to be displayed, lowest power consumption (no backlight) and low cost are desired or readability in direct sunlight is needed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Displays having a passive-matrix structure are employing \"super-twisted nematic\" STN (invented by Brown Boveri Research Center, Baden, Switzerland, in 1983; scientific details were published) or double-layer STN (DSTN) technology (the latter of which addresses a color-shifting problem with the former), and color-STN (CSTN) in which color is added by using an internal filter. STN LCDs have been optimized for passive-matrix addressing. They exhibit a sharper threshold of the contrast-vs-voltage characteristic than the original TN LCDs. This is important, because pixels are subjected to partial voltages even while not selected. Crosstalk between activated and non-activated pixels has to be handled properly by keeping the RMS voltage of non-activated pixels below the threshold voltage, while activated pixels are subjected to voltages above threshold (the voltages according to the \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme) Driving such STN displays according to the Alt & Pleshko drive scheme require very high line addressing voltages. Welzen and de Vaan invented an alternative drive scheme (a non \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme) requiring much lower voltages, such that the STN display could be driven using low voltage CMOS technologies. STN LCDs have to be continuously refreshed by alternating pulsed voltages of one polarity during one frame and pulses of opposite polarity during the next frame. Individual pixels are addressed by the corresponding row and column circuits. This type of display is called \"passive-matrix addressed\", because the pixel must retain its state between refreshes without the benefit of a steady electrical charge. As the number of pixels (and, correspondingly, columns and rows) increases, this type of display becomes less feasible. Slow response times and poor contrast are typical of passive-matrix addressed LCDs with too many pixels and driven according to the \"Alt & Pleshko\" drive scheme. Welzen and de Vaan also invented a non RMS drive scheme enabling to drive STN displays with video rates and enabling to show smooth moving video images on an STN display. Citizen, amongst others, licensed these patents and successfully introduced several STN based LCD pocket televisions on the market", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bistable LCDs do not require continuous refreshing. Rewriting is only required for picture information changes. In 1984 HA van Sprang and AJSM de Vaan invented an STN type display that could be operated in a bistable mode, enabling extreme high resolution images up to 4000 lines or more using only low voltages. Since a pixel however may be either in an on-state or in an off state at the moment new information needs to be written to that particular pixel, the addressing method of these bistable displays is rather complex, reason why these displays did not made it to the market. That changed when in the 2010 \"zero-power\" (bistable) LCDs became available. Potentially, passive-matrix addressing can be used with devices if their write/erase characteristics are suitable, which was the case for ebooks showing still pictures only. After a page is written to the display, the display may be cut from the power while that information remains readable. This has the advantage that such ebooks may be operated long time on just a small battery only. High-resolution color displays, such as modern LCD computer monitors and televisions, use an active-matrix structure. A matrix of thin-film transistors (TFTs) is added to the electrodes in contact with the LC layer. Each pixel has its own dedicated transistor, allowing each column line to access one pixel. When a row line is selected, all of the column lines are connected to a row of pixels and voltages corresponding to the picture information are driven onto all of the column lines. The row line is then deactivated and the next row line is selected. All of the row lines are selected in sequence during a refresh operation. Active-matrix addressed displays look brighter and sharper than passive-matrix addressed displays of the same size, and generally have quicker response times, producing much better images.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Twisted nematic displays contain liquid crystals that twist and untwist at varying degrees to allow light to pass through. When no voltage is applied to a TN liquid crystal cell, polarized light passes through the 90-degrees twisted LC layer. In proportion to the voltage applied, the liquid crystals untwist changing the polarization and blocking the light's path. By properly adjusting the level of the voltage almost any gray level or transmission can be achieved.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In-plane switching is an LCD technology that aligns the liquid crystals in a plane parallel to the glass substrates. In this method, the electrical field is applied through opposite electrodes on the same glass substrate, so that the liquid crystals can be reoriented (switched) essentially in the same plane, although fringe fields inhibit a homogeneous reorientation. This requires two transistors for each pixel instead of the single transistor needed for a standard thin-film transistor (TFT) display. Before LG Enhanced IPS was introduced in 2009, the additional transistors resulted in blocking more transmission area, thus requiring a brighter backlight and consuming more power, making this type of display less desirable for notebook computers. Currently Panasonic is using an enhanced version eIPS for their large size LCD-TV products as well as Hewlett-Packard in its WebOS based TouchPad tablet and their Chromebook 11.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2011, LG claimed the smartphone LG Optimus Black (IPS LCD (LCD NOVA)) has the brightness up to 700 nits, while the competitor has only IPS LCD with 518 nits and double an active-matrix OLED (AMOLED) display with 305 nits. LG also claimed the NOVA display to be 50 percent more efficient than regular LCDs and to consume only 50 percent of the power of AMOLED displays when producing white on screen. When it comes to contrast ratio, AMOLED display still performs best due to its underlying technology, where the black levels are displayed as pitch black and not as dark gray. On August 24, 2011, Nokia announced the Nokia 701 and also made the claim of the world's brightest display at 1000 nits. The screen also had Nokia's Clearblack layer, improving the contrast ratio and bringing it closer to that of the AMOLED screens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Super-IPS was later introduced after in-plane switching with even better response times and color reproduction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Known as fringe field switching (FFS) until 2003,\nadvanced fringe field switching is similar to IPS or S-IPS offering superior performance and color gamut with high luminosity. AFFS was developed by Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd, Korea (formally Hyundai Electronics, LCD Task Force). AFFS-applied notebook applications minimize color distortion while maintaining a wider viewing angle for a professional display. Color shift and deviation caused by light leakage is corrected by optimizing the white gamut which also enhances white/gray reproduction. In 2004, Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd licensed AFFS to Japan's Hitachi Displays. Hitachi is using AFFS to manufacture high-end panels. In 2006, HYDIS licensed AFFS to Sanyo Epson Imaging Devices Corporation. Shortly thereafter, Hydis introduced a high-transmittance evolution of the AFFS display, called HFFS (FFS+). Hydis introduced AFFS+ with improved outdoor readability in 2007. AFFS panels are mostly utilized in the cockpits of latest commercial aircraft displays. However, it is no longer produced as of February 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vertical-alignment displays are a form of LCDs in which the liquid crystals naturally align vertically to the glass substrates. When no voltage is applied, the liquid crystals remain perpendicular to the substrate, creating a black display between crossed polarizers. When voltage is applied, the liquid crystals shift to a tilted position, allowing light to pass through and create a gray-scale display depending on the amount of tilt generated by the electric field. It has a deeper-black background, a higher contrast ratio, a wider viewing angle, and better image quality at extreme temperatures than traditional twisted-nematic displays.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Blue phase mode LCDs have been shown as engineering samples early in 2008, but they are not in mass-production. The physics of blue phase mode LCDs suggest that very short switching times (\u22481 ms) can be achieved, so time sequential color control can possibly be realized and expensive color filters would be obsolete.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some LCD panels have defective transistors, causing permanently lit or unlit pixels which are commonly referred to as stuck pixels or dead pixels respectively. Unlike integrated circuits (ICs), LCD panels with a few defective transistors are usually still usable. Manufacturers' policies for the acceptable number of defective pixels vary greatly. At one point, Samsung held a zero-tolerance policy for LCD monitors sold in Korea. As of 2005, though, Samsung adheres to the less restrictive ISO 13406-2 standard. Other companies have been known to tolerate as many as 11 dead pixels in their policies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dead pixel policies are often hotly debated between manufacturers and customers. To regulate the acceptability of defects and to protect the end user, ISO released the ISO 13406-2 standard. However, not every LCD manufacturer conforms to the ISO standard and the ISO standard is quite often interpreted in different ways. LCD panels are more likely to have defects than most ICs due to their larger size. For example, a 300\u00a0mm SVGA LCD has 8 defects and a 150\u00a0mm wafer has only 3 defects. However, 134 of the 137 dies on the wafer will be acceptable, whereas rejection of the whole LCD panel would be a 0% yield. In recent years, quality control has been improved. An SVGA LCD panel with 4 defective pixels is usually considered defective and customers can request an exchange for a new one. Some manufacturers, notably in South Korea where some of the largest LCD panel manufacturers, such as LG, are located, now have a zero-defective-pixel guarantee, which is an extra screening process which can then determine \"A\"- and \"B\"-grade panels. Many manufacturers would replace a product even with one defective pixel. Even where such guarantees do not exist, the location of defective pixels is important. A display with only a few defective pixels may be unacceptable if the defective pixels are near each other. LCD panels also have defects known as \"clouding\" (or less commonly \"mura\"), which describes the uneven patches of changes in luminance. It is most visible in dark or black areas of displayed scenes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The zenithal bistable device (ZBD), developed by Qinetiq (formerly DERA), can retain an image without power. The crystals may exist in one of two stable orientations (\"black\" and \"white\") and power is only required to change the image. ZBD Displays is a spin-off company from QinetiQ who manufactured both grayscale and color ZBD devices. Kent Displays has also developed a \"no-power\" display that uses polymer stabilized cholesteric liquid crystal (ChLCD). In 2009 Kent demonstrated the use of a ChLCD to cover the entire surface of a mobile phone, allowing it to change colors, and keep that color even when power is removed.\nIn 2004 researchers at the University of Oxford demonstrated two new types of zero-power bistable LCDs based on Zenithal bistable techniques. Several bistable technologies, like the 360\u00b0 BTN and the bistable cholesteric, depend mainly on the bulk properties of the liquid crystal (LC) and use standard strong anchoring, with alignment films and LC mixtures similar to the traditional monostable materials. Other bistable technologies, \"e.g.\", BiNem technology, are based mainly on the surface properties and need specific weak anchoring materials.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nSome of these issues relate to full-screen displays, others to small displays as on watches, etc. Many of the comparisons are with CRT displays.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nSeveral different families of liquid crystals are used in liquid crystals. The molecules used have to be anisotropic, and to exhibit mutual attraction. Polarizable rod-shaped molecules (biphenyls, terphenyls, etc.) are common. A common form is a pair of aromatic benzene rings, with a nonpolar moiety (pentyl, heptyl, octyl, or alkyl oxy group) on one end and polar (nitrile, halogen) on the other. Sometimes the benzene rings are separated with an acetylene group, ethylene, CH=N, CH=NO, N=N, N=NO, or ester group. In practice, eutectic mixtures of several chemicals are used, to achieve wider temperature operating range (-10..+60\u00a0\u00b0C for low-end and -20..+100\u00a0\u00b0C for high-performance displays). For example, the E7 mixture is composed of three biphenyls and one terphenyl: 39 wt.% of 4'-pentyl[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 24..35\u00a0\u00b0C), 36 wt.% of 4'-heptyl[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 30..43\u00a0\u00b0C), 16 wt.% of 4'-octoxy[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 54..80\u00a0\u00b0C), and 9 wt.% of 4\"-pentyl[1,1':4',1\"-terphenyl]-4-carbonitrile (nematic range 131..240\u00a0\u00b0C).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Latency (engineering)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Latency is a time interval between the stimulation and response, or, from a more general point of view, a time delay between the cause and the effect of some physical change in the system being observed. Latency is physically a consequence of the limited velocity with which any physical interaction can propagate. The magnitude of this velocity is always less than or equal to the speed of light. Therefore, every physical system will experience some sort of latency, regardless of the nature of stimulation that it has been exposed to.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a time phase between ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The precise definition of latency depends on the system being observed and the nature of stimulation. In communications, the lower limit of latency is determined by the medium being used for communications. In reliable two-way communication systems, latency limits the maximum rate that information can be transmitted, as there is often a limit on the amount of information that is \"in-flight\" at any one moment. In the field of human\u2013machine interaction, perceptible latency has a strong effect on user satisfaction and usability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Online games are sensitive to latency since fast response times to new events occurring during a game session are rewarded while slow response times may carry penalties. Lag is the term used to describe latency in gaming. Due to a delay in transmission of game events, a player with a high latency internet connection may show slow responses in spite of appropriate reaction time. This gives players with low latency connections a technical advantage.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the ways that can result in a game session ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Minimizing latency is of interest in the capital markets, particularly where algorithmic trading is used to process market updates and turn around orders within milliseconds. Low-latency trading occurs on the networks used by financial institutions to connect to stock exchanges and electronic communication networks (ECNs) to execute financial transactions. Joel Hasbrouck and Gideon Saar (2011) measure latency based on three components: the time it takes for information to reach the trader, execution of the trader\u2019s algorithms to analyze the information and decide a course of action, and the generated action to reach the exchange and get implemented. Hasbrouck and Saar contrast this with the way in which latencies are measured by many trading venues who use much more narrow definitions, such as, the processing delay measured from the entry of the order (at the vendor\u2019s computer) to the transmission of an acknowledgement (from the vendor\u2019s computer). Electronic trading now makes up 60% to 70% of the daily volume on the NYSE and algorithmic trading close to 35%. Trading using computers has developed to the point where millisecond improvements in network speeds offer a competitive advantage for financial institutions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Network latency in a packet-switched network is measured as either one-way (the time from the source sending a packet to the destination receiving it), or round-trip delay time (the one-way latency from source to destination plus the one-way latency from the destination back to the source). Round-trip latency is more often quoted, because it can be measured from a single point. Note that round trip latency excludes the amount of time that a destination system spends processing the packet. Many software platforms provide a service called ping that can be used to measure round-trip latency. Ping uses the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) \"echo request\" which causes the recipient to send the received packet as an immediate response, thus it provides a rough way of measuring round-trip delay time. Ping cannot perform accurate measurements, principally because ICMP is intended only for diagnostic or control purposes, and differs from real communication protocols such as TCP. Furthermore, routers and internet service providers might apply different traffic shaping policies to different protocols. For more accurate measurements it is better to use specific software, for example: hping, Netperf or Iperf.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the time from the source sent to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "However, in a non-trivial network, a typical packet will be forwarded over multiple links and gateways, each of which will not begin to forward the packet until it has been completely received. In such a network, the minimal latency is the sum of the transmission delay of each link, plus the forwarding latency of each gateway. In practice, minimal latency also includes queuing and processing delays. Queuing delay occurs when a gateway receives multiple packets from different sources heading towards the same destination. Since typically only one packet can be transmitted at a time, some of the packets must queue for transmission, incurring additional delay. Processing delays are incurred while a gateway determines what to do with a newly received packet. Bufferbloat can also cause increased latency that is an order of magnitude or more. The combination of propagation, serialization, queuing, and processing delays often produces a complex and variable network latency profile.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latency limits total throughput in reliable two-way communication systems as described by the bandwidth-delay product.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latency in fiber optics is largely a function of the speed of light, which is 299,792,458 meters/second in vacuum. This would equate to a latency of 3.33\u00a0\u00b5s for every kilometer of path length. The index of refraction of most fibre optic cables is about 1.5, meaning that light travels about 1.5 times as fast in a vacuum as it does in the cable. This works out to about 5.0\u00a0\u00b5s of latency for every kilometer. In shorter metro networks, higher latency can be experienced due to extra distance in building risers and cross-connects. To calculate latency of a connection, one has to know the distance traveled by the fibre, which is rarely a straight line, since it has to traverse geographic contours and obstacles, such as roads and railway tracks, as well as other rights-of-way.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to imperfections in the fibre, light degrades as it is transmitted through it. For distances of greater than 100 kilometers, amplifiers or regenerators are deployed. Latency introduced by these components needs to be taken into account.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Satellites in geostationary orbits are far enough away from Earth that communication latency becomes significant \u2014 about a quarter of a second for a trip from one ground-based transmitter to the satellite and back to another ground-based transmitter; close to half a second for two-way communication from one Earth station to another and then back to the first. Low Earth orbit is sometimes used to cut this delay, at the expense of more complicated satellite tracking on the ground and requiring more satellites in the satellite constellation to ensure continuous coverage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Audio latency is the delay between when an audio signal enters and when it emerges from a system. Potential contributors to latency in an audio system include analog-to-digital conversion, buffering, digital signal processing, transmission time, digital-to-analog conversion and the speed of sound in air.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the timing between an audio signal called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Any individual workflow within a system of workflows can be subject to some type of operational latency. It may even be the case that an individual system may have more than one type of latency, depending on the type of participant or goal-seeking behavior. This is best illustrated by the following two examples involving air travel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the point of view of a passenger, latency can be described as follows. Suppose John Doe flies from London to New York. The latency of his trip is the time it takes him to go from his house in England to the hotel he is staying at in New York. This is independent of the throughput of the London-New York air link \u2013 whether there were 100 passengers a day making the trip or 10000, the latency of the trip would remain the same.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the point of view of flight operations personnel, latency can be entirely different. Consider the staff at the London and New York airports. Only a limited number of planes are able to make the transatlantic journey, so when one lands they must prepare it for the return trip as quickly as possible. It might take, for example:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assuming the above are done one after another, minimum plane turnaround time is:", "qas": [{"question": "how long does each plane run ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "However, cleaning, refueling and loading the cargo can be done at the same time. Passengers can be loaded after cleaning is complete. The reduced latency, then, is:", "qas": [{"question": "what can be done at the same time ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The people involved in the turnaround are interested only in the time it takes for their individual tasks. When all of the tasks are done at the same time, however, it is possible to reduce the latency to the length of the longest task. If some steps have prerequisites, it becomes more difficult to perform all steps in parallel. In the example above, the requirement to clean the plane before loading passengers results in a minimum latency longer than any single task.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the people in the turnaround do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Any mechanical process encounters limitations modeled by Newtonian physics. The behavior of disk drives provides an example of mechanical latency. Here, it is the time needed for the data encoded on a platter to rotate from its current position to a position adjacent to the read-write head as well as the seek time required for the actuator arm for the read-write head to be positioned above the appropriate track. This is also known as rotational latency and seek time since the basic term latency is also applied to the time required by a computer's electronics and software to perform polling, interrupts, and direct memory access.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Computers run sets of instructions called a process. In operating systems, the execution of the process can be postponed if other processes are also executing. In addition, the operating system can schedule when to perform the action that the process is commanding. For example, suppose a process commands that a computer card's voltage output be set high-low-high-low and so on at a rate of 1000\u00a0Hz. The operating system may choose to adjust the scheduling of each transition (high-low or low-high) based on an internal clock. The latency is the delay between the process instruction commanding the transition and the hardware actually transitioning the voltage from high to low or low to high.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On Microsoft Windows, it appears that the timing of commands to hardware is not exact. Empirical data suggest that Windows (using the Windows sleep timer which accepts millisecond sleep times) will schedule on a 1024\u00a0Hz clock and will delay 24 of 1024 transitions per second to make an average of 1000\u00a0Hz for the update rate. This can have serious ramifications for discrete-time algorithms that rely on fairly consistent timing between updates such as those found in control theory. The sleep function or similar windows API were at no point designed for accurate timing purposes. Certain multimedia-oriented API routines like codice_1 and its siblings provide better timing consistency. However, consumer- and server-grade Windows ( those based on NT kernel) were not to be real-time operating systems. Drastically more accurate timings could be achieved by using dedicated hardware extensions and control-loop cards.", "qas": [{"question": "what did microsoft windows say the timing of instructions needed to do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Linux may have the same problems with scheduling of hardware I/O. The problem in Linux is mitigated by support for posix real-time extensions, and the possibility of using a kernel with the PREEMPT_RT patch applied.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On embedded systems, the real-time execution of instructions is often supported by the low-level embedded operating system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In simulation applications, 'latency' refers to the time delay, normally measured in milliseconds (1/1,000 sec), between initial input and an output clearly discernible to the simulator trainee or simulator subject. Latency is sometimes also called transport delay.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another name for transport timing ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 22, 1)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "History of public transport authorities in London", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The history of public transport authorities in London details the various organisations that have been responsible for the public transport network in and around London, England from 1933 until 2000 and have used the London Transport brand. Their responsibilities have encompassed the buses, coaches, trams and the London Underground. The period began with the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board, which covered the County of London and adjacent counties within a 30-mile (48-km) radius. This area later came under the control of the London Transport Executive and then the London Transport Board. The area of responsibility was reduced to that of the Greater London administrative area in 1970 when the Greater London Council, and then London Regional Transport took over responsibility. Since 2000, the Greater London Authority has been the transport authority and the executive agency has been called Transport for London; ending the 67-year use of the \"London Transport\" name.", "qas": [{"question": "what has the greater london authority been called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 0, 5)"}, {"question": "what was the name of london 's public transport ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Prior to 1933, the ownership and management of the transport system in London was distributed among a large number of independent and separate organisations. The Underground railway system had been developed and was owned by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) and the Metropolitan Railway. Tram and Trolleybus networks were owned by various local authorities and public companies and buses were owned by numerous companies. Many of these services were in competition with one another leading to wasteful duplication. The London County Council managed tram operations within the County of London, but its responsibility did not extend to the bus or tram routes that ran outside its area; or to the railways, which also extended into neighbouring counties. A Royal Commission on London Government in the 1920s did not permit the London County Council to extend its area of responsibility and an ad hoc London Traffic Area was created to regulate motor traffic in the wider London region. In the 1930s another ad hoc solution was sought to improve the control and coordination of public transport.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) was the transport authority from 1 July 1933 to 31 December 1947. It unified services in the London area for the first time. The London Passenger Transport Act 1933 removed responsibility for of tram route from the London County Council, three county boroughs and a number of other local authorities in the Greater London area. It brought the UERL lines under the same control, and took over supervision of buses from the Metropolitan Police. The area of responsibility of the LPTB was far greater than the current Greater London boundaries and was known as the London Passenger Transport Area. The period saw massive expansion of the tube network and was directly responsible for the expansion of the suburbs. The extensive New Works Programme was halted by World War II, with some projects abandoned and others completed after the end of hostilities. The 'roundel symbol' designed in 1918 was adopted by London Passenger Transport Board and the London Transport brand and architectural style was perfected during this period. The iconic tube map designed in 1931, was published in 1933.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The London Transport Executive (LTE) was the transport authority from 1 January 1948 to 31 December 1962. London Transport was taken into public ownership and became part of the British Transport Commission, which brought London Transport and British Railways under the same control for the first and last time. The period saw the start of direct recruitment from the Caribbean and the repair and replacement of stock and stations damaged during the war as well as completion of delayed projects such as the Central line eastern extension. The AEC Routemaster bus was introduced in 1956. Trams were withdrawn in 1952 and trolleybuses in 1962.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the london transport executive ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The London Transport Board was the transport authority from 1 January 1963 to 31 December 1969 It reported directly to the Minister of Transport, ending its direct association with the management of British Railways. During this period many of Britain\u2019s unprofitable railways were closed down, as most routes in the capital were widely used the Beeching Axe had little effect. However, during this period there was little investment in public transport and the motor car increased in popularity. During this period, the Victoria line was opened - although work had started in the early 1960s - and the AEC Merlin single-deck bus was introduced.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Greater London Council was the transport authority from 1 January 1970 to 28 June 1984 and the executive agency was called the London Transport Executive. The legislation creating the Greater London Council (GLC) was already passed in 1963 when the London Transport Board was created. However, control did not pass to the new authority until 1 January 1970. The GLC broadly controlled only those services within the boundaries of Greater London. The (green painted) country buses and Green Line Coaches had been passed in 1969 to a new company, London Country Bus Services, which in 1970 became part of the National Bus Company. The period is perhaps the most controversial in London's transport history and there was a severe lack of funding from central government and staff shortages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The inter-modal zonal ticketing system currently used by Transport for London originated in this period. Following the Greater London Council election in 1981, the incoming Labour administration simplified fares in Greater London by introducing four new bus fare zones and two central London Underground zones, named \"City\" and \"West End\", where flat fares applied for the first time. This was accompanied by a cut in prices of about a third and was marketed as the \"Fares Fair\" campaign. Following successful legal action against it, on 21 March 1982 London Buses fares were subsequently doubled and London Underground fares increased by 91%. The two central area zones were retained and the fares to all other stations were restructured to be graduated at three-mile intervals. In 1983, a third revision of fares was undertaken, and a new inter-modal Travelcard season ticket was launched covering five new numbered zones; representing an overall cut in prices of around 25%. The \"One Day Travelcard\" was launched in 1984 and on weekdays was only sold for travel after 09.30.", "qas": []}, {"context": "London Regional Transport was the transport authority from 29 June 1984 to 2 July 2000. The GLC was abolished in 1986 with responsibility for public transport removed two years earlier in 1984. The new authority, London Regional Transport (LRT), again came under direct state control, reporting to the Secretary of State for Transport. The London Regional Transport Act contained provision for setting up subsidiary companies to run the Underground and bus services and in 1985 London Underground Limited (LUL), a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport, was set up to manage the tube network. In 1988 ten individual line business units were created to manage the network. London Buses Limited was constituted to progress the privatisation of London bus services. London Transport was converted to a route operating contract tendering authority, and the former bus operating interests and assets of London Transport were split into 12 business units under the banner \"London Buses\". The 12 units competed for contracts with private operators from 1984, and were all sold off by 1994/5 becoming private operators themselves.", "qas": [{"question": "when was london regional transport established ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Further amendments to the fare system were made during this period, including inclusion of the separately managed British Rail services. In January 1985 the \"Capitalcard\" season ticket was launched, offering validity on British Rail as well as London Underground and London Buses. It was priced around 10-15% higher than the Travelcard. In June 1986 the \"One Day Capitalcard\" was launched. The Capitalcard brand ended in January 1989 when the Travelcard gained validity on British Rail. In January 1991 Zone 5 was split to create a new Zone 6. The Docklands Light Railway was opened on 31 August 1987 and was included in the zonal Travelcard ticketing scheme.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Greater London Authority, a replacement authority for the GLC, was set up in 2000 with a transport executive called Transport for London (TfL) that took control from 3 July 2000. It is the first London transport authority since 1933 not to be commonly called \"London Transport\". The London Underground did not pass to TfL until after a Private Finance Initiative (PFI) agreement for maintenance was completed in 2003.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Light", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Light is electromagnetic radiation within a certain portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. The word usually refers to visible light, which is the visible spectrum that is visible to the human eye and is responsible for the sense of sight. Visible light is usually defined as having wavelengths in the range of 400\u2013700 nanometres (nm), or 4.00 \u00d7 10 to 7.00 \u00d7 10\u00a0m, between the infrared (with longer wavelengths) and the ultraviolet (with shorter wavelengths). This wavelength means a frequency range of roughly 430\u2013750 terahertz (THz).\nThe main source of light on Earth is the Sun. Sunlight provides the energy that green plants use to create sugars mostly in the form of starches, which release energy into the living things that digest them. This process of photosynthesis provides virtually all the energy used by living things. Historically, another important source of light for humans has been fire, from ancient campfires to modern kerosene lamps. With the development of electric lights and power systems, electric lighting has effectively replaced firelight. Some species of animals generate their own light, a process called bioluminescence. For example, fireflies use light to locate mates, and vampire squids use it to hide themselves from prey.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of radiation is infrared radiation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The primary properties of visible light are intensity, propagation direction, frequency or wavelength spectrum, and polarization, while its speed in a vacuum, 299,792,458 metres per second, is one of the fundamental constants of nature. Visible light, as with all types of electromagnetic radiation (EMR), is experimentally found to always move at this speed in a vacuum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In physics, the term \"light\" sometimes refers to electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength, whether visible or not. In this sense, gamma rays, X-rays, microwaves and radio waves are also light. Like all types of EM radiation, visible light propagates as waves. However, the energy imparted by the waves is absorbed at single locations the way particles are absorbed. The absorbed energy of the EM waves is called a photon, and represents the quanta of light. When a wave of light is transformed and absorbed as a photon, the energy of the wave instantly collapses to a single location, and this location is where the photon \"arrives.\" This is what is called the wave function collapse. This dual wave-like and particle-like nature of light is known as the wave\u2013particle duality. The study of light, known as optics, is an important research area in modern physics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Generally, EM radiation (the designation \"radiation\" excludes static electric, magnetic, and near fields), or EMR, is classified by wavelength into radio waves, microwaves, infrared, the visible spectrum that we perceive as light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The behavior of EMR depends on its wavelength. Higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths, and lower frequencies have longer wavelengths. When EMR interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior depends on the amount of energy per quantum it carries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "EMR in the visible light region consists of quanta (called photons) that are at the lower end of the energies that are capable of causing electronic excitation within molecules, which leads to changes in the bonding or chemistry of the molecule. At the lower end of the visible light spectrum, EMR becomes invisible to humans (infrared) because its photons no longer have enough individual energy to cause a lasting molecular change (a change in conformation) in the visual molecule retinal in the human retina, which change triggers the sensation of vision.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There exist animals that are sensitive to various types of infrared, but not by means of quantum-absorption. Infrared sensing in snakes depends on a kind of natural thermal imaging, in which tiny packets of cellular water are raised in temperature by the infrared radiation. EMR in this range causes molecular vibration and heating effects, which is how these animals detect it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Above the range of visible light, ultraviolet light becomes invisible to humans, mostly because it is absorbed by the cornea below 360 nm and the internal lens below 400 nm. Furthermore, the rods and cones located in the retina of the human eye cannot detect the very short (below 360\u00a0nm) ultraviolet wavelengths and are in fact damaged by ultraviolet. Many animals with eyes that do not require lenses (such as insects and shrimp) are able to detect ultraviolet, by quantum photon-absorption mechanisms, in much the same chemical way that humans detect visible light.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the surface of visible light ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Various sources define visible light as narrowly as 420\u2013680\u00a0nm to as broadly as 380\u2013800\u00a0nm. Under ideal laboratory conditions, people can see infrared up to at least 1050\u00a0nm; children and young adults may perceive ultraviolet wavelengths down to about 310\u2013313\u00a0nm.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Plant growth is also affected by the color spectrum of light, a process known as photomorphogenesis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The speed of light in a vacuum is defined to be exactly 299,792,458\u00a0m/s (approx. 186,282 miles per second). The fixed value of the speed of light in SI units results from the fact that the metre is now defined in terms of the speed of light. All forms of electromagnetic radiation move at exactly this same speed in vacuum.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the speed of light in a vacuum ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Different physicists have attempted to measure the speed of light throughout history. Galileo attempted to measure the speed of light in the seventeenth century. An early experiment to measure the speed of light was conducted by Ole R\u00f8mer, a Danish physicist, in 1676. Using a telescope, R\u00f8mer observed the motions of Jupiter and one of its moons, Io. Noting discrepancies in the apparent period of Io's orbit, he calculated that light takes about 22 minutes to traverse the diameter of Earth's orbit. However, its size was not known at that time. If R\u00f8mer had known the diameter of the Earth's orbit, he would have calculated a speed of 227,000,000\u00a0m/s.", "qas": [{"question": "what have physicists tried to measure ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Another, more accurate, measurement of the speed of light was performed in Europe by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1849. Fizeau directed a beam of light at a mirror several kilometers away. A rotating cog wheel was placed in the path of the light beam as it traveled from the source, to the mirror and then returned to its origin. Fizeau found that at a certain rate of rotation, the beam would pass through one gap in the wheel on the way out and the next gap on the way back. Knowing the distance to the mirror, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the rate of rotation, Fizeau was able to calculate the speed of light as 313,000,000\u00a0m/s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "L\u00e9on Foucault carried out an experiment which used rotating mirrors to obtain a value of 298,000,000\u00a0m/s in 1862. Albert A. Michelson conducted experiments on the speed of light from 1877 until his death in 1931. He refined Foucault's methods in 1926 using improved rotating mirrors to measure the time it took light to make a round trip from Mount Wilson to Mount San Antonio in California. The precise measurements yielded a speed of 299,796,000\u00a0m/s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The effective velocity of light in various transparent substances containing ordinary matter, is less than in vacuum. For example, the speed of light in water is about 3/4 of that in vacuum.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the speed of light in vacuum ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 14, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Two independent teams of physicists were said to bring light to a \"complete standstill\" by passing it through a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate of the element rubidium, one team at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute for Science in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the other at the Harvard\u2013Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, also in Cambridge. However, the popular description of light being \"stopped\" in these experiments refers only to light being stored in the excited states of atoms, then re-emitted at an arbitrary later time, as stimulated by a second laser pulse. During the time it had \"stopped\" it had ceased to be light.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the `` stop '' stop being visible ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 15, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The study of light and the interaction of light and matter is termed optics. The observation and study of optical phenomena such as rainbows and the aurora borealis offer many clues as to the nature of light.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the study of light and matter called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Refraction is the bending of light rays when passing through a surface between one transparent material and another. It is described by Snell's Law:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where \u03b8 is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the first medium, \u03b8 is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the second medium, and n and n are the indices of refraction, \"n\" = 1 in a vacuum and \"n\" > 1 in a transparent substance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When a beam of light crosses the boundary between a vacuum and another medium, or between two different media, the wavelength of the light changes, but the frequency remains constant. If the beam of light is not orthogonal (or rather normal) to the boundary, the change in wavelength results in a change in the direction of the beam. This change of direction is known as refraction.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the frequency of a vacuum ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The refractive quality of lenses is frequently used to manipulate light in order to change the apparent size of images. Magnifying glasses, spectacles, contact lenses, microscopes and refracting telescopes are all examples of this manipulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many sources of light. A body at a given temperature emits a characteristic spectrum of black-body radiation. A simple thermal source is sunlight, the radiation emitted by the chromosphere of the Sun at around peaks in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum when plotted in wavelength units and roughly 44% of sunlight energy that reaches the ground is visible. Another example is incandescent light bulbs, which emit only around 10% of their energy as visible light and the remainder as infrared. A common thermal light source in history is the glowing solid particles in flames, but these also emit most of their radiation in the infrared, and only a fraction in the visible spectrum.", "qas": [{"question": "what are many sources of light ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The peak of the blackbody spectrum is in the deep infrared, at about 10 micrometre wavelength, for relatively cool objects like human beings. As the temperature increases, the peak shifts to shorter wavelengths, producing first a red glow, then a white one, and finally a blue-white colour as the peak moves out of the visible part of the spectrum and into the ultraviolet. These colours can be seen when metal is heated to \"red hot\" or \"white hot\". Blue-white thermal emission is not often seen, except in stars (the commonly seen pure-blue colour in a gas flame or a welder's torch is in fact due to molecular emission, notably by CH radicals (emitting a wavelength band around 425\u00a0nm, and is not seen in stars or pure thermal radiation).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atoms emit and absorb light at characteristic energies. This produces \"emission lines\" in the spectrum of each atom. Emission can be spontaneous, as in light-emitting diodes, gas discharge lamps (such as neon lamps and neon signs, mercury-vapor lamps, etc.), and flames (light from the hot gas itself\u2014so, for example, sodium in a gas flame emits characteristic yellow light). Emission can also be stimulated, as in a laser or a microwave maser.", "qas": [{"question": "what do atoms emit ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Deceleration of a free charged particle, such as an electron, can produce visible radiation: cyclotron radiation, synchrotron radiation, and bremsstrahlung radiation are all examples of this. Particles moving through a medium faster than the speed of light in that medium can produce visible Cherenkov radiation. Certain chemicals produce visible radiation by chemoluminescence. In living things, this process is called bioluminescence. For example, fireflies produce light by this means, and boats moving through water can disturb plankton which produce a glowing wake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Certain substances produce light when they are illuminated by more energetic radiation, a process known as fluorescence. Some substances emit light slowly after excitation by more energetic radiation. This is known as phosphorescence. Phosphorescent materials can also be excited by bombarding them with subatomic particles. Cathodoluminescence is one example. This mechanism is used in cathode ray tube television sets and computer monitors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Certain other mechanisms can produce light:", "qas": []}, {"context": "When the concept of light is intended to include very-high-energy photons (gamma rays), additional generation mechanisms include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Light is measured with two main alternative sets of units: radiometry consists of measurements of light power at all wavelengths, while photometry measures light with wavelength weighted with respect to a standardised model of human brightness perception. Photometry is useful, for example, to quantify Illumination (lighting) intended for human use. The SI units for both systems are summarised in the following tables.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The photometry units are different from most systems of physical units in that they take into account how the human eye responds to light. The cone cells in the human eye are of three types which respond differently across the visible spectrum, and the cumulative response peaks at a wavelength of around 555\u00a0nm. Therefore, two sources of light which produce the same intensity (W/m) of visible light do not necessarily appear equally bright. The photometry units are designed to take this into account, and therefore are a better representation of how \"bright\" a light appears to be than raw intensity. They relate to raw power by a quantity called luminous efficacy, and are used for purposes like determining how to best achieve sufficient illumination for various tasks in indoor and outdoor settings. The illumination measured by a photocell sensor does not necessarily correspond to what is perceived by the human eye, and without filters which may be costly, photocells and charge-coupled devices (CCD) tend to respond to some infrared, ultraviolet or both.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Light exerts physical pressure on objects in its path, a phenomenon which can be deduced by Maxwell's equations, but can be more easily explained by the particle nature of light: photons strike and transfer their momentum. Light pressure is equal to the power of the light beam divided by \"c\", the speed of light. Due to the magnitude of \"c\", the effect of light pressure is negligible for everyday objects. For example, a one-milliwatt laser pointer exerts a force of about 3.3 piconewtons on the object being illuminated; thus, one could lift a U.S. penny with laser pointers, but doing so would require about 30 billion 1-mW laser pointers. However, in nanometre-scale applications such as nanoelectromechanical systems (|NEMS), the effect of light pressure is more significant, and exploiting light pressure to drive NEMS mechanisms and to flip nanometre-scale physical switches in integrated circuits is an active area of research. At larger scales, light pressure can cause asteroids to spin faster, acting on their irregular shapes as on the vanes of a windmill. The possibility of making solar sails that would accelerate spaceships in space is also under investigation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the motion of the Crookes radiometer was originally attributed to light pressure, this interpretation is incorrect; the characteristic Crookes rotation is the result of a partial vacuum. This should not be confused with the Nichols radiometer, in which the (slight) motion caused by torque (though not enough for full rotation against friction) \"is\" directly caused by light pressure.\nAs a consequence of light pressure, Einstein in 1909 predicted the existence of \"radiation friction\" which would oppose the movement of matter. He wrote, \u201cradiation will exert pressure on both sides of the plate. The forces of pressure exerted on the two sides are equal if the plate is at rest. However, if it is in motion, more radiation will be reflected on the surface that is ahead during the motion (front surface) than on the back surface. The backwardacting force of pressure exerted on the front surface is thus larger than the force of pressure acting on the back. Hence, as the resultant of the two forces, there remains a force that counteracts the motion of the plate and that increases with the velocity of the plate. We will call this resultant 'radiation friction' in brief.\u201d", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the fifth century BC, Empedocles postulated that everything was composed of four elements; fire, air, earth and water. He believed that Aphrodite made the human eye out of the four elements and that she lit the fire in the eye which shone out from the eye making sight possible. If this were true, then one could see during the night just as well as during the day, so Empedocles postulated an interaction between rays from the eyes and rays from a source such as the sun.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In about 300 BC, Euclid wrote \"Optica\", in which he studied the properties of light. Euclid postulated that light travelled in straight lines and he described the laws of reflection and studied them mathematically. He questioned that sight is the result of a beam from the eye, for he asks how one sees the stars immediately, if one closes one's eyes, then opens them at night. If the beam from the eye travels infinitely fast this is not a problem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 55 BC, Lucretius, a Roman who carried on the ideas of earlier Greek atomists, wrote that \"The light & heat of the sun; these are composed of minute atoms which, when they are shoved off, lose no time in shooting right across the interspace of air in the direction imparted by the shove.\" (from \"On the nature of the Universe\"). Despite being similar to later particle theories, Lucretius's views were not generally accepted. Ptolemy (c. 2nd century) wrote about the refraction of light in his book \"Optics\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In ancient India, the Hindu schools of Samkhya and Vaisheshika, from around the early centuries AD developed theories on light. According to the Samkhya school, light is one of the five fundamental \"subtle\" elements (\"tanmatra\") out of which emerge the gross elements. The atomicity of these elements is not specifically mentioned and it appears that they were actually taken to be continuous.\nOn the other hand, the Vaisheshika school gives an atomic theory of the physical world on the non-atomic ground of ether, space and time. (See \"Indian atomism\".) The basic atoms are those of earth (\"prthivi\"), water (\"pani\"), fire (\"agni\"), and air (\"vayu\") Light rays are taken to be a stream of high velocity of \"tejas\" (fire) atoms. The particles of light can exhibit different characteristics depending on the speed and the arrangements of the \"tejas\" atoms.\nThe \"Vishnu Purana\" refers to sunlight as \"the seven rays of the sun\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Indian Buddhists, such as Dign\u0101ga in the 5th century and Dharmakirti in the 7th century, developed a type of atomism that is a philosophy about reality being composed of atomic entities that are momentary flashes of light or energy. They viewed light as being an atomic entity equivalent to energy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) held that light was a mechanical property of the luminous body, rejecting the \"forms\" of Ibn al-Haytham and Witelo as well as the \"species\" of Bacon, Grosseteste, and Kepler. In 1637 he published a theory of the refraction of light that assumed, incorrectly, that light travelled faster in a denser medium than in a less dense medium. Descartes arrived at this conclusion by analogy with the behaviour of sound waves. Although Descartes was incorrect about the relative speeds, he was correct in assuming that light behaved like a wave and in concluding that refraction could be explained by the speed of light in different media.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Descartes is not the first to use the mechanical analogies but because he clearly asserts that light is only a mechanical property of the luminous body and the transmitting medium, Descartes' theory of light is regarded as the start of modern physical optics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pierre Gassendi (1592\u20131655), an atomist, proposed a particle theory of light which was published posthumously in the 1660s. Isaac Newton studied Gassendi's work at an early age, and preferred his view to Descartes' theory of the \"plenum\". He stated in his \"Hypothesis of Light\" of 1675 that light was composed of corpuscles (particles of matter) which were emitted in all directions from a source. One of Newton's arguments against the wave nature of light was that waves were known to bend around obstacles, while light travelled only in straight lines. He did, however, explain the phenomenon of the diffraction of light (which had been observed by Francesco Grimaldi) by allowing that a light particle could create a localised wave in the aether.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Newton's theory could be used to predict the reflection of light, but could only explain refraction by incorrectly assuming that light accelerated upon entering a denser medium because the gravitational pull was greater. Newton published the final version of his theory in his \"Opticks\" of 1704. His reputation helped the particle theory of light to hold sway during the 18th century. The particle theory of light led Laplace to argue that a body could be so massive that light could not escape from it. In other words, it would become what is now called a black hole. Laplace withdrew his suggestion later, after a wave theory of light became firmly established as the model for light (as has been explained, neither a particle or wave theory is fully correct). A translation of Newton's essay on light appears in \"The large scale structure of space-time,\" by Stephen Hawking and George F. R. Ellis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fact that light could be polarized was for the first time qualitatively explained by Newton using the particle theory. \u00c9tienne-Louis Malus in 1810 created a mathematical particle theory of polarization. Jean-Baptiste Biot in 1812 showed that this theory explained all known phenomena of light polarization. At that time the polarization was considered as the proof of the particle theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To explain the origin of colors, Robert Hooke (1635-1703) developed a \"pulse theory\" and compared the spreading of light to that of waves in water in his 1665 work \"Micrographia\" (\"Observation IX\"). In 1672 Hooke suggested that light's vibrations could be perpendicular to the direction of propagation. Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) worked out a mathematical wave theory of light in 1678, and published it in his \"Treatise on light\" in 1690. He proposed that light was emitted in all directions as a series of waves in a medium called the \"Luminiferous ether\". As waves are not affected by gravity, it was assumed that they slowed down upon entering a denser medium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The wave theory predicted that light waves could interfere with each other like sound waves (as noted around 1800 by Thomas Young). Young showed by means of a diffraction experiment that light behaved as waves. He also proposed that different colours were caused by different wavelengths of light, and explained colour vision in terms of three-coloured receptors in the eye. Another supporter of the wave theory was Leonhard Euler. He argued in \"Nova theoria lucis et colorum\" (1746) that diffraction could more easily be explained by a wave theory. In 1816 Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re gave Augustin-Jean Fresnel an idea that the polarization of light can be explained by the wave theory if light were a transverse wave.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Later, Fresnel independently worked out his own wave theory of light, and presented it to the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences in 1817. Sim\u00e9on Denis Poisson added to Fresnel's mathematical work to produce a convincing argument in favour of the wave theory, helping to overturn Newton's corpuscular theory. By the year 1821, Fresnel was able to show via mathematical methods that polarisation could be explained by the wave theory of light and only if light was entirely transverse, with no longitudinal vibration whatsoever.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The weakness of the wave theory was that light waves, like sound waves, would need a medium for transmission. The existence of the hypothetical substance \"luminiferous aether\" proposed by Huygens in 1678 was cast into strong doubt in the late nineteenth century by the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Newton's corpuscular theory implied that light would travel faster in a denser medium, while the wave theory of Huygens and others implied the opposite. At that time, the speed of light could not be measured accurately enough to decide which theory was correct. The first to make a sufficiently accurate measurement was L\u00e9on Foucault, in 1850. His result supported the wave theory, and the classical particle theory was finally abandoned, only to partly re-emerge in the 20th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1845, Michael Faraday discovered that the plane of polarisation of linearly polarised light is rotated when the light rays travel along the magnetic field direction in the presence of a transparent dielectric, an effect now known as Faraday rotation. This was the first evidence that light was related to electromagnetism. In 1846 he speculated that light might be some form of disturbance propagating along magnetic field lines. Faraday proposed in 1847 that light was a high-frequency electromagnetic vibration, which could propagate even in the absence of a medium such as the ether.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Faraday's work inspired James Clerk Maxwell to study electromagnetic radiation and light. Maxwell discovered that self-propagating electromagnetic waves would travel through space at a constant speed, which happened to be equal to the previously measured speed of light. From this, Maxwell concluded that light was a form of electromagnetic radiation: he first stated this result in 1862 in \"On Physical Lines of Force\". In 1873, he published \"A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism\", which contained a full mathematical description of the behaviour of electric and magnetic fields, still known as Maxwell's equations. Soon after, Heinrich Hertz confirmed Maxwell's theory experimentally by generating and detecting radio waves in the laboratory, and demonstrating that these waves behaved exactly like visible light, exhibiting properties such as reflection, refraction, diffraction, and interference. Maxwell's theory and Hertz's experiments led directly to the development of modern radio, radar, television, electromagnetic imaging, and wireless communications.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the quantum theory, photons are seen as wave packets of the waves described in the classical theory of Maxwell. The quantum theory was needed to explain effects even with visual light that Maxwell's classical theory could not (such as spectral lines).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1900 Max Planck, attempting to explain black body radiation suggested that although light was a wave, these waves could gain or lose energy only in finite amounts related to their frequency. Planck called these \"lumps\" of light energy \"quanta\" (from a Latin word for \"how much\"). In 1905, Albert Einstein used the idea of light quanta to explain the photoelectric effect, and suggested that these light quanta had a \"real\" existence. In 1923 Arthur Holly Compton showed that the wavelength shift seen when low intensity X-rays scattered from electrons (so called Compton scattering) could be explained by a particle-theory of X-rays, but not a wave theory. In 1926 Gilbert N. Lewis named these light quanta particles photons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eventually the modern theory of quantum mechanics came to picture light as (in some sense) \"both\" a particle and a wave, and (in another sense), as a phenomenon which is \"neither\" a particle nor a wave (which actually are macroscopic phenomena, such as baseballs or ocean waves). Instead, modern physics sees light as something that can be described sometimes with mathematics appropriate to one type of macroscopic metaphor (particles), and sometimes another macroscopic metaphor (water waves), but is actually something that cannot be fully imagined. As in the case for radio waves and the X-rays involved in Compton scattering, physicists have noted that electromagnetic radiation tends to behave more like a classical wave at lower frequencies, but more like a classical particle at higher frequencies, but never completely loses all qualities of one or the other. Visible light, which occupies a middle ground in frequency, can easily be shown in experiments to be describable using either a wave or particle model, or sometimes both.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In February 2018, scientists reported, for the first time, the discovery of a new form of light, which may involve polaritons, that could be useful in the development of quantum computers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lipid", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In biology and biochemistry, a lipid is a biomolecule that is soluble in nonpolar solvents. Non-polar solvents are typically hydrocarbons used to dissolve other naturally occurring hydrocarbon lipid molecules that do not (or do not easily) dissolve in water, including fatty acids, waxes, sterols, fat-soluble vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, E, and K), monoglycerides, diglycerides, triglycerides, and phospholipids.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The functions of lipids include storing energy, signaling, and acting as structural components of cell membranes. Lipids have applications in the cosmetic and food industries as well as in nanotechnology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scientists sometimes broadly define lipids as hydrophobic or amphiphilic small molecules; the amphiphilic nature of some lipids allows them to form structures such as vesicles, multilamellar/unilamellar liposomes, or membranes in an aqueous environment. Biological lipids originate entirely or in part from two distinct types of biochemical subunits or \"building-blocks\": ketoacyl and isoprene groups. Using this approach, lipids may be divided into eight categories: fatty acids, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, saccharolipids, and polyketides (derived from condensation of ketoacyl subunits); and sterol lipids and prenol lipids (derived from condensation of isoprene subunits).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the term \"lipid\" is sometimes used as a synonym for fats, fats are a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides. Lipids also encompass molecules such as fatty acids and their derivatives (including tri-, di-, monoglycerides, and phospholipids), as well as other sterol-containing metabolites such as cholesterol. Although humans and other mammals use various biosynthetic pathways both to break down and to synthesize lipids, some essential lipids can't be made this way and must be obtained from the diet.", "qas": [{"question": "what term is sometimes used as a synonym for fats ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1815, Henry Braconnot classified lipids (\"graisses\") in two categories, \"suifs\" (solid greases or tallow) and \"huiles\" (fluid oils). In 1823, Michel Eug\u00e8ne Chevreul developed a more detailed classification, including oils, greases, tallow, waxes, resins, balsams and volatile oils (or essential oils).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1827, William Prout recognized fat (\"oily\" alimentary matters), along with protein (\"albuminous\") and carbohydrate (\"saccharine\"), as an important nutrient for humans and animals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a century, chemists regarded \"fats\" as only simple lipids made of fatty acids and glycerol (glycerides), but new forms were described later. Theodore Gobley (1847) discovered phospholipids in mammalian brain and hen egg, called by him as \"lecithins\". Thudichum discovered in human brain some phospholipids (cephalin), glycolipids (cerebroside) and sphingolipids (sphingomyelin).", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the compound that made a very simple enzymes made of carbohydrates ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The terms lipoid, lipin, lipide and lipid have been used with varied meanings from author to author. In 1912, Rosenbloom and Gies proposed the substitution of \"lipoid\" by \"lipin\". In 1920, Bloor introduced a new classification for \"lipoids\": simple lipoids (greases and waxes), compound lipoids (phospholipoids and glycolipoids), and the derived lipoids (fatty acids, alcohols, sterols).", "qas": [{"question": "what terms have been used with varied ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The word \"lipid\", which stems etymologically from the Greek \"lipos\" (fat), was introduced in 1923 by Gabriel Bertrand. Bertrands included in the concept not only the traditional fats (glycerides), but also the \"lipoids\", with a complex constitution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1947, divided lipids into \"simple lipids\", with greases and waxes (true waxes, sterols, alcohols), and \"complex lipids\", with phospholipids and glycolipids.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term used for simple ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Fatty acids, or fatty acid residues when they are part of a lipid, are a diverse group of molecules synthesized by chain-elongation of an acetyl-CoA primer with malonyl-CoA or methylmalonyl-CoA groups in a process called fatty acid synthesis. They are made of a hydrocarbon chain that terminates with a carboxylic acid group; this arrangement confers the molecule with a polar, hydrophilic end, and a nonpolar, hydrophobic end that is insoluble in water. The fatty acid structure is one of the most fundamental categories of biological lipids, and is commonly used as a building-block of more structurally complex lipids. The carbon chain, typically between four and 24 carbons long, may be saturated or unsaturated, and may be attached to functional groups containing oxygen, halogens, nitrogen, and sulfur. If a fatty acid contains a double bond, there is the possibility of either a \"cis\" or \"trans\" geometric isomerism, which significantly affects the molecule's configuration. \"Cis\"-double bonds cause the fatty acid chain to bend, an effect that is compounded with more double bonds in the chain. Three double bonds in 18-carbon \"linolenic acid\", the most abundant fatty-acyl chains of plant \"thylakoid membranes\", render these membranes highly \"fluid\" despite environmental low-temperatures, and also makes linolenic acid give dominating sharp peaks in high resolution 13-C NMR spectra of chloroplasts. This in turn plays an important role in the structure and function of cell membranes. Most naturally occurring fatty acids are of the \"cis\" configuration, although the \"trans\" form does exist in some natural and partially hydrogenated fats and oils.", "qas": [{"question": "what are fatty acids ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Examples of biologically important fatty acids include the eicosanoids, derived primarily from arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid, that include prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes. Docosahexaenoic acid is also important in biological systems, particularly with respect to sight. Other major lipid classes in the fatty acid category are the fatty esters and fatty amides. Fatty esters include important biochemical intermediates such as wax esters, fatty acid thioester coenzyme A derivatives, fatty acid thioester ACP derivatives and fatty acid carnitines. The fatty amides include N-acyl ethanolamines, such as the cannabinoid neurotransmitter anandamide.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the eicosanoids ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Glycerolipids are composed of mono-, di-, and tri-substituted glycerols, the best-known being the fatty acid triesters of glycerol, called triglycerides. The word \"triacylglycerol\" is sometimes used synonymously with \"triglyceride\". In these compounds, the three hydroxyl groups of glycerol are each esterified, typically by different fatty acids. Because they function as an energy store, these lipids comprise the bulk of storage fat in animal tissues. The hydrolysis of the ester bonds of triglycerides and the release of glycerol and fatty acids from adipose tissue are the initial steps in metabolizing fat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Additional subclasses of glycerolipids are represented by glycosylglycerols, which are characterized by the presence of one or more sugar residues attached to glycerol via a glycosidic linkage. Examples of structures in this category are the digalactosyldiacylglycerols found in plant membranes and seminolipid from mammalian sperm cells.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Glycerophospholipids, usually referred to as phospholipids (though sphingomyelins are also classified as phospholipids), are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and cell signaling. Neural tissue (including the brain) contains relatively high amounts of glycerophospholipids, and alterations in their composition has been implicated in various neurological disorders. Glycerophospholipids may be subdivided into distinct classes, based on the nature of the polar headgroup at the \"sn\"-3 position of the glycerol backbone in eukaryotes and eubacteria, or the \"sn\"-1 position in the case of archaebacteria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Examples of glycerophospholipids found in biological membranes are phosphatidylcholine (also known as PC, GPCho or lecithin), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE or GPEtn) and phosphatidylserine (PS or GPSer). In addition to serving as a primary component of cellular membranes and binding sites for intra- and intercellular proteins, some glycerophospholipids in eukaryotic cells, such as phosphatidylinositols and phosphatidic acids are either precursors of or, themselves, membrane-derived second messengers. Typically, one or both of these hydroxyl groups are acylated with long-chain fatty acids, but there are also alkyl-linked and 1Z-alkenyl-linked (plasmalogen) glycerophospholipids, as well as dialkylether variants in archaebacteria.", "qas": [{"question": "what are acylated ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 15, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Sphingolipids are a complicated family of compounds that share a common structural feature, a sphingoid base backbone that is synthesized \"de novo\" from the amino acid serine and a long-chain fatty acyl CoA, then converted into ceramides, phosphosphingolipids, glycosphingolipids and other compounds. The major sphingoid base of mammals is commonly referred to as sphingosine. Ceramides (N-acyl-sphingoid bases) are a major subclass of sphingoid base derivatives with an amide-linked fatty acid. The fatty acids are typically saturated or mono-unsaturated with chain lengths from 16 to 26 carbon atoms.", "qas": [{"question": "what are amino acids ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 16, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The major phosphosphingolipids of mammals are sphingomyelins (ceramide phosphocholines), whereas insects contain mainly ceramide phosphoethanolamines and fungi have phytoceramide phosphoinositols and mannose-containing headgroups. The glycosphingolipids are a diverse family of molecules composed of one or more sugar residues linked via a glycosidic bond to the sphingoid base. Examples of these are the simple and complex glycosphingolipids such as cerebrosides and gangliosides.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sterol lipids, such as cholesterol and its derivatives, are an important component of membrane lipids, along with the glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelins. The steroids, all derived from the same fused four-ring core structure, have different biological roles as hormones and signaling molecules. The eighteen-carbon (C18) steroids include the estrogen family whereas the C19 steroids comprise the androgens such as testosterone and androsterone. The C21 subclass includes the progestogens as well as the glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. The secosteroids, comprising various forms of vitamin D, are characterized by cleavage of the B ring of the core structure. Other examples of sterols are the bile acids and their conjugates, which in mammals are oxidized derivatives of cholesterol and are synthesized in the liver. The plant equivalents are the phytosterols, such as \u03b2-sitosterol, stigmasterol, and brassicasterol; the latter compound is also used as a biomarker for algal growth. The predominant sterol in fungal cell membranes is ergosterol.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an important component of membrane membrane ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Prenol lipids are synthesized from the five-carbon-unit precursors isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate that are produced mainly via the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway. The simple isoprenoids (linear alcohols, diphosphates, etc.) are formed by the successive addition of C5 units, and are classified according to number of these terpene units. Structures containing greater than 40 carbons are known as polyterpenes. Carotenoids are important simple isoprenoids that function as antioxidants and as precursors of vitamin A. Another biologically important class of molecules is exemplified by the quinones and hydroquinones, which contain an isoprenoid tail attached to a quinonoid core of non-isoprenoid origin. Vitamin E and vitamin K, as well as the ubiquinones, are examples of this class. Prokaryotes synthesize polyprenols (called bactoprenols) in which the terminal isoprenoid unit attached to oxygen remains unsaturated, whereas in animal polyprenols (dolichols) the terminal isoprenoid is reduced.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Saccharolipids describe compounds in which fatty acids are linked directly to a sugar backbone, forming structures that are compatible with membrane bilayers. In the saccharolipids, a monosaccharide substitutes for the glycerol backbone present in glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids. The most familiar saccharolipids are the acylated glucosamine precursors of the Lipid\u00a0A component of the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria. Typical lipid\u00a0A molecules are disaccharides of glucosamine, which are derivatized with as many as seven fatty-acyl chains. The minimal lipopolysaccharide required for growth in \"E. coli\" is Kdo-Lipid A, a hexa-acylated disaccharide of glucosamine that is glycosylated with two 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid (Kdo) residues.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Polyketides are synthesized by polymerization of acetyl and propionyl subunits by classic enzymes as well as iterative and multimodular enzymes that share mechanistic features with the fatty acid synthases. They comprise a large number of secondary metabolites and natural products from animal, plant, bacterial, fungal and marine sources, and have great structural diversity. Many polyketides are cyclic molecules whose backbones are often further modified by glycosylation, methylation, hydroxylation, oxidation, or other processes. Many commonly used anti-microbial, anti-parasitic, and anti-cancer agents are polyketides or polyketide derivatives, such as erythromycins, tetracyclines, avermectins, and antitumor epothilones.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eukaryotic cells feature the compartmentalized membrane-bound organelles that carry out different biological functions. The glycerophospholipids are the main structural component of biological membranes, as the cellular plasma membrane and the intracellular membranes of organelles; in animal cells, the plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular components from the extracellular environment. The glycerophospholipids are amphipathic molecules (containing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions) that contain a glycerol core linked to two fatty acid-derived \"tails\" by ester linkages and to one \"head\" group by a phosphate ester linkage. While glycerophospholipids are the major component of biological membranes, other non-glyceride lipid components such as sphingomyelin and sterols (mainly cholesterol in animal cell membranes) are also found in biological membranes. In plants and algae, the galactosyldiacylglycerols, and sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, which lack a phosphate group, are important components of membranes of chloroplasts and related organelles and are the most abundant lipids in photosynthetic tissues, including those of higher plants, algae and certain bacteria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Plant thylakoid membranes have the largest lipid component of a non-bilayer forming monogalactosyl diglyceride (MGDG), and little phospholipids; despite this unique lipid composition, chloroplast thylakoid membranes have been shown to contain a dynamic lipid-bilayer matrix as revealed by magnetic resonance and electron microscope studies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A biological membrane is a form of lamellar phase lipid bilayer. The formation of lipid bilayers is an energetically preferred process when the glycerophospholipids described above are in an aqueous environment. This is known as the hydrophobic effect. In an aqueous system, the polar heads of lipids align towards the polar, aqueous environment, while the hydrophobic tails minimize their contact with water and tend to cluster together, forming a vesicle; depending on the concentration of the lipid, this biophysical interaction may result in the formation of micelles, liposomes, or lipid bilayers. Other aggregations are also observed and form part of the polymorphism of amphiphile (lipid) behavior. Phase behavior is an area of study within biophysics and is the subject of current academic research. Micelles and bilayers form in the polar medium by a process known as the hydrophobic effect. When dissolving a lipophilic or amphiphilic substance in a polar environment, the polar molecules (i.e., water in an aqueous solution) become more ordered around the dissolved lipophilic substance, since the polar molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds to the lipophilic areas of the amphiphile. So in an aqueous environment, the water molecules form an ordered \"clathrate\" cage around the dissolved lipophilic molecule.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The formation of lipids into protocell membranes represents a key step in models of abiogenesis, the origin of life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Triglycerides, stored in adipose tissue, are a major form of energy storage both in animals and plants. They are a major source of energy because carbohydrates are fully reduced structures. In comparison to glycogen which would contribute only half of the energy per its pure mass, triglyceride carbons are all bonded to hydrogens, unlike in carbohydrates. The adipocyte, or fat cell, is designed for continuous synthesis and breakdown of triglycerides in animals, with breakdown controlled mainly by the activation of hormone-sensitive enzyme lipase. The complete oxidation of fatty acids provides high caloric content, about 38\u00a0kJ/g (9\u00a0kcal/g), compared with 17\u00a0kJ/g (4\u00a0kcal/g) for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins. Migratory birds that must fly long distances without eating use stored energy of triglycerides to fuel their flights.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In recent years, evidence has emerged showing that lipid signaling is a vital part of the cell signaling. Lipid signaling may occur via activation of G protein-coupled or nuclear receptors, and members of several different lipid categories have been identified as signaling molecules and cellular messengers. These include sphingosine-1-phosphate, a sphingolipid derived from ceramide that is a potent messenger molecule involved in regulating calcium mobilization, cell growth, and apoptosis; diacylglycerol (DAG) and the phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), involved in calcium-mediated activation of protein kinase C; the prostaglandins, which are one type of fatty-acid derived eicosanoid involved in inflammation and immunity; the steroid hormones such as estrogen, testosterone and cortisol, which modulate a host of functions such as reproduction, metabolism and blood pressure; and the oxysterols such as 25-hydroxy-cholesterol that are liver X receptor agonists. Phosphatidylserine lipids are known to be involved in signaling for the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells or pieces of cells. They accomplish this by being exposed to the extracellular face of the cell membrane after the inactivation of flippases which place them exclusively on the cytosolic side and the activation of scramblases, which scramble the orientation of the phospholipids. After this occurs, other cells recognize the phosphatidylserines and phagocytosize the cells or cell fragments exposing them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"fat-soluble\" vitamins (A, D, E and K)\u00a0\u2013 which are isoprene-based lipids\u00a0\u2013 are essential nutrients stored in the liver and fatty tissues, with a diverse range of functions. Acyl-carnitines are involved in the transport and metabolism of fatty acids in and out of mitochondria, where they undergo beta oxidation. Polyprenols and their phosphorylated derivatives also play important transport roles, in this case the transport of oligosaccharides across membranes. Polyprenol phosphate sugars and polyprenol diphosphate sugars function in extra-cytoplasmic glycosylation reactions, in extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis (for instance, peptidoglycan polymerization in bacteria), and in eukaryotic protein N-glycosylation. Cardiolipins are a subclass of glycerophospholipids containing four acyl chains and three glycerol groups that are particularly abundant in the inner mitochondrial membrane. They are believed to activate enzymes involved with oxidative phosphorylation. Lipids also form the basis of steroid hormones.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the basis of steroid hormones ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 28, 6)"}]}, {"context": "The major dietary lipids for humans and other animals are animal and plant triglycerides, sterols, and membrane phospholipids. The process of lipid metabolism synthesizes and degrades the lipid stores and produces the structural and functional lipids characteristic of individual tissues.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the process of metabolic metabolism ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 29, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In animals, when there is an oversupply of dietary carbohydrate, the excess carbohydrate is converted to triglycerides. This involves the synthesis of fatty acids from acetyl-CoA and the esterification of fatty acids in the production of triglycerides, a process called lipogenesis. Fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl-CoA units. The acyl chains in the fatty acids are extended by a cycle of reactions that add the acetyl group, reduce it to an alcohol, dehydrate it to an alkene group and then reduce it again to an alkane group. The enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups, in animals and fungi all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional protein, while in plant plastids and bacteria separate enzymes perform each step in the pathway. The fatty acids may be subsequently converted to triglycerides that are packaged in lipoproteins and secreted from the liver.", "qas": [{"question": "where can fatty acids be converted to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 30, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids involves a desaturation reaction, whereby a double bond is introduced into the fatty acyl chain. For example, in humans, the desaturation of stearic acid by stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 produces oleic acid. The doubly unsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid as well as the triply unsaturated \u03b1-linolenic acid cannot be synthesized in mammalian tissues, and are therefore essential fatty acids and must be obtained from the diet.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the body of unsaturated acid ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 31, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Triglyceride synthesis takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum by metabolic pathways in which acyl groups in fatty acyl-CoAs are transferred to the hydroxyl groups of glycerol-3-phosphate and diacylglycerol.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Terpenes and isoprenoids, including the carotenoids, are made by the assembly and modification of isoprene units donated from the reactive precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate. These precursors can be made in different ways. In animals and archaea, the mevalonate pathway produces these compounds from acetyl-CoA, while in plants and bacteria the non-mevalonate pathway uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate as substrates. One important reaction that uses these activated isoprene donors is steroid biosynthesis. Here, the isoprene units are joined together to make squalene and then folded up and formed into a set of rings to make lanosterol. Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids such as cholesterol and ergosterol.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beta oxidation is the metabolic process by which fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria or in peroxisomes to generate acetyl-CoA. For the most part, fatty acids are oxidized by a mechanism that is similar to, but not identical with, a reversal of the process of fatty acid synthesis. That is, two-carbon fragments are removed sequentially from the carboxyl end of the acid after steps of dehydrogenation, hydration, and oxidation to form a beta-keto acid, which is split by thiolysis. The acetyl-CoA is then ultimately converted into ATP, CO, and HO using the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. Hence the citric acid cycle can start at acetyl-CoA when fat is being broken down for energy if there is little or no glucose available. The energy yield of the complete oxidation of the fatty acid palmitate is 106 ATP. Unsaturated and odd-chain fatty acids require additional enzymatic steps for degradation.", "qas": [{"question": "where are fatty acids broken down ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most of the fat found in food is in the form of triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids. Some dietary fat is necessary to facilitate absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and carotenoids. Humans and other mammals have a dietary requirement for certain essential fatty acids, such as linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid) and alpha-linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) because they cannot be synthesized from simple precursors in the diet. Both of these fatty acids are 18-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids differing in the number and position of the double bonds. Most vegetable oils are rich in linoleic acid (safflower, sunflower, and corn oils). Alpha-linolenic acid is found in the green leaves of plants, and in selected seeds, nuts, and legumes (in particular flax, rapeseed, walnut, and soy). Fish oils are particularly rich in the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). A large number of studies have shown positive health benefits associated with consumption of omega-3 fatty acids on infant development, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and various mental illnesses, such as depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and dementia. In contrast, it is now well-established that consumption of trans fats, such as those present in partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Fats that are good for you can be turned into trans fats by overcooking.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A few studies have suggested that total dietary fat intake is linked to an increased risk of obesity and diabetes. However, a number of very large studies, including the Women's Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial, an eight-year study of 49,000 women, the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, revealed no such links. None of these studies suggested any connection between percentage of calories from fat and risk of cancer, heart disease, or weight gain. The Nutrition Source, a website maintained by the Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, summarizes the current evidence on the impact of dietary fat: \"Detailed research\u2014much of it done at Harvard\u2014shows that the total amount of fat in the diet isn't really linked with weight or disease.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Introductory", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nomenclature", "qas": []}, {"context": "Databases", "qas": []}, {"context": "General", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lie algebra", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In mathematics, a Lie algebra (pronounced \"Lee\") is a vector space formula_1 together with a non-associative, alternating bilinear map formula_2, called the Lie bracket, satisfying the Jacobi identity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie algebras are closely related to Lie groups, which are groups that are also smooth manifolds, with the property that the group operations of multiplication and inversion are smooth maps. Any Lie group gives rise to a Lie algebra. Conversely, to any finite-dimensional Lie algebra over real or complex numbers, there is a corresponding connected Lie group unique up to covering (Lie's third theorem). This correspondence between Lie groups and Lie algebras allows one to study Lie groups in terms of Lie algebras.", "qas": [{"question": "what allows one to study groups in terms of lie symmetry ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Lie algebras and their representations are used extensively in physics, notably in quantum mechanics and particle physics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie algebras were so termed by Hermann Weyl after Sophus Lie in the 1930s. In older texts, the name \"infinitesimal group\" is used.", "qas": [{"question": "when did hermann weyl die ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lie algebras were introduced to study the concept of infinitesimal transformations by Marius Sophus Lie in the 1870s, and independently discovered by Wilhelm Killing in the 1880s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lie algebra is a vector space formula_3 over some field formula_4 together with a binary operation formula_5 called the Lie bracket that satisfies the following axioms:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nUsing bilinearity to expand the Lie bracket formula_13 and using alternativity shows that formula_14 for all elements \"x\", \"y\" in formula_8, showing that bilinearity and alternativity together imply", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is customary to express a Lie algebra in lower-case fraktur, like formula_8. If a Lie algebra is associated with a Lie group, then the spelling of the Lie algebra is the same as that Lie group. For example, the Lie algebra of SU(\"n\") is written as formula_19.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Consider formula_20, with the bracket defined by \nwhere formula_22 is the cross product. The bilinearity, skew-symmetry, and Jacobi identity are all known properties of the cross product. Concretely, if formula_23 is the standard basis, then the bracket operation is completely determined by the relations:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Elements of a Lie algebra formula_8 are said to be generators of the Lie algebra if the smallest subalgebra of formula_8 containing them is formula_8 itself. The \"dimension\" of a Lie algebra is its dimension as a vector space over \"F\". The cardinality of a minimal generating set of a Lie algebra is always less than or equal to its dimension.", "qas": []}, {"context": "See also the classification of low-dimensional real Lie algebras for the low-dimensional case.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lie bracket is not associative in general, meaning that formula_29 need not equal formula_30. (However, it is \"flexible\".) Nonetheless, much of the terminology that was developed in the theory of associative rings or associative algebras is commonly applied to Lie algebras. A subspace formula_31 that is closed under the Lie bracket is called a \"Lie subalgebra\". If a subspace formula_32 satisfies a stronger condition that", "qas": []}, {"context": "then formula_34 is called an \"ideal\" in the Lie algebra formula_8. A \"homomorphism\" between two Lie algebras (over the same base field) is a linear map that is compatible with the respective Lie brackets:", "qas": []}, {"context": "for all elements \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_8. As in the theory of associative rings, ideals are precisely the kernels of homomorphisms; given a Lie algebra formula_8 and an ideal formula_34 in it, one constructs the \"factor algebra\" or \"quotient algebra\" formula_40, and the first isomorphism theorem holds for Lie algebras.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let \"S\" be a subset of formula_8. The set of elements \"x\" such that formula_42 for all \"s\" in \"S\" forms a subalgebra called the centralizer of \"S\". The centralizer of formula_8 itself is called the \"center\" of formula_8. Similar to centralizers, if \"S\" is a subspace, then the set of \"x\" such that formula_45 is in \"S\" for all \"s\" in \"S\" forms a subalgebra called the normalizer of \"S\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Given two Lie algebras formula_46 and formula_47, their direct sum is the Lie algebra consisting of the vector space\nformula_48, of the pairs formula_49, with the operation", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let formula_8 be a Lie algebra and formula_52 an ideal of formula_8. If the canonical map formula_54 splits (i.e., admits a section), then formula_8 is said to be a semidirect product of formula_52 and formula_57, formula_58. See also semidirect sum of Lie algebras.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Levi's theorem says that a finite-dimensional Lie algebra is a semidirect product of its radical and the complementary subalgebra (Levi subalgebra).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A derivation on the Lie algebra formula_8 (in fact on any non-associative algebra) is a linear map formula_60 that obeys the Leibniz law, that is,\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\" in the algebra. For any \"x\", formula_62 is a derivation; a consequence of the Jacobi identity. Thus, the image of formula_63 lies in the subalgebra of formula_64 consisting of derivations on formula_8. A derivation that happens to be in the image of formula_63 is called an inner derivation. If formula_8 is semisimple, every derivation on formula_8 is inner.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let \"V\" be a finite-dimensional vector space over a field \"F\", formula_69 the Lie algebra of linear transformations and formula_70 a Lie subalgebra. Then formula_8 is said to be split if the roots of the characteristic polynomials of all linear transformations in formula_8 are in the base field \"F\". More generally, a finite-dimensional Lie algebra formula_8 is said to be split if it has a Cartan subalgebra formula_74 such that, for the adjoint representation formula_75, the image formula_76 is split; see split Lie algebra for further information.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Any vector space formula_77 endowed with the identically zero Lie bracket becomes a Lie algebra. Such Lie algebras are called abelian, cf. below. Any one-dimensional Lie algebra over a field is abelian, by the antisymmetry of the Lie bracket.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Every subalgebra (subspace closed under the Lie bracket) of a Lie algebra is a Lie algebra in its own right.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Any Lie group defines an associated real Lie algebra formula_93. The definition in general is somewhat technical, but in the case of a real matrix group \"G\", it can be formulated via the exponential map, or the matrix exponential. The Lie algebra formula_8 of \"G\" may be computed as\nThe Lie bracket of formula_8 is given by the commutator of matrices, formula_97. The following are examples of Lie algebras of matrix Lie groups:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nGiven a vector space \"V\", let formula_69 denote the Lie algebra consisting of all linear endomorphisms of \"V\", with bracket given by formula_97. A \"representation\" of a Lie algebra formula_8 on \"V\" is a Lie algebra homomorphism", "qas": []}, {"context": "A representation is said to be \"faithful\" if its kernel is zero. Ado's theorem states that every finite-dimensional Lie algebra has a faithful representation on a finite-dimensional vector space.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For any Lie algebra formula_8, we can define a representation\ngiven by formula_123 is a representation of formula_8 on the vector space formula_8 called the adjoint representation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One important aspect of the study of Lie algebras (especially semisimple Lie algebras) is the study of their representations. (Indeed, most of the books listed in the references section devote a substantial fraction of their pages to representation theory.) Although Ado's theorem is an important result, the primary goal of representation theory is not to find a faithful representation of a given Lie algebra formula_8. Indeed, in the semisimple case, the adjoint representation is already faithful. Rather the goal is to understand \"all\" possible representation of formula_8, up to the natural notion of equivalence. In the semisimple case, Weyl's theorem says that every finite-dimensional representation is a direct sum of irreducible representations (those with no nontrivial invariant subspaces). The irreducible representations, in turn, are classified by a theorem of the highest weight.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The representation theory of Lie algebras plays an important role in various parts of theoretical physics. There, one considers operators on the space of states that satisfy certain natural commutation relations. These commutation relations typically come from a symmetry of the problem\u2014specifically, they are the relations of the Lie algebra of the relevant symmetry group. An example would be the angular momentum operators, whose commutation relations are those of the Lie algebra formula_111 of the rotation group SO(3). Typically, the space of states is very far from being irreducible under the pertinent operators, but one can attempt to decompose it into irreducible pieces. In doing so, one needs to know what the irreducible representations of the given Lie algebra are. In the study of the quantum hydrogen atom, for example, quantum mechanics textbooks give (without calling it that) a classification of the irreducible representations of the Lie algebra formula_111.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie algebras can be classified to some extent. In particular, this has an application to the classification of Lie groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Analogously to abelian, nilpotent, and solvable groups, defined in terms of the derived subgroups, one can define abelian, nilpotent, and solvable Lie algebras.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lie algebra formula_8 is \"abelian\" if the Lie bracket vanishes, i.e. [\"x\",\"y\"] = 0, for all \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_8. Abelian Lie algebras correspond to commutative (or abelian) connected Lie groups such as vector spaces formula_132 or tori formula_133, and are all of the form formula_134 meaning an \"n\"-dimensional vector space with the trivial Lie bracket.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A more general class of Lie algebras is defined by the vanishing of all commutators of given length. A Lie algebra formula_8 is \"nilpotent\" if the lower central series", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nLie rings need not be Lie groups under addition. Any Lie algebra is an example of a Lie ring. Any associative ring can be made into a Lie ring by defining a bracket operator formula_82. Conversely to any Lie algebra there is a corresponding ring, called the universal enveloping algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie rings are used in the study of finite p-groups through the \"Lazard correspondence. The lower central factors of a \"p\"-group are finite abelian \"p\"-groups, so modules over Z/\"p\"Z\"'. The direct sum of the lower central factors is given the structure of a Lie ring by defining the bracket to be the commutator of two coset representatives. The Lie ring structure is enriched with another module homomorphism, the \"p\"th power map, making the associated Lie ring a so-called restricted Lie ring.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie rings are also useful in the definition of a p-adic analytic groups and their endomorphisms by studying Lie algebras over rings of integers such as the p-adic integers. The definition of finite groups of Lie type due to Chevalley involves restricting from a Lie algebra over the complex numbers to a Lie algebra over the integers, and the reducing modulo \"p\" to get a Lie algebra over a finite field.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lie group", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In mathematics, a Lie group (pronounced \"Lee\") is a group that is also a differentiable manifold, with the property that the group operations are smooth. Lie groups are named after Norwegian mathematician Sophus Lie, who laid the foundations of the theory of continuous transformation groups.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a finite manifold ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In rough terms, a Lie group is a continuous group, that is, one whose elements are described by several real parameters. As such, Lie groups provide a natural model for the concept of continuous symmetry, such as rotational symmetry in three dimensions. Lie groups are widely used in many parts of modern mathematics and physics. Lie's original motivation for introducing Lie groups was to model the continuous symmetries of differential equations, in much the same way that finite groups are used in Galois theory to model the discrete symmetries of algebraic equations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie groups are smooth differentiable manifolds and as such can be studied using differential calculus, in contrast with the case of more general topological groups. One of the key ideas in the theory of Lie groups is to replace the \"global\" object, the group, with its \"local\" or linearized version, which Lie himself called its \"infinitesimal group\" and which has since become known as its Lie algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie groups play an enormous role in modern geometry, on several different levels. Felix Klein argued in his Erlangen program that one can consider various \"geometries\" by specifying an appropriate transformation group that leaves certain geometric properties invariant. Thus Euclidean geometry corresponds to the choice of the group E(3) of distance-preserving transformations of the Euclidean space R, conformal geometry corresponds to enlarging the group to the conformal group, whereas in projective geometry one is interested in the properties invariant under the projective group. This idea later led to the notion of a G-structure, where \"G\" is a Lie group of \"local\" symmetries of a manifold.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie groups (and their associated Lie algebras) play a major role in modern physics, with the Lie group typically playing the role of a symmetry of a physical system. Here, the representations of the Lie group (or of its Lie algebra) are especially important. Representation theory is used extensively in particle physics. Groups whose representations are of particular importance include the rotation group SO(3) (or its double cover SU(2)), the special unitary group SU(3) and the Poincar\u00e9 group.", "qas": [{"question": "what group plays a symmetry of a symmetry of a physical system ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On a \"global\" level, whenever a Lie group acts on a geometric object, such as a Riemannian or a symplectic manifold, this action provides a measure of rigidity and yields a rich algebraic structure. The presence of continuous symmetries expressed via a Lie group action on a manifold places strong constraints on its geometry and facilitates analysis on the manifold. Linear actions of Lie groups are especially important, and are studied in representation theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1940s\u20131950s, Ellis Kolchin, Armand Borel, and Claude Chevalley realised that many foundational results concerning Lie groups can be developed completely algebraically, giving rise to the theory of algebraic groups defined over an arbitrary field. This insight opened new possibilities in pure algebra, by providing a uniform construction for most finite simple groups, as well as in algebraic geometry. The theory of automorphic forms, an important branch of modern number theory, deals extensively with analogues of Lie groups over adele rings; \"p\"-adic Lie groups play an important role, via their connections with Galois representations in number theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A real Lie group is a group that is also a finite-dimensional real smooth manifold, in which the group operations of multiplication and inversion are smooth maps. Smoothness of the group multiplication", "qas": [{"question": "smoothness of the group matrix group groups smoothness of the group multiplication group group of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness of the group multiplication group smoothness ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 7, 1)"}, {"question": "what is a real lie group that is not a subset of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "means that \"\u03bc\" is a smooth mapping of the product manifold into \"G\". These two requirements can be combined to the single requirement that the mapping\nbe a smooth mapping of the product manifold into \"G\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nWe now present an example of a group with an uncountable number of elements that is not a Lie group under a certain topology. The group given by", "qas": []}, {"context": "with formula_10 a \"fixed\" irrational number, is a subgroup of the torus formula_11 that is not a Lie group when given the subspace topology. If we take any small neighborhood formula_12 of a point formula_13 in formula_14, for example, the portion of formula_14 in formula_12 is disconnected. The group formula_14 winds repeatedly around the torus and forms a dense subgroup of formula_11.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The group formula_14 can, however, be given a different topology, in which the distance between two points formula_20 is defined as the length of the shortest path \"in the group H\" joining formula_21 to formula_22. In this topology, formula_14 is identified homeomorphically with the real line by identifying each element with the number formula_24 in the definition of formula_14. With this topology, formula_14 is just the group of real numbers under addition and is therefore a Lie group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The group formula_14 is an example of a \"Lie subgroup\" of a Lie group that is not closed. See the discussion below of Lie subgroups in the section on basic concepts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let denote the group of invertible matrices with entries in C. Any closed subgroup of is a Lie group; Lie groups of this sort are called matrix Lie groups. Since most of the interesting examples of Lie groups can be realized as matrix Lie groups, some textbooks restrict attention to this class, including those of Hall and Rossmann. Restricting attention to matrix Lie groups simplifies the definition of the Lie algebra and the exponential map. The following are standard examples of matrix Lie groups.\nAll of the preceding examples fall under the heading of the classical groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A complex Lie group is defined in the same way using complex manifolds rather than real ones (example: ), and similarly, using an alternate metric completion of Q, one can define a \"p\"-adic Lie group over the \"p\"-adic numbers, a topological group in which each point has a \"p\"-adic neighborhood. Hilbert's fifth problem asked whether replacing differentiable manifolds with topological or analytic ones can yield new examples. The answer to this question turned out to be negative: in 1952, Gleason, Montgomery and Zippin showed that if \"G\" is a topological manifold with continuous group operations, then there exists exactly one analytic structure on \"G\" which turns it into a Lie group (see also Hilbert\u2013Smith conjecture). If the underlying manifold is allowed to be infinite-dimensional (for example, a Hilbert manifold), then one arrives at the notion of an infinite-dimensional Lie group. It is possible to define analogues of many Lie groups over finite fields, and these give most of the examples of finite simple groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The language of category theory provides a concise definition for Lie groups: a Lie group is a group object in the category of smooth manifolds. This is important, because it allows generalization of the notion of a Lie group to Lie supergroups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lie group can be defined as a (Hausdorff) topological group that, near the identity element, looks like a transformation group, with no reference to differentiable manifolds. First, we define an immersely linear Lie group to be a subgroup \"G\" of the general linear group formula_32 such that\n(For example, a closed subgroup of formula_32; that is, a matrix Lie group satisfies the above conditions.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then a \"Lie group\" is defined as a topological group that (1) is locally isomorphic near the identities to an immersely linear Lie group and (2) has at most countably many connected components. Showing the topological definition is equivalent to the usual one is technical (and the beginning readers should skip the following) but is done roughly as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The topological definition implies the statement that if two Lie groups are isomorphic as topological groups, then they are isomorphic as Lie groups. In fact, it states the general principle that, to a large extent, \"the topology of a Lie group\" together with the group law determines the geometry of the group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie groups occur in abundance throughout mathematics and physics. Matrix groups or algebraic groups are (roughly) groups of matrices (for example, orthogonal and symplectic groups), and these give most of the more common examples of Lie groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The only connected Lie groups with dimension one are the real line formula_40 (with the group operation being addition) and the circle group formula_41 of complex numbers with absolute value one (with the group operation being multiplication). The formula_41 group is often denoted as formula_43, the group of formula_44 unitary matrices.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In two dimensions, if we restrict attention to simply connected groups, then they are classified by their Lie algebras. There are (up to isomorphism) only two Lie algebras of dimension two. The associated simply connected Lie groups are formula_45 (with the group operation being vector addition) and the affine group in dimension one, described in the previous subsection under \"first examples.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThere are several standard ways to form new Lie groups from old ones:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some examples of groups that are \"not\" Lie groups (except in the trivial sense that any group can be viewed as a 0-dimensional Lie group, with the discrete topology), are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nTo every Lie group we can associate a Lie algebra whose underlying vector space is the tangent space of the Lie group at the identity element and which completely captures the local structure of the group. Informally we can think of elements of the Lie algebra as elements of the group that are \"infinitesimally close\" to the identity, and the Lie bracket of the Lie algebra is related to the commutator of two such infinitesimal elements. Before giving the abstract definition we give a few examples:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The concrete definition given above for matrix groups is easy to work with, but has some minor problems: to use it we first need to represent a Lie group as a group of matrices, but not all Lie groups can be represented in this way, and even it is not obvious that the Lie algebra is independent of the representation we use. To get around these problems we give \nthe general definition of the Lie algebra of a Lie group (in 4 steps):", "qas": []}, {"context": "This Lie algebra formula_51 is finite-dimensional and it has the same dimension as the manifold \"G\". The Lie algebra of \"G\" determines \"G\" up to \"local isomorphism\", where two Lie groups are called locally isomorphic if they look the same near the identity element.\nProblems about Lie groups are often solved by first solving the corresponding problem for the Lie algebras, and the result for groups then usually follows easily. \nFor example, simple Lie groups are usually classified by first classifying the corresponding Lie algebras.", "qas": []}, {"context": "We could also define a Lie algebra structure on \"T\" using right invariant vector fields instead of left invariant vector fields. This leads to the same Lie algebra, because the inverse map on \"G\" can be used to identify left invariant vector fields with right invariant vector fields, and acts as \u22121 on the tangent space \"T\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lie algebra structure on \"T\" can also be described as follows:\nthe commutator operation", "qas": []}, {"context": "on \"G\" \u00d7 \"G\" sends (\"e\",\u00a0\"e\") to \"e\", so its derivative yields a bilinear operation on \"TG\". This bilinear operation is actually the zero map, but the second derivative, under the proper identification of tangent spaces, yields an operation that satisfies the axioms of a Lie bracket, and it is equal to twice the one defined through left-invariant vector fields.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If \"G\" and \"H\" are Lie groups, then a Lie group homomorphism \"f\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\" is a smooth group homomorphism. In the case of complex Lie groups, such a homomorphism is required to be a holomorphic map. However, these requirements are a bit stringent; every continuous homomorphism between real Lie groups turns out to be (real) analytic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The composition of two Lie homomorphisms is again a homomorphism, and the class of all Lie groups, together with these morphisms, forms a category. Moreover, every Lie group homomorphism induces a homomorphism between the corresponding Lie algebras. Let formula_53 be a Lie group homomorphism and let formula_54 be its derivative at the identity. If we identify the Lie algebras of \"G\" and \"H\" with their tangent spaces at the identity elements then formula_54 is a map between the corresponding Lie algebras:\nOne can show that formula_54 is actually a Lie algebra homomorphism (meaning that it is a linear map which preserves the Lie bracket). In the language of category theory, we then have a covariant functor from the category of Lie groups to the category of Lie algebras which sends a Lie group to its Lie algebra and a Lie group homomorphism to its derivative at the identity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Two Lie groups are called \"isomorphic\" if there exists a bijective homomorphism between them whose inverse is also a Lie group homomorphism. Equivalently, it is a diffeomorphism which is also a group homomorphism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Isomorphic Lie groups necessarily have isomorphic Lie algebras; it is then reasonable to ask how isomorphism classes of Lie groups relate to isomorphism classes of Lie algebras.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first result in this direction is Lie's third theorem, which states that every finite-dimensional, real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of some (linear) Lie group. One way to prove Lie's third theorem is to use Ado's theorem, which says every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is isomorphic to a matrix Lie algebra. Meanwhile, for every finite-dimensional matrix Lie algebra, there is a linear group (matrix Lie group) with this algebra as its Lie algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the other hand, Lie groups with isomorphic Lie algebras need not be isomorphic. Furthermore, this result remains true even if we assume the groups are connected. To put it differently, the \"global\" structure of a Lie group is not determined by its Lie algebra; for example, if \"Z\" is any discrete subgroup of the center of \"G\" then \"G\" and \"G\"/\"Z\" have the same Lie algebra (see the table of Lie groups for examples). An example of importance in physics are the groups SU(2) and SO(3). These two groups have isomorphic Lie algebras, but the groups themselves are not isomorphic, because SU(2) is simply connected but SO(3) is not.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the other hand, if we require that the Lie group be simply connected, then the global structure is determined by its Lie algebra: two simply connected Lie groups with isomorphic Lie algebras are isomorphic. (See the next subsection for more information about simply connected Lie groups.) In light of Lie's third theorem, we may therefore say that there is a one-to-one correspondence between isomorphism classes of finite-dimensional real Lie algebras and isomorphism classes of simply connected Lie groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lie group \"G\" is said to be simply connected if every loop in \"G\" can be shrunk continuously to a point in \"G\". This notion is important because of the following result that has simple connectedness as a hypothesis:\nLie's third theorem says that every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a Lie group. It follows from Lie's third theorem and the preceding result that every finite-dimensional real Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of a \"unique\" simply connected Lie group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An example of a simply connected group is the special unitary group SU(2), which as a manifold is the 3-sphere. The rotation group SO(3), on the other hand, is not simply connected. (See Topology of SO(3).) The failure of SO(3) to be simply connected is intimately connected to the distinction between integer spin and half-integer spin in quantum mechanics. Other examples of simply connected Lie groups include the special unitary group SU(n), the spin group (double cover of rotation group) Spin(n) for formula_68, and the compact symplectic group Sp(n).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Methods for determining whether a Lie group is simply connected or not are discussed in the article on fundamental groups of Lie groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential map from the Lie algebra formula_69 of the general linear group formula_70 to formula_70 is defined by the matrix exponential, given by the usual power series:", "qas": []}, {"context": "for matrices formula_73. If formula_58 is a closed subgroup of formula_70, then the exponential map takes the Lie algebra of formula_58 into formula_58; thus, we have an exponential map for all matrix groups. Every element of formula_58 that is sufficiently close to the identity is the exponential of a matrix in the Lie algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The definition above is easy to use, but it is not defined for Lie groups that are not matrix groups, and it is not clear that the exponential map of a Lie group does not depend on its representation as a matrix group. We can solve both problems using a more abstract definition of the exponential map that works for all Lie groups, as follows.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For each vector formula_73 in the Lie algebra formula_51 of formula_58 (i.e., the tangent space to formula_58 at the identity), one proves that there is a unique one-parameter subgroup formula_83 such that formula_84. Saying that formula_85 is a one-parameter subgroup means simply that formula_85 is a smooth map into formula_58 and that", "qas": []}, {"context": "for all \"s\" and \"t\". The operation on the right hand side is the group multiplication in \"G\". The formal similarity of this formula with the one valid for the exponential function justifies the definition", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is called the exponential map, and it maps the Lie algebra formula_51 into the Lie group \"G\". It provides a diffeomorphism between a neighborhood of 0 in formula_51 and a neighborhood of \"e\" in \"G\". This exponential map is a generalization of the exponential function for real numbers (because R is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of positive real numbers with multiplication), for complex numbers (because C is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of non-zero complex numbers with multiplication) and for matrices (because M(\"n\", R) with the regular commutator is the Lie algebra of the Lie group GL(\"n\", R) of all invertible matrices).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because the exponential map is surjective on some neighbourhood \"N\" of \"e\", it is common to call elements of the Lie algebra infinitesimal generators of the group \"G\". The subgroup of \"G\" generated by \"N\" is the identity component of \"G\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential map and the Lie algebra determine the \"local group structure\" of every connected Lie group, because of the Baker\u2013Campbell\u2013Hausdorff formula: there exists a neighborhood \"U\" of the zero element of formula_51, such that for \"X\", \"Y\" in \"U\" we have", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the omitted terms are known and involve Lie brackets of four or more elements. In case \"X\" and \"Y\" commute, this formula reduces to the familiar exponential law .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential map relates Lie group homomorphisms. That is, if formula_94 is a Lie group homomorphism and formula_95 the induced map on the corresponding Lie algebras, then for all formula_96 we have\nIn other words, the following diagram commutes,", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential map from the Lie algebra to the Lie group is not always onto, even if the group is connected (though it does map onto the Lie group for connected groups that are either compact or nilpotent). For example, the exponential map of SL(2, R) is not surjective. Also, exponential map is not surjective nor injective for infinite-dimensional (see below) Lie groups modelled on \"C\" Fr\u00e9chet space, even from arbitrary small neighborhood of 0 to corresponding neighborhood of 1.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lie subgroup \"H\" of a Lie group \"G\" is a Lie group that is a subset of \"G\" and such that the inclusion map from \"H\" to \"G\" is an injective immersion and group homomorphism. According to Cartan's theorem, a closed subgroup of \"G\" admits a unique smooth structure which makes it an embedded Lie subgroup of \"G\"\u2014i.e. a Lie subgroup such that the inclusion map is a smooth embedding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Examples of non-closed subgroups are plentiful; for example take \"G\" to be a torus of dimension \u2265 2, and let \"H\" be a one-parameter subgroup of \"irrational slope\", i.e. one that winds around in \"G\". Then there is a Lie group homomorphism \u03c6 : R \u2192 \"G\" with \"H\" as its image. The closure of \"H\" will be a sub-torus in \"G\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential map gives a one-to-one correspondence between the connected Lie subgroups of a connected Lie group \"G\" and the subalgebras of the Lie algebra of \"G\". Typically, the subgroup corresponding to a subalgebra is not a closed subgroup. There is no criterion solely based on the structure of \"G\" which determines which subalgebras correspond to closed subgroups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One important aspect of the study of Lie groups is their representations, that is, the way they can act (linearly) on vector spaces. In physics, Lie groups often encode the symmetries of a physical system. The way one makes use of this symmetry to help analyze the system is often through representation theory. Consider, for example, the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation in quantum mechanics, formula_98. Assume the system in question has the rotation group SO(3) as a symmetry, meaning that the Hamiltonian operator formula_99 commutes with the action of SO(3) on the wave function formula_100. (One important example of such a system is the Hydrogen atom.) This assumption does not necessarily mean that the solutions formula_100 are rotationally invariant functions. Rather, it means that the \"space\" of solutions to formula_98 is invariant under rotations (for each fixed value of formula_103). This space, therefore, constitutes a representation of SO(3). These representations have been and the classification leads to a substantial simplification of the problem, essentially converting a three-dimensional partial differential equation to a one-dimensional ordinary differential equation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The case of a connected compact Lie group \"K\" (including the just-mentioned case of SO(3)) is particularly tractable. In that case, every finite-dimensional representation of \"K\" decomposes as a direct sum of irreducible representations. The irreducible representations, in turn, were classified by Hermann Weyl. The classification is in terms of the \"highest weight\" of the representation. The classification is closely related to the classification of representations of a semisimple Lie algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One can also study (in general infinite-dimensional) unitary representations of an arbitrary Lie group (not necessarily compact). For example, it is possible to give a relatively simple explicit description of the representations of the group SL(2,R) and the representations of the Poincar\u00e9 group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the most authoritative source on the early history of Lie groups (Hawkins, p.\u00a01), Sophus Lie himself considered the winter of 1873\u20131874 as the birth date of his theory of continuous groups. Hawkins, however, suggests that it was \"Lie's prodigious research activity during the four-year period from the fall of 1869 to the fall of 1873\" that led to the theory's creation (\"ibid\"). Some of Lie's early ideas were developed in close collaboration with Felix Klein. Lie met with Klein every day from October 1869 through 1872: in Berlin from the end of October 1869 to the end of February 1870, and in Paris, G\u00f6ttingen and Erlangen in the subsequent two years (\"ibid\", p.\u00a02). Lie stated that all of the principal results were obtained by 1884. But during the 1870s all his papers (except the very first note) were published in Norwegian journals, which impeded recognition of the work throughout the rest of Europe (\"ibid\", p.\u00a076). In 1884 a young German mathematician, Friedrich Engel, came to work with Lie on a systematic treatise to expose his theory of continuous groups. From this effort resulted the three-volume \"Theorie der Transformationsgruppen\", published in 1888, 1890, and 1893. The term \"groupes de Lie\" first appeared in French in 1893 in the thesis of Lie's student Arthur Tresse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie's ideas did not stand in isolation from the rest of mathematics. In fact, his interest in the geometry of differential equations was first motivated by the work of Carl Gustav Jacobi, on the theory of partial differential equations of first order and on the equations of classical mechanics. Much of Jacobi's work was published posthumously in the 1860s, generating enormous interest in France and Germany (Hawkins, p.\u00a043). Lie's \"id\u00e9e fixe\" was to develop a theory of symmetries of differential equations that would accomplish for them what \u00c9variste Galois had done for algebraic equations: namely, to classify them in terms of group theory. Lie and other mathematicians showed that the most important equations for special functions and orthogonal polynomials tend to arise from group theoretical symmetries. In Lie's early work, the idea was to construct a theory of \"continuous groups\", to complement the theory of discrete groups that had developed in the theory of modular forms, in the hands of Felix Klein and Henri Poincar\u00e9. The initial application that Lie had in mind was to the theory of differential equations. On the model of Galois theory and polynomial equations, the driving conception was of a theory capable of unifying, by the study of symmetry, the whole area of ordinary differential equations. However, the hope that Lie Theory would unify the entire field of ordinary differential equations was not fulfilled. Symmetry methods for ODEs continue to be studied, but do not dominate the subject. There is a differential Galois theory, but it was developed by others, such as Picard and Vessiot, and it provides a theory of quadratures, the indefinite integrals required to express solutions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Additional impetus to consider continuous groups came from ideas of Bernhard Riemann, on the foundations of geometry, and their further development in the hands of Klein. Thus three major themes in 19th century mathematics were combined by Lie in creating his new theory: the idea of symmetry, as exemplified by Galois through the algebraic notion of a group; geometric theory and the explicit solutions of differential equations of mechanics, worked out by Poisson and Jacobi; and the new understanding of geometry that emerged in the works of Pl\u00fccker, M\u00f6bius, Grassmann and others, and culminated in Riemann's revolutionary vision of the subject.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although today Sophus Lie is rightfully recognized as the creator of the theory of continuous groups, a major stride in the development of their structure theory, which was to have a profound influence on subsequent development of mathematics, was made by Wilhelm Killing, who in 1888 published the first paper in a series entitled \"Die Zusammensetzung der stetigen endlichen Transformationsgruppen\" (\"The composition of continuous finite transformation groups\") (Hawkins, p.\u00a0100). The work of Killing, later refined and generalized by \u00c9lie Cartan, led to classification of semisimple Lie algebras, Cartan's theory of symmetric spaces, and Hermann Weyl's description of representations of compact and semisimple Lie groups using highest weights.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1900 David Hilbert challenged Lie theorists with his Fifth Problem presented at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Weyl brought the early period of the development of the theory of Lie groups to fruition, for not only did he classify irreducible representations of semisimple Lie groups and connect the theory of groups with quantum mechanics, but he also put Lie's theory itself on firmer footing by clearly enunciating the distinction between Lie's \"infinitesimal groups\" (i.e., Lie algebras) and the Lie groups proper, and began investigations of topology of Lie groups. The theory of Lie groups was systematically reworked in modern mathematical language in a monograph by Claude Chevalley.\nLie groups may be thought of as smoothly varying families of symmetries. Examples of symmetries include rotation about an axis. What must be understood is the nature of 'small' transformations, for example, rotations through tiny angles, that link nearby transformations. The mathematical object capturing this structure is called a Lie algebra (Lie himself called them \"infinitesimal groups\"). It can be defined because Lie groups are smooth manifolds, so have tangent spaces at each point.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lie algebra of any compact Lie group (very roughly: one for which the symmetries form a bounded set) can be decomposed as a direct sum of an abelian Lie algebra and some number of simple ones. The structure of an abelian Lie algebra is mathematically uninteresting (since the Lie bracket is identically zero); the interest is in the simple summands. Hence the question arises: what are the simple Lie algebras of compact groups? It turns out that they mostly fall into four infinite families, the \"classical Lie algebras\" A, B, C and D, which have simple descriptions in terms of symmetries of Euclidean space. But there are also just five \"exceptional Lie algebras\" that do not fall into any of these families. E is the largest of these.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lie groups are classified according to their algebraic properties (simple, semisimple, solvable, nilpotent, abelian), their connectedness (connected or simply connected) and their compactness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A first key result is the Levi decomposition, which says that every simply connected Lie group is the semidirect product of a solvable normal subgroup and a semisimple subgroup.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe identity component of any Lie group is an open normal subgroup, and the quotient group is a discrete group. The universal cover of any connected Lie group is a simply connected Lie group, and conversely any connected Lie group is a quotient of a simply connected Lie group by a discrete normal subgroup of the center. Any Lie group \"G\" can be decomposed into discrete, simple, and abelian groups in a canonical way as follows. Write \nso that we have a sequence of normal subgroups\nThen", "qas": []}, {"context": "This can be used to reduce some problems about Lie groups (such as finding their unitary representations) to the same problems for connected simple groups and nilpotent and solvable subgroups of smaller dimension.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nLie groups are often defined to be finite-dimensional, but there are many groups that resemble Lie groups, except for being infinite-dimensional. The simplest way to define infinite-dimensional Lie groups is to model them locally on Banach spaces (as opposed to Euclidean space in the finite-dimensional case), and in this case much of the basic theory is similar to that of finite-dimensional Lie groups. However this is inadequate for many applications, because many natural examples of infinite-dimensional Lie groups are not Banach manifolds. Instead one needs to define Lie groups modeled on more general locally convex topological vector spaces. In this case the relation between the Lie algebra and the Lie group becomes rather subtle, and several results about finite-dimensional Lie groups no longer hold.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The literature is not entirely uniform in its terminology as to exactly which properties of infinite-dimensional groups qualify the group for the prefix \"Lie\" in \"Lie group\". On the Lie algebra side of affairs, things are simpler since the qualifying criteria for the prefix \"Lie\" in \"Lie algebra\" are purely algebraic. For example, an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra may or may not have a corresponding Lie group. That is, there may be a group corresponding to the Lie algebra, but it might not be nice enough to be called a Lie group, or the connection between the group and the Lie algebra might not be nice enough (for example, failure of the exponential map to be onto a neighborhood of the identity). It is the \"nice enough\" that is not universally defined.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some of the examples that have been studied include:\nThe diffeomorphism group of spacetime sometimes appears in attempts to quantize gravity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lake Erie", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Lake Erie () is the fourth-largest lake (by surface area) of the five Great Lakes in North America, and the eleventh-largest globally if measured in terms of surface area. It is the southernmost, shallowest, and smallest by volume of the Great Lakes and therefore also has the shortest average water residence time. At its deepest point Lake Erie is deep.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the main point of deep point lake erie ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 0, 2)"}, {"question": "what is the largest lake in north america ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Situated on the International Boundary between Canada and the United States, Lake Erie's northern shore is the Canadian province of Ontario, specifically the Ontario Peninsula, with the U.S. states of Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York on its western, southern, and eastern shores. These jurisdictions divide the surface area of the lake with water boundaries.", "qas": [{"question": "what divides the surface area of the lake with water boundaries ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The lake was named by the Erie people, a Native American people who lived along its southern shore. The tribal name \"erie\" is a shortened form of the Iroquoian word \"erielhonan\", meaning \"long tail\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Situated below Lake Huron, Erie's primary inlet is the Detroit River. The main natural outflow from the lake is via the Niagara River, which provides hydroelectric power to Canada and the U.S. as it spins huge turbines near Niagara Falls at Lewiston, New York and Queenston, Ontario. Some outflow occurs via the Welland Canal, part of the St. Lawrence Seaway, which diverts water for ship passages from Port Colborne, Ontario on Lake Erie, to St. Catharines on Lake Ontario, an elevation difference of . Lake Erie's environmental health has been an ongoing concern for decades, with issues such as overfishing, pollution, algae blooms, and eutrophication generating headlines.", "qas": [{"question": "where is the detroit river located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Erie (42.2\u00b0 N, 81.2W) has a mean elevation of above sea level. It has a surface area of with a length of and breadth of at its widest points.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is the shallowest of the Great Lakes with an average depth of 10 fathoms 3 feet ( and a maximum depth of For comparison, Lake Superior has an average depth of 80 fathoms 3 feet (, a volume of and shoreline of 2,726 statute miles (4,385\u00a0km). Because it is the shallowest, it is also the warmest of the Great Lakes, and in 1999 this almost became a problem for two nuclear power plants which require cool lake water to keep their reactors cool. The warm summer of 1999 caused lake temperatures to come close to the limit necessary to keep the plants cool. Also because of its shallowness, and in spite of being the warmest lake in the summer, it is also the first to freeze in the winter. The shallowest section of Lake Erie is the western basin where depths average only ; as a result, \"the slightest breeze can kick up lively waves,\" according to a \"New York Times\" reporter in 2004. The \"waves build very quickly\", according to other accounts. Sometimes fierce waves springing up unexpectedly have led to dramatic rescues; in one instance, a Cleveland resident trying to measure the dock near his house became trapped but was rescued by a fire department diver from Avon Lake, Ohio:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This area is also known as the \"thunderstorm capital of Canada\" with \"breathtaking\" lightning displays. Lake Erie is primarily fed by the Detroit River (from Lake Huron and Lake St. Clair) and drains via the Niagara River and Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario. Navigation downstream is provided by the Welland Canal, part of the Saint Lawrence Seaway. Other major contributors to Lake Erie include the Grand River, the Huron River, the Maumee River, the Sandusky River, the Buffalo River, and the Cuyahoga River. The drainage basin covers .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Point Pelee National Park, the southernmost point of the Canadian mainland, is located on a peninsula extending into the lake. Several islands are found in the western end of the lake; these belong to Ohio except for Pelee Island and eight neighboring islands, which are part of Ontario.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Major cities along Lake Erie include Buffalo, New York; Erie, Pennsylvania; Toledo, Ohio; and Cleveland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Islands tend to be located in the western side of the lake and total 31 in number (13 in Canada, 18 in the U.S.). The island-village of Put-in-Bay on South Bass Island attracts young crowds who sometimes wear \"red bucket hats\" and are prone to \"break off cartwheels in the park\" and general merriment. Kelleys Island was depicted by the \"Chicago Tribune\" as having charms that were \"more subtle\" than Put-in-Bay, and offers amenities such as beach lounging, hiking, biking and \"marveling at deep glacial grooves left in limestone.\" Pelee Island is the largest of Erie's islands, accessible by ferry from Leamington, Ontario and Sandusky, Ohio. The island has a \"fragile and unique ecosystem\" with plants rarely found in Canada, such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian (\"Triosteum angustifolium\") and prickly pear cactus, as well as two endangered snakes, the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake. Songbirds migrate to Pelee in spring, and monarch butterflies stop over during the fall.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the highest number of islands in canada ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Erie has a lake retention time of 2.6 years, the shortest of all the Great Lakes. The lake's surface area is . Lake Erie's water level fluctuates with the seasons as in the other Great Lakes. Generally, the lowest levels are in January and February, and the highest in June or July, although there have been exceptions. The average yearly level varies depending on long-term precipitation. Short-term level changes are often caused by seiches that are particularly high when southwesterly winds blow across the length of the lake during storms. These cause water to pile up at the eastern end of the lake. Storm-driven seiches can cause damage onshore. During one storm in November 2003, the water level at Buffalo rose by with waves of for a rise of . Meanwhile, at the western end of the lake, Toledo experienced a similar drop in water level. Lake water is used for drinking purposes.", "qas": [{"question": "how long is lake erie ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 10, 0)"}, {"question": "what is used for drinking purposes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 10, 10)"}]}, {"context": "\nLake Erie was carved out by glacier ice, and in its current form is less than 4,000 years old, which is a short span in geological terms. Before this, the land on which the lake now sits went through several complex stages. A large lowland basin formed over two million years ago as a result of an eastern flowing river that existed well before the Pleistocene ice ages. This ancient drainage system was destroyed by the first major glacier in the area, while it deepened and enlarged the lowland areas, allowing water to settle and form a lake. The glaciers were able to carve away more land on the eastern side of the lowland because the bedrock is made of shale which is softer than the carbonate rocks of dolomite and limestone on the western side. Thus, the eastern and central basins of the modern lake are much deeper than the western basin, which averages only deep and is rich in nutrients and fish. Lake Erie is the shallowest of the Great Lakes because the ice was relatively thin and lacked erosion power when it reached that far south, according to one view.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the lake of the great lakes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 11, 6)"}]}, {"context": "As many as three glaciers advanced and retreated over the land causing temporary lakes to form in the time periods in between each of them. Because each lake had a different volume of water their shorelines rested at differing elevations. The last of these lakes to form, Lake Warren, existed between about 13,000 and 12,000 years ago. It was deeper than the current Lake Erie, so its shoreline existed about inland from the modern one. The shorelines of these lakes left behind high ground sand ridges that cut through swamps and were used as trails for Indians and later, pioneers. These trails became primitive roads which were eventually paved. U.S. Route 30 west of Delphos and U.S. Route 20 west of Norwalk and east of Cleveland were formed in this manner. One can still see some of these ancient sand dunes that formed in the Oak Openings Region in Northwestern Ohio. There, the sandy dry lake bed soil was not enough to support large trees with the exception of a few species of oaks, forming a rare oak savanna.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the time of European contact, there were several groups of Native American cultures living around the shores of the eastern end of the lake. The Erie tribe (from whom the lake takes its name) lived along the southern edge, while the Neutrals (also known as Attawandaron) lived along the northern shore. Near Port Stanley, there is a Native American village dating from the 16th century known as the \"Southwold Earthworks\" where as many as 800 Neutral Native Americans once lived; the archaeological remains include double earth walls winding around the grass-covered perimeter. Europeans named the tribe the \"Neutral Indians\" since these people refused to fight with other tribes. Both tribes were conquered and assimilated by their hostile eastern neighbors, the Iroquois Confederacy between AD 1651 and 1657, in what is referred to as part of the Beaver Wars.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For decades after those wars, the land around eastern Lake Erie was claimed and utilized by the Iroquois as a hunting ground. As the power of the Iroquois waned during the last quarter of the 17th century, several other, mainly Anishinaabe Native American tribes, displaced them from the territories they claimed on the north shore of the lake. There was a legend of a Native American woman named Huldah, who, despairing over her lost British lover, hurled herself from a high rock from Pelee Island.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1669, the Frenchman Louis Jolliet was the first documented European to sight Lake Erie, although there is speculation that \u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9 may have come across it in 1615. Lake Erie was the last of the Great Lakes to be explored by Europeans, since the Iroquois who occupied the Niagara River area were in conflict with the French, and they did not allow explorers or traders to pass through. Explorers followed rivers out of Lake Ontario and portaged directly into Lake Huron. British authorities in Canada were nervous about possible expansion by American settlers across Lake Erie, so Colonel Talbot developed the Talbot Trail in 1809 as a way to stimulate settlement to the area; Talbot recruited settlers from Ireland and Scotland and there are numerous places named after him, such as Port Talbot and the Talbot River and Talbotville in southern Ontario.\nDuring the War of 1812, Oliver Hazard Perry captured an entire British fleet in 1813 near Put-in-Bay, Ohio, despite having inferior numbers. American soldiers swept through the Ontario area around Port Rowan burning towns and villages, but spared a gristmill owned by a Canadian mason named John Backhouse, according to one report. Generally, however, despite the two exceptions being the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 which involved conflicts between the U.S. and Great Britain, relations between the U.S. and Canada have been remarkably friendly with an \"unfortified boundary\" and an agreement \"that has kept all fleets of war off the Great Lakes.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1837, rebellions broke about between Canadian settlers and the British Colonial government. These primarily concerned political reforms and land allocation issues. Some of the rebels stationed themselves in the U.S. and crossed the ice from Sandusky Bay to Pelee Island wearing \"tattered overcoats and worn-out boots\", and carrying muskets, pitchforks, and swords, but the islanders had already fled. Later, there was a battle on the ice with the Royal 32nd regiment, with the rebels being driven to retreat.\nSettlers established commercial fisheries on the north coast of the lake around the 1850s. An important business was fishing. In the pre-Civil War years, railways sprouted everywhere, and around 1852 there were railways circling the lake. Maritime traffic picked up, although the lake was usually closed because of ice from December to early April, and ships had to wait for the ice to clear before proceeding. Since slavery had been abolished in Canada in 1833, but was still legal in southern states of the U.S., a Lake Erie crossing was sometimes required for fugitive slaves seeking freedom:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Merchant shippers lacked modern radar and weather forecasting so vessels were often caught up in intense gales:", "qas": []}, {"context": "There were reports of disasters usually from sea captains passing information to reporters; in 1868, the captain of the \"Grace Whitney\" saw a sunken vessel \"three men clinging to the masthead\" but he could not help because of the gale and high seas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A balloonist named John Steiner of Philadelphia made an ambitious trip across the lake in 1857. He was described in \"The New York Times\" as an \"eronaut\" or \"aeronaut\"; powered boats were called \"propellers\"; and fast was deemed \"railroad speed\". Here's an account of the day-long voyage over the lake:", "qas": [{"question": "an account of the day-long voyage over the lake: voyage over the lake: voyage over the lake: voyage over the lake: voyage over what lake: ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 19, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 1885, lake winds were so strong that water levels dropped substantially, sometimes by as much as two feet, so that at ports such as Toledo, watercraft could not load coal or depart the port.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the history of the lake as a \"fishery\", there has been marked battling by opposing interest groups. Here's an 1895 newspaper account in which critics of commercial fishing issued dire predictions and calling for government action to solve the problem:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Predictions of the lake being over-fished in 1895 were premature, since the fishery has survived commercial and sport fishing, pollution in the middle of the 20th century, invasive species and other ailments, but state and provincial governments, as well as national governments, have played a greater role as time went by. Business boomed; in 1901, the Carnegie Company proposed building a new harbor near Erie in Elk Creek to accommodate shipments from its tube-plant site nearby. In 1913, a memorial to Commodore Perry was built on Put-in-Bay island featuring a Doric column.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Prohibition years from 1919 to 1933, a \"great deal of alcohol crossed Erie\" along with \"mobster corpses\" dumped into the Detroit River which sometimes washed up on the beaches of Pelee Island. According to one account, Al Capone hid a \"fortune\" in the walls of the Middle Island luxury club, but no money was found in it as of 2007 when the building no longer stood. The club had a basement casino with poker tables and slot machines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 20th century, commercial fishing was prevalent, but so was the boom in manufacturing industry around the lake, and often rivers and streams were used as sewers to flush untreated sewage which ended up in the lake. Sometimes poorly constructed sanitary systems meant that when old mains broke, raw sewage would spill directly into the Cuyahoga and into the lake. A report in \"Time\" magazine in 1969 described the lake as a \"gigantic cesspool\" since only three of 62 beaches were rated \"completely safe for swimming\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 1975 the popular commercial fish blue pike had been declared extinct, although the declaration may have been premature. By the 1980s, there were about 130 fishing vessels with about 3,000 workers, but commercial fishing was declining rapidly, particularly from the American side.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2005, the Great Lakes States of Ohio, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Canadian Provinces of Ontario and Quebec endorsed the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Compact (Compact). The Compact was signed into law by President George W. Bush in September 2008. An international water rights policy overseen by the Great Lakes Commission, the Compact aims to prevent diversion of water from Great Lakes to distant states, as well as to set standards for use and conservation. It had support from both political parties, including former United States Senator George Voinovich (R-OH) and former Governor Jennifer Granholm (D-MI), but is not popular in the southwestern states due to frequent drought conditions and water scarcity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like the other Great Lakes, Erie produces lake effect snow when the first cold winds of winter pass over the warm waters. When the difference in temperature between the relatively warm surface water and the colder air reaches a threshold value of 18 to 23 degrees Fahrenheit (-5 to -8 degrees Celsius), then \"lake-effect snow becomes possible:\"", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the lake that produces lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Heavy lake-effect snowfalls can occur when cold air travels or longer over a large unfrozen lake. Lake-effect snow makes Buffalo and Erie the eleventh and thirteenth snowiest places in the entire United States respectively, according to data collected from the National Climatic Data Center. Since winds blow primarily west\u2013to\u2013east along the main axis of the lake, lake effect snow effects are more pronounced on the eastern parts of the lake such as cities such as Buffalo and Erie. Buffalo typically gets of snow each winter, and sometimes of snow; the snowiest city is Syracuse, New York, which can receive heavy snowfall from both the lake effect process and large coastal cyclones. A storm around Christmas in 2001 pounded Buffalo with seven feet of snow.\nThe lake effect ends or its effect is reduced, however, when the lake freezes over. In January 2011, for example, residents of Cleveland were glad when Lake Erie was \"90 percent frozen\" since it meant that the area had \"made it over the hump\" in terms of enduring repeated snowfalls which required much shoveling. Being the shallowest of the Great Lakes, it is the most likely to freeze and frequently does. On February 16, 2010, meteorologists reported that the lake had frozen over marking the first time the lake had completely frozen over since the winter of 1995\u20131996. In contrast, Lake Michigan has never completely frozen over since the warmer and deeper portion is in the south, although it came close to being totally frozen during three harsh winters over the past century. When the lake freezes over, this usually shuts down the lake effect snowfall. In past years, lake ice was so thick that it was possible to drive over it or go sailing on iceboats; but in the first decade of the 21st century, the ice has not been thick enough for such activities. Many lake residents take advantage of the ice and travel; some drive to Canada and back. Here's one account of ice life around Put-in-Bay:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Strong winds have caused lake currents to shift sediment on the bottom, leading to \"wickedly shifting sandbars\" that have been the cause of shipwrecks. But winds can have a peaceful purpose as well; there have been proposals to place electricity\u2013producing wind turbines in windy and shallow points in the lake and along the coast, both in the United States and Canada. In 2010, there were plans for GE to develop five wind turbines to generate 20 megawatts of power by 2012 with plans to generate 1,000 megawatts by 2020; one proposal called for \"gearless turbines\" with 176-foot long blades helped along with magnets. A nonprofit development group near Cleveland was developing plans to construct hundreds of turbines in the lake. A former steel mill site on the eastern edge of the lake in Buffalo, NY has been redeveloped as an urban wind farm in 2007. Known as Steel Winds, the project currently houses 14 turbines capable of generating up to 35 megawatts of electricity. A plan by Samsung to build an offshore wind farm on the north shore of the lake, from Port Maitland to Nanticoke for a distance of , but the plan has been met with opposition from residents for a number of reasons. Canadians near Leamington and Kingsville have organized protest groups to thwart attempts to bring wind turbines to the lake; reasons against the turbines include spoiling lake views as well as possible adverse effects regarding drinking water and commercial fishing. Plans to install turbines in Pigeon Bay, south of Leamington were met with opposition as well. The notion that bird and bat migration may be hurt by the wind turbines has been used to argue against the wind turbines; a reporter in \"The Globe and Mail\" wrote \"Given the tendency of turbines to make mincemeat of things airborne, it doesn't require great imagination to figure out what would happen.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake is also responsible for microclimates that are important to agriculture. Along its north shore is one of the richest areas of Canada's fruit and vegetable production; this southernmost tip, particularly in the area around Leamington, is known as Canada's \"tomato capital\". The area around Port Rowan in Ontario has special trees which grow because of the \"tempering effect of the lake\", and species include tulip trees, flowering dogwood, sassafras and sour gum. In this area there are many greenhouses which produce a \"variety of tropical plants rarely cultivated so far north\", including some species of cacti, because of the lake's tempering effect. Along the southeastern shore of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York is an important grape growing region, as are the islands in the lake. Apple orchards are abundant in northeast Ohio to western New York.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the lake responsible for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "According to one estimate, 34 to 36 inches of water evaporates each year from the surface of the lake, which allows for rainfall and other precipitation in surrounding areas. There are conflicting reports about the overall effect of global warming on the Great Lakes region, including Lake Erie. One account suggests that climate change is causing greater evaporation of lake water, leading to warmer temperatures as well as ice in winter which is less thick or nonexistent, fueling concerns that \"Erie appears to be shrinking\" and is the most likely candidate among the five Great Lakes to \"turn into a festering mud puddle.\" In 2010, the \"Windsor Star\" reported that the lake experienced \"record-breaking temperatures\" reaching in mid-August and compared the lake to a \"bath tub\". But the long term weather patterns are subject to controversy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Erie has a complex ecosystem with many species in constant interaction. Human activity, such as pollution and maritime ship traffic, can affect this environment in numerous ways. The interactions between the new species can sometimes have beneficial effects, as well as harmful effects. Some introductions have been seen as beneficial such as the introduction of Pacific salmon. Occasionally there have been mass die-offs of certain species of fish, sometimes for reasons unknown, such as many numbers of rainbow smelt in May 2010.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of biodiversity does lake lafayette have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The lake has been plagued with a number of invasive species, including zebra and quagga mussels, the goby and the grass carp. One estimate was that there have been 180 invasive species in the Great Lakes, some having traveled in ballast water in international ships. Zebra mussels and gobies have been credited with the increased population and size of smallmouth bass in Lake Erie. In 2008 there were concerns that the \"newest invader swarming in the Great Lakes\", which was the \"bloody-red shrimp\", might harm fish populations and promote algae blooms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Environmentalists and biologists study lake conditions via installations such as the Franz Theodore Stone Laboratory on Gibraltar Island. The lab, which was established in 1895, is the oldest biological field station in the United States. Stone Laboratory was donated to the Ohio State University by Julius Stone in 1925 as part of the university's Ohio Sea Grant College Program. In addition, the Great Lakes Institute of the University of Windsor has experts who study issues such as lake sediment pollution and the flow of contaminants such as phosphorus.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the study of the great lakes institute ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 34, 3)"}]}, {"context": "A list of the common invasive species in Lake Erie include: Zebra Mussels, Quagga Mussels, Round Gobies, Spiny European Water Fleas, Fishhook Water Fleas, the Sea Lamprey, and White Perch. The invasive plant species that fill Lake Erie consist mainly of Eurasian Milfoil, and Purple Loosestrife,", "qas": []}, {"context": "An ongoing concern is that \"nutrient overloading from fertilizers, human and animal waste\", known as eutrophication, in which additional nitrogen and phosphorus enter the lake, will cause plant life to \"run wild and multiply like crazy\". Since there are fewer wetlands, which are like \"Nature's kidneys\" by filtering nutrients, as well as greater \"channelization of waterways\", nutrients in water can cause algal blooms to sprout as well as \"low-oxygen dead zones\" in a complex interaction of natural forces. As of the 2010s much of the phosphorus in the lake comes from fertilizer applied to no-till soybean and corn fields but washed into streams by heavy rains. The algal blooms result from growth of Microcystis, a toxic blue-green algae that the zebra mussels which infest the lake don't eat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There periodically is a \"dead zone\", or region of low oxygen, in the lake whose exact location varies. Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have been studying the lake's blue-green algae blooms, and trying to find ways to predict when they are spreading or where they might hit landfall; typically the blooms arrive late each summer. This problem was extreme in the mid and late 1960s and the Lake Erie Wastewater Management Study (LEWMS) conducted by the Buffalo District of the US Army Corps of Engineers determined that the eutrophication was due to \"point sources\" such as industrial outfalls and municipal sanitary and storm sewer outfalls, as well as \"diffuse sources\", such as overland runoff from farm and forest land. All these sources contribute nutrients, primarily phosphorus, to the lake. Growth of organisms in the lake is then spiked to the point that oxygen levels are depleted. LEWMS made recommendations for reducing point source outflows, as well as reducing farm contributions of phosphorus by changing fertilizer usage, employing \"no-till\" farming and other conservative practices. Many industrial and municipal sources have since then been greatly reduced. The improved farming practices, which were voluntary, were followed for a while, resulting in remarkable recovery of the lake in the 1970s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unfortunately, the conservative practices are not monitored and have not been kept up. One recent account suggests that the seasonal algae blooms in Lake Erie were possibly caused by \"runoff from cities, fertilizers, zebra mussels, and livestock near water.\" A second report focuses on the zebra mussels as being the cause of \"big oxygen-poor dead zones\" since they filter so much sediment that this produces an overgrowth of algae. One report suggests the oxygen-poor zone began about 1993 in the lake's central basin and becomes more pronounced during summer months, but it is somewhat of a mystery why this happens. Some scientists speculate that the dead zone is a naturally occurring phenomenon. Another report cited Ohio's Maumee River as the main source of polluted runoff of phosphorus from industries, municipalities, tributaries and agriculture, and in 2008, satellite images showed the algal bloom heading toward Pelee Island, and possibly heading to Lake Erie's central basin. There have been two-year $2 million studies trying to understand the \"growing zone\" which was described as a \"10-foot-thick layer of cold water at the bottom\", in one area, which stretches \"100 miles across the lake's center\". It kills fish and microscopic creatures of the lake's food chain and fouls the water, and may cause further problems in later years for sport and commercial fishing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Algae blooms continued in early 2013 but new farming techniques, climate change and even a change in Lake Erie's ecosystem make phosphorus pollution more intractable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lake Erie water snake, a subspecies of the northern water snake (\"Nerodia sipedon\"), lives in the vicinity of Ohio's Put-in-Bay Harbor, and had been put on the threatened species list. A threatened species is one which may soon become an endangered species. By 2010, the water snake population was over 12,000 snakes. While they have a non-venomous bite, they are a key predator in the lake's aquatic ecosystem since they feed on mudpuppies and walleye and smallmouth bass. The snake was helpful in keeping the population of goby fish in check. They mate from late May through early June and can be found in large \"mating balls\" with one female bunched with several males.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is a concern that Asian carp might enter the Great Lakes region and alter the ecosystem negatively. They have been described as \"greedy giants that suck plankton from the water with the brutal efficiency of vacuum cleaners\" and scientists worry that they may unravel the \"aquatic food web\" by crowding out other species.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There was concern in 2007 that snakehead fish could get into the Great Lakes area. Officials warn that if the fish invades, it could \"decimate the aquatic food chain\". A YouTube video mentioned in a newspaper account has a man claiming that the fish could \"bite your entire hand off\". The fish can reach in length and \"survive out of water for four days\" and \"has a mouth full of teeth that can shear fish in half\" and can \"eat ducks and small mammals.\" The snakehead fish can not live in a lake that has completely frozen over. They must come to the surface to breathe via their swim bladder.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the main concern in 2008 that discovered that snakehead fish could get into the great lakes area ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1999, Doppler radar weather sensors detected millions of mayflies heading for Presque Isle in blue and green splotches on the radar in clouds measuring long. These insects were a sign of Lake Erie's move back to health, since the mayflies require clean water to thrive. Biologist Masteller of Penn State Erie declared the bugs to be a \"nice nuisance\" since they signified the lake's return to health after forty years of absence. Each is an inch and a half long; the three main species of mayflies are \"Ephemera simulans\", \"Hexagenia rigida\" and \"Hexagenia limbata\". The insects mate over a 72-hour period from June through September; they fly in masses up to the shore, mate in the air, then females lay up to 8,000 eggs each over the water; the eggs sink back down and the cycle repeats. Sometimes the clouds of mayflies have caused power outages as well as causing roads to become slippery with squashed insects. Since zebra mussels filter extra nutrients from the lake, it allows the mayfly larvae to thrive.\nThere have been incidents of birds dying from botulism, in 2000, and in 2002. Birds affected included grebes, common and red-breasted mergansers, loons, diving ducks, ring-billed gulls and herring gulls. One account suggests that bird populations are in trouble, notably the woodland warbler, which had population declines around 60 percent in 2008. Possible causes for declines in bird populations are farming practices, loss of habitats, soil depletion and erosion, and toxic chemicals. In 2006, there were concerns of possible bird flu after two wild swans on the lake were found diseased, but it was learned that they did not contain the deadly H5N1 virus. There were sightings of a magnificent frigatebird, a tropical bird with a two-metre wingspan, over the lake in 2008.", "qas": [{"question": "a tropical bird with a two-metre wingspan is called what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 43, 12)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Erie infamously became very polluted in the 1960s and 1970s as a result of the quantity of heavy industry situated in cities on its shores, with reports of bacteria-laden beaches and fish contaminated by industrial waste. In the 1970s, patches of the lake were declared dead because of industrial waste as well as sewage from runoffs; as \"The New York Times\" reporter Denny Lee wrote in 2004, \"The lake, after all, is where the Rust Belt meets the water.\"", "qas": [{"question": "in what decade did the new york times report dead ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 44, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The water quality deteriorated partially due to increasing levels of the nutrient phosphorus in both the water and lake bottom sediments. The resultant high nitrogen levels in the water caused eutrophication, which resulted in algal blooms and algae masses and fish kills increasingly fouled the shoreline during this period. There were incidents of the oily surfaces of tributary rivers emptying into Lake Erie catching fire: in 1969, Cleveland's Cuyahoga River erupted in flames, chronicled in a \"Time\" magazine article which lamented a tendency to use rivers flowing through major cities as \"convenient, free sewers\"; the Detroit River caught fire on another occasion. The outlook was gloomy:", "qas": [{"question": "what caused the water quality in both the water and lakes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 45, 0)"}]}, {"context": "These events embarrassed officials and spurred local officials, including Cleveland's director of public utilities, Ben Stefanski, to pursue a massive effort to \"scrub the Cuyahoga\"; the effort cost $100 million in bonds, according to one estimate. New sewer lines were built. Clevelanders approved a bond issue by 2 to 1 to seriously upgrade Cleveland's sewage system. Federal officials acted as well; the United States Congress passed the Clean Water Act of 1972. In that year, the United States and Canada established water pollution limits in an International Water Quality Agreement. The Corps' LEWMS, mentioned above, was also instituted at that time. The controls were effective, but it took several decades to take effect; by 1999, there were signs that large numbers of mayflies were spotted on the lake after a forty-year absence, signalling a return to health.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The clearing of the water column is also partly due to the introduction and rapid spread of zebra mussels from Europe, which had the effect of covering \"the basin floor like shag carpeting\" with each creature filtering \"a liter of fresh water a day,\" helping to restore the lake to a cleaner state. The 1972 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement also significantly reduced the dumping and runoff of phosphorus into the lake. The lake has since become clean enough to allow sunlight to infiltrate its water and produce algae and sea weed, but a dead zone persists in the central Lake Erie Basin during the late summer. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has studied this cyclic phenomenon since 2005. There have been instances of beach closings at Presque Isle off the coast of northwestern Pennsylvania because of unexplained E. Coli contaminations, possibly caused by storm water overflows after heavy downpours.\nSince the 1970s environmental regulation has led to a great increase in water quality and the return of economically important fish species such as walleye and other biological life. There was substantial evidence that the new controls had substantially reduced levels of DDT in the water by 1979. Cleanup efforts were described in 1979 as a notable environmental success story, suggesting that the cumulative effect of legislation, studies, and bans had reversed the effects of pollution:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Joint U.S.\u2013Canadian agreements pushed 600 of 864 major industrial dischargers to meet requirements for keeping the water clean. One estimate was that $5\u00a0billion was spent to upgrade plants to treat sewage. The change toward cleaner water has been in a positive direction since the 1970s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There was a tentative exploratory plan to capture CO, compress it to a liquid form, and pump it a half-mile (800 m) beneath Lake Erie's surface underneath the porous rock structure. According to chemical engineer Peter Douglas, there is sufficient storage space beneath Lake Erie to hold between 15 and 50 years of liquid CO2 emissions from the 4,000 megawatt Nanticoke coal plant. But there has been no substantial progress on this issue since 2007.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Erie is home to one of the world's largest freshwater commercial fisheries. Lake Erie's fish populations are the most abundant of the Great Lakes, partially because of the lake's relatively mild temperatures and plentiful supply of plankton, which is the basic building block of the food chain. The lake's fish population accounts for an estimated 50% of all fish inhabiting the Great Lakes. The lake is \"loaded with superstars\" such as steelhead, walleye (American usage) or pickerel (Canadian usage), smallmouth bass, perch, as well as bass, trout, salmon, whitefesh, smelt, and many others. The lake consists of a long list of well established introduced species. Common non-indigenous fish species include the rainbow smelt, alewife, white perch and common carp. Non-native sport fish such as rainbow trout and brown trout are stocked specifically for anglers to catch. Attempts failed to stock coho salmon and its numbers are once again dwindling. Commercial landings are dominated by yellow perch and walleye, with substantial quantities of rainbow smelt and white bass also taken. Anglers target walleye and yellow perch, with some effort directed at rainbow trout. A variety of other species are taken in smaller quantities by both commercial and sport fleets.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of land is lake erie ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 50, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Up until the end of the 1950s, the most commonly caught commercial fish (more than 50% of the commercial catch) was a subspecies of the walleye known as the blue walleye (\"Sander vitreus glaucus\") sometimes erroneously called \"blue pike\". In the 1970s and 1980s, as pollution in the lake declined, counts of walleyes which were caught grew from 112,000 in 1975 to 4.1 million in 1985, with estimates of the numbers of walleyes in the lake at around 33 million in the basin, with many of 8 pounds or more. Not all walleyes thrived. The combination of overfishing and the eutrophication of the lake by pollution caused the population to collapse, and in the mid-1980s, one species of walleye called the blue walleye was declared extinct. But the Lake Erie walleye was reportedly having record numbers, even in 1989, according to one report. There have been concerns about rising levels of mercury in walleye fish; a study by the Canadian Ministry of the Environment noted an \"increasing concentration trend\" but that limits were within acceptable established by authorities in Pennsylvania. It was recommended, because of PCBs, that persons eat no more than one walleye meal per month. Because of these and other concerns, in 1990, the National Wildlife Federation was on the verge of having a \"negative fish consumption \"advisory\"\" for walleyes and smallmouth bass, which had been the bread-and-butter catch of an $800 million commercial fishing industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The longest fish in Lake Erie is reportedly the sturgeon which can grow to ten feet long and weight 300 pounds, but it is an endangered species and mostly lives on the bottom of the lake. In 2009, there was a confirmed instance of a sturgeon being caught, which was returned to the lake alive, and there are hopes that the population of sturgeons is resurging.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the longest fish in lake erie ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 52, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Estimates vary about the fishing market for the Great Lakes region. One estimate of the total market for fishing, including commercial as well as sport or recreational fishing, for all of the Great Lakes, was $4 billion annually, in 2007. A second estimate was that the fishing industry was valued at more than $7 billion.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the estimated amount of fishing market in the great lakes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 53, 0)"}]}, {"context": "But since high levels of pollution were discovered in the 1960s and 1970s, there has been continued debate over the desired intensity of commercial fishing. Commercial fishing in Lake Erie has been hurt by the bad economy as well as government regulations which limit the size of their catch; one report suggested that the numbers of fishing boats and employees had declined by two-thirds in recent decades. Another concern had been that pollution in the lake, as well as toxins found inside fish, were working against commercial fishing interests. U.S. fishermen based along Lake Erie \"lost their livelihood\" over the past few decades described as being \"caught in a net of laws and bans\", according to the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\", and no longer catch fish such as whitefish for markets in New York. Pennsylvania had a special $3 stamp on fishing licenses to help \"compensate commercial fishermen for their losses\", but this program ended after five years turning Erie's commercial fishing industry into an \"artifact.\" One blamed the commercial fishing ban after a \"test of wills\" between commercial and recreational fishermen: \"One side needed large hauls. The other feared the lake was being emptied.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what did the other fear of the lake fear ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 54, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Commercial fishing is now predominantly based in Canadian communities, with a much smaller fishery\u2014largely restricted to yellow perch\u2014in Ohio. One account suggested that Canadian fishermen are \"still at it and making money\" and they \"know how to fish\" by \"using the old nets.\" The Ontario fishery is one of the most intensively managed in the world. However, there are reports that some Canadian commercial fishermen are dissatisfied with fishing quotas, and have sued their government about this matter, and there have been complaints that the legislative body writing the quotas is \"dominated by the U.S.\" and that sport fishing interests are favored at the expense of commercial fishing interests. Cuts of 30 to 45 percent for certain fish were made in 2007. The Lake Erie fishery was one of the first fisheries in the world managed on individual transferable quotas and features mandatory daily catch reporting and intensive auditing of the catch reporting system. Still, the commercial fishery is the target of critics who would like to see the lake managed for the exclusive benefit of sport fishing and the various industries serving the sport fishery. In November 2010, Ontario's oldest and largest fish processor known as Great Lakes Fish Corporation was shut down after operating for a hundred years; 130 workers were laid off and numerous spinoff jobs disappeared, such as jobs at local restaurants and net repair shops. According to one report, the Canadian town of Port Dover is the home of the lake's largest fishing fleet, and the town features miniature golf, dairy bars, French-fry stands, and restaurants serving perch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake can be thought of as a common asset with multiple purposes including being a \"fishery\". There was direct competition between commercial fishermen and sport fishermen (including charter boats and sales of fishing licenses) throughout the lake's history, with both sides seeking government assistance from either Washington or Ottawa, and trying to make their case in the \"court\" of public opinion through newspaper reporting. But other groups have entered the political process as well, including environmentalists, lakefront property owners, industry owners and workers seeking cost-effective solutions for sewage, ferry boat operators, even corporations making electric-generating wind turbines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Management of the fishery is by consensus of all management agencies with an interest in the resource and include the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and the province of Ontario, and work under the mandate of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission. The commission makes assessments using sophisticated mathematical modeling systems. The Commission has been the focus of considerable recrimination, primarily from angler and charter fishing groups in the U.S. which have had a historical antipathy to commercial fishing interests. This conflict is complex, dating from the 1960s and earlier, with the result in the United States that, in 2011, commercial fishing was mostly eliminated from Great Lakes states. One report suggests that battling between diverse fishing interests began around Lake Michigan and evolved to cover the entire Great Lakes region. The analysis suggests that in the Lake Erie context, the competition between sport and commercial fishing involves universals and that these conflicts are cultural, not scientific, and therefore not resolvable by reference to ecological data.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake also supports a strong sport fishery. While commercial fishing declined, sport fishing has remained. The deep cool waters that spawn the best fishing is in the Canadian side of the lake. As a result, a fishing boat that crosses the international border triggers the security concerns of border crossings and fishermen are advised to have their passport. If their boat crosses the invisible border line in the lake, upon returning to the American shore, passengers will have to \"drive to a local government reporting station and pose for pictures\" to Customs officers by videophone. There are cumbersome rules for fishing boat operators as well, who will have to fax passenger personal information to a government agency an hour before leaving; officers will be watching and doing spot checks from patrol boats and government aircraft\". Authorities in 2008 from the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission have tried stocking the lake with brown trout in an effort to build what's called a \"put-grow-and-take\" fishery. There was a report that charter boat fishing increased substantially on the American side, from 46 to 638 charter boats in operation in Ohio alone, during a period from 1975 to 1985 as pollution levels declined, and after populations of walleye increased substantially in the lake. In 1984, Ohio sold 27,000 nonresident fishing permits, and sport fishing was described as big business. In 1992, there were accounts of fishermen catching 8, 10, and 12 pound walleyes, and that the \"runt of a five-man daily limit of 25 walleye might be a nuisance of 5 pounds.\" It is possible to fish off piers in winter for a fish called the burbot, also known by pseudonyms such as eelpout, mudblow, lawyer fish, cusk, or freshwater cod which looks \"ugly\" but tastes great; the burbot make a midwinter spawning run and is reportedly one of \"Erie's glacial relics.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what type of sport does the lake support ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 58, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In winter when the lake freezes, many fishermen go out on the ice, cut holes, and fish. It is even possible to build bonfires on the ice. But venturing on Lake Erie ice can be dangerous. In a freak incident in 2009, warming temperatures and winds of 35 miles per hour and currents pushing eastward dislodged a miles-wide ice floe which broke away from the shore, trapping more than 130 fishermen offshore; one man died while the rest were rescued by helicopters or boats.", "qas": [{"question": "where do many farmers go on ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 59, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The lake's formerly more extensive lakebed creates a favorable environment for agriculture in the bordering areas of Ontario, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New York. The Lake Erie sections of western New York State have a suitable climate for growing grapes, and in Chautauqua County there have been many vineyards and wineries in the area as well as in Erie County in northwestern Pennsylvania. Much grape juice is produced in this region. The Canadian region of Lake Erie's north shore is becoming a more prominent wine region as well; it has been dubbed the Lake Erie North Shore, or LENS region, and includes Pelee Island, and since it is farther north than comparable wine-growing areas in the world, the season is longer in terms of light. A longer growing season due to the lake-moderated temperatures make the risk of early frosts less likely.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The drainage basin has led to well fertilized soil. The north coast of Ohio is widely referred to as its nursery capital.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Erie is a favorite for divers since there are many shipwrecks, perhaps 1,400 to 8,000 according to one estimate, of which about 270 are \"confirmed shipwreck locations.\" Most wrecks are undiscovered but believed to be well preserved and in good condition and at most only below the water surface. One report suggests there are more \"wrecks per square mile\" than any other freshwater location, including wrecks from Native American watercraft. There are efforts to identify shipwreck sites and survey the lake floor to map the location of underwater sites, possibly for further study or exploration. While the lake is relatively warmer than the other Great Lakes, there is a thermocline, meaning that as a diver descends, the water temperature drops about , requiring a wetsuit. One estimate is that Lake Erie has a quarter of all 8,000 estimated shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. They are preserved because the water is cold and salt-free creating \"intact time capsules down there\". Divers have a policy of not removing or touching anything at the wreck else the \"next person won't be able to see it\"; when artifacts were removed on occasion, it was met by \"outrage\" by the diving community. The cold conditions make diving difficult and \"strenuous\" requiring divers with skill and experience. One charter firm from western New York State takes about 1,500 divers to Lake Erie shipwrecks in a typical season from April through October.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1991, the 19th-century sidewheeler \"Atlantic\" was discovered. It had sunk in a collision with the \"Ogdensburg\", a steamship sometimes referred to as a \"propeller\" according to 19th-century parlance, in 1852, west of Long Point, Ontario and survivors from the \"Atlantic\" were saved by the \"Ogdensburg\". One account suggests 130 people drowned while another suggests about 20 drowned. The aftermath of the disaster led to calls for authorities to seize captains of both ships so \"that the cause of the collision may be correctly ascertained\" as well as calls for more lifeboats and improved life preservers since the earlier ones proved to be \"totally useless.\" There was speculation that the sunken vessel had been a gambling ship, and therefore there might have been money aboard, but most historians were skeptical. In 1998, the shipwreck of the vessel \"Adventure\" was the first shipwreck registered with the state of Ohio as an \"underwater archaeological site\"; when it was discovered that the \"Adventure's\" propeller had been removed and given to a junkyard, the propeller was rescued days before being converted to scrap metal and brought back to the dive site and back to its underwater home. In 2003, divers discovered the steamer \"Canobie\" near Presque Isle, which sunk in 1921. Other wrecks include the fish tub \"Neal H. Dow\" (1910), the \"Elderado\" \"steamer-cum-barge\" (1880), the \"W. R. Hanna\", the \"Dundee\" which sank north of Cleveland in 1900, the \"F. H. Prince\", and \"The Craftsman\". In 2007, the wreck of the steamship named after \"Mad\" Anthony Wayne was found near Vermilion, Ohio in of water; the vessel sank in 1850 after its boilers exploded, and 38 people died. The wreck belongs to the state of Ohio and \"salvaging it is illegal\" but divers can visit it after it is surveyed. In addition, there are wrecks of smaller vessels, with occasional drownings of fishermen.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The finding of the well-preserved wreck of the Canadian-built British troop transport warship \"Caledonia\", sunk during the War of 1812, has led to accusations about plundering of the site and legal wrangling about whether the vessel should be resurfaced in time for the 2013 war's bicentennial.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Research into shipwrecks has been organized by the Peachman Lake Erie Shipwreck Research Center, or PLESRC, located on the grounds of the Great Lakes Historical Society. In 2008, the Great Lakes Historical Society announced plans to survey the underwater battle site of the Battle of Lake Erie in preparation for the bicentennial celebration of the battle in 2013.", "qas": [{"question": "where is research located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 65, 0)"}, {"question": "the great lakes site of the battle of lake eerie was found in what year ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 65, 1)"}]}, {"context": "There are numerous public parks around the lake. In western Pennsylvania, a wildlife reserve was established in 1991 in Springfield Township for hiking, fishing, cross-country skiing and walking along the beach. In Ontario, Long Point is a peninsula on the northwest shore near Port Rowan that extends into Lake Erie which is a stopover for birds migrating as well as turtles; one reporter found a \"turtle-crossing\" sign along the road; Long Point Provincial Park is located there and has been designated as a UNESCO Biosphere reserve. In Ontario's Sand Hill Park, east of Port Burwell, there is a high dune which is so steep it requires people to \"crawl like crabs to the summit\", although there are lake views from the top.", "qas": [{"question": "how many public parks are there in the lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 66, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Crystal Beach, in the village of Crystal Beach, Ontario, at the eastern end of the lake, is one of several South-facing beaches on the Canadian side. It is therefore well situated for sun-bathers, facing the sun from sunrise to sunset. The beach is gently sloping with no sharp drop-offs or rip currents, and is usually cooled by southwest breezes, even on the hottest days.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In southern Michigan, Sterling State Park has campgrounds, for hiking, biking, fishing, boating, with a sand beach for sunbathing, swimming, and picnicking.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"The New York Times\" reporter Donna Marchetti took a bike tour around the Lake Erie perimeter in 1997, traveling per day and staying at bed and breakfasts. They went through the cities of Cleveland, Erie, Windsor, Detroit and Toledo as well as resort towns, vineyards, and cornfields. The trip highlights were the \"small port towns and rural farmlands of southern Ontario\". There are few bike repair shops in Ontario on the route.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Erie islands tend to be in the westernmost part of the lake and have different characters. Some of them include:", "qas": [{"question": "what type of islands are the lake of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 70, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Kayaking has become more popular along the lake, particularly in places such as Put-in-Bay, Ohio. There are extensive views with steep cliffs with exotic wildlife and \"100 miles of paddle-friendly shoreline.\" Long distance swimmers have swum across the lake to set records; for example, a 15-year-old amputee swam the stretch across the lake in 2001. In 2008, 14-year-old Jade Scognamillo swam from New York's Sturgeon Point to Ontario's Crystal Beach and completed the 11.9-mile (19.2-km) swim in five hours, 40 minutes and 35 seconds, and also became the youngest swimmer to make the crossing. It is illegal for swimmers younger than 14 to attempt such a crossing. In Port Dover, Ontario, brave swimmers do high-dives at the annual \"Polar Bear Swim\" on the beach; in 2011, the water was , although the air was warmer, which did not deter 14-year-old youth Austin Merrell. Currents can pose a problem, and there have been occasional incidents of drownings.", "qas": [{"question": "which lake has become more popular along the lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 71, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The lake is dotted by distinct lighthouses. A lighthouse off the coast of Cleveland, beset with cold lake winter spray, has an unusual artistic icy shape, although sometimes ice prevents the light from being seen by maritime vessels.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the lake decorated by ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 72, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A New York Times reporter, biking through the region in 1997, found the Ontario town of Port Stanley to be the \"prettiest of the port towns\" with a lively \"holiday air\" but no \"ticky-tacky commercialism\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are numerous vineyards around the lake, including ones on Pelee Island which makes wines including pinot noir, riesling and chardonnay.", "qas": []}, {"context": "People can rent summer houses and cabins near the lake to enjoy the beaches, swimming, as well as be close to activities such as wine tours and fishing and water parks. Presque Isle is a peninsula jutting out into the lake in northwestern Pennsylvania which has nice beaches, although there were incidents in 2006 when beaches had to be closed because of unexplained unhealthy water conditions with E. Coli bacteria.\nIt was described as a \"spit of sand, trees and swamp that arcs off the shore\" with seafood restaurants and beautiful sunsets. Pelee Island, Canada's southernmost point and only three miles away from Ohio, is a place that \"forces you to do nothing\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pleasure boat operators offer dinner cruises in the Cleveland area on the Cuyahoga River as well as Lake Erie.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake has been a \"bustling thoroughfare\" for maritime vessels for centuries. Ships headed eastward can take the Welland Canal and a series of eight locks descending to Lake Ontario which takes about 12 hours, according to one source. Thousands of ships make this journey each year. During the 19th century, ships could enter the Buffalo River and travel the Erie Canal eastward to Albany then south to New York City along the Hudson River. Generally there is heavy traffic on the lake except during the winter months from January through March when ice prevents vessels from traveling safely. In 2007, there was a protest against Ontario's energy policy which allows the shipping of coal in the lake; GreenPeace activists climbed a ladder on a freighter and \"locked themselves to the conveyor belt device that helps to unload the ship's cargo\"; three activists were arrested and the ship was delayed for more than four hours, and anti-coal messages were painted on the ship.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ship traffic in Lake Erie being the highest among the Great Lakes and roughest of the lakes has led to it having the highest number of known shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. There have been other accidents as well; for example, in 2010 according to \"The Star\", crewmen from the freighter \"Hermann Schoening\" were sickened by phosphine gas which had been used to fumigate or control pests; rescuers took them by tugboat to receive medical attention.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Port of Cleveland generated over $350 million and over 15 million tons of cargo in a recent year. The current port facility is unable to handle larger cargo ships, and the cranes needed to lift goods such as steel to truck trailers are insufficient to meet current shipping standards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ferryboats operate in numerous places, such as the Jet Express Ferry from Sandusky and Port Clinton. However, plans to operate a ferryboat between the U.S. port of Erie and the Ontario port of Port Dover ran into a slew of political problems, including security restrictions on both sides as well as additional fees required to hire border inspectors. In particular, Canada was described as having a \"sticky set of laws\"; the project was abandoned.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. One reporter thought the roads on the Canadian side were narrower, sometimes without shoulders, but were less trafficked except for the roads around the Ontario towns of Fort Erie and Port Colborne. Drivers can cross from the United States to the Canadian town of Fort Erie by going over the Peace Bridge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2004, debris from a plane carrying 9 people was found off Lake Erie isle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the border between the two nations is largely unpatrolled, it is possible for people to cross undetected from one country to the other, in either direction, by boat. In 2010, Canadian police arrested persons crossing the border illegally from the United States to Canada, near the Ontario town of Amherstburg.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n<br>", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lake Ontario", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Lake Ontario is one of the five Great Lakes of North America. It is surrounded on the north, west, and southwest by the Canadian province of Ontario, and on the south and east by the American state of New York, whose water boundaries meet in the middle of the lake. Ontario, Canada's most populous province, was named for the lake. Many of Ontario's most populous cities, including Toronto, Canada's most populous city, and Hamilton, are on the lake's northern or western shores. In the Huron language, the name \"\" means \"Lake of Shining Waters\". Its primary inlet is the Niagara River from Lake Erie. The last in the Great Lakes chain, Lake Ontario serves as the outlet to the Atlantic Ocean via the Saint Lawrence River. It is the only Great Lake not to border the state of Michigan.", "qas": [{"question": "how many great lakes does lake canada have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "which state is the only great lake to border state ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 0, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Ontario is the easternmost of the Great Lakes and the smallest in surface area (7,340\u00a0sq\u00a0mi, 18,960\u00a0km), although it exceeds Lake Erie in volume (393 cu\u00a0mi, 1,639\u00a0km). It is the 14th largest lake in the world. When its islands are included, the lake's shoreline is long. As the last lake in the Great Lakes' hydrologic chain, Lake Ontario has the lowest mean surface elevation of the lakes at 243 feet (74\u00a0m) above sea level; lower than its neighbor upstream. Its maximum length is and its maximum width is . The lake's average depth is 47 fathoms 1 foot (283\u00a0ft; 86 m), with a maximum depth of 133 fathoms 4 feet (802\u00a0ft; 244 m). The lake's primary source is the Niagara River, draining Lake Erie, with the St. Lawrence River serving as the outlet. The drainage basin covers 24,720\u00a0square\u00a0miles (64,030\u00a0km). As with all the Great Lakes, water levels change both within the year (owing to seasonal changes in water input) and among years (owing to longer term trends in precipitation). These water level fluctuations are an integral part of lake ecology, and produce and maintain extensive wetlands. The lake also has an important freshwater fishery, although it has been negatively affected by factors including over-fishing, water pollution and invasive species.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the tallest lake in the alps ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Baymouth bars built by prevailing winds and currents have created a significant number of lagoons and sheltered harbors, mostly near (but not limited to) Prince Edward County, Ontario and the easternmost shores. Perhaps the best-known example is Toronto Bay, chosen as the site of the Upper Canada (Ontario) capital for its strategic harbour. Other prominent examples include Hamilton Harbour, Irondequoit Bay, Presqu'ile Bay, and Sodus Bay. The bars themselves are the sites of long beaches, such as Sandbanks Provincial Park and Sandy Island Beach State Park. These sand bars are often associated with large wetlands, which support large numbers of plant and animal species, as well as providing important rest areas for migratory birds. Presqu'ile, on the north shore of Lake Ontario, is particularly significant in this regard. One unique feature of the lake is the Z-shaped Bay of Quinte which separates Prince Edward County from the Ontario mainland, save for a isthmus near Trenton; this feature also supports many wetlands and aquatic plants, as well as associated fisheries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Major rivers draining into Lake Ontario include the Niagara River, Don River, Humber River, Trent River, Cataraqui River, Genesee River, Oswego River, Black River, Little Salmon River, and the Salmon River.", "qas": [{"question": "what river is located in the rivers river ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The lake basin was carved out of soft, weak Silurian-age rocks by the Wisconsin ice sheet during the last ice age. The action of the ice occurred along the pre-glacial Ontarian River valley which had approximately the same orientation as today's basin. Material that was pushed southward by the ice sheet left landforms such as drumlins, kames, and moraines, both on the modern land surface and the lake bottom, reorganizing the region's entire drainage system. As the ice sheet retreated toward the north, it still dammed the St. Lawrence valley outlet, so the lake surface was at a higher level. This stage is known as Lake Iroquois. During that time the lake drained through present-day Syracuse, New York into the Mohawk River, thence to the Hudson River and the Atlantic. The shoreline created during this stage can be easily recognized by the (now dry) beaches and wave-cut hills 10 to 25 miles (15 to 40\u00a0km) from the present shoreline.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When the ice finally receded from the St. Lawrence valley, the outlet was below sea level, and for a short time the lake became a bay of the Atlantic Ocean, in association with the Champlain Sea. Gradually the land rebounded from the release of the weight of about 6,500 feet (2,000\u00a0m) of ice that had been stacked on it. It is still rebounding about 12\u00a0inches (30\u00a0cm) per century in the St. Lawrence area. Since the ice receded from the area last, the most rapid rebound still occurs there. This means the lake bed is gradually tilting southward, inundating the south shore and turning river valleys into bays. Both north and south shores experience shoreline erosion, but the tilting amplifies this effect on the south shore, causing loss to property owners.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The name Ontario is derived from the Huron word \"Ontar\u00ed'io\", which means \"great lake\". The lake was a border between the Huron people and the Iroquois Confederacy in the pre-Columbian era. In the 1600s, the Iroquois drove out the Huron from southern Ontario and settled the northern shores of Lake Ontario. When the Iroquois withdrew and the Anishnabeg / Ojibwa / Mississaugas moved in from the north to southern Ontario, they retained the Iroquois name.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the name canada mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It is believed the first European to reach the lake was \u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9 in 1615. As was their practice, the French explorers introduced other names for the lake. In 1632 and 1656, the lake was referred to as Lac de St. Louis or Lake St. Louis by Samuel de Champlain and cartographer Nicolas Sanson respectively (likely for Louis XIV of France) In 1660 Jesuit historian Francis Creuxius coined the name \"Lacus Ontarius\". In a map drawn in the \"Relation des J\u00e9suites\" (1662\u20131663), the lake bears the legend \"Lac Ontario ou des Iroquois\" with the name \"Ondiara\" in smaller type. A French map produced in 1712 (currently in the Canadian Museum of History), created by military engineer Jean-Baptiste de Couagne, identified Lake Ontario as \"Lac Frontenac\" named after Louis de Buade, Comte de Frontenac et de Palluau. He was a French soldier, courtier, and Governor General of New France from 1672 to 1682 and from 1689 to his death in 1698.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Artifacts which are believed to be of Norse origin have been found in the area of Sodus Bay, indicating the possibility of trading by the indigenous peoples with Norse explorers on the east coast of North America.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A series of trading posts were established by both the British and French, such as Fort Frontenac (Kingston) in 1673, Fort Oswego in 1722, Fort Rouill\u00e9 (Toronto) in 1750. After the French and Indian War, all forts around the lake were under British control. The United States did not take possession of forts on present-day American territory until the signing of the Jay Treaty in 1794. Permanent, non-military European settlement began during the American Revolution. As the easternmost and nearest lake to the Atlantic seaboard of Canada and the United States, population centres here are among the oldest in the Great Lakes basin, with Kingston, Ontario, formerly the capital of Canada, dating to the 1670s (Fort Frontenac). The lake became a hub of commercial activity following the War of 1812 with canal building on both sides of the border and heavy travel by lake steamers. Steamer activity peaked in the mid-19th century before competition from railway lines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a type of scow known as a \"stone hooker\" was in operation on the north-west shore, particularly around Port Credit and Bronte. Stonehooking was the practice of raking flat fragments of Dundas shale from the shallow lake floor of the area for use in construction, particularly in the growing city of Toronto.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes watershed is a region of high biodiversity, and Lake Ontario is important for its diversity of birds, fish, reptiles amphibians and plants. Many of these special species are associated with shorelines, particularly sand dunes, lagoons, and wetlands. The importance of wetlands to the lake has been appreciated, and many of the larger wetlands have protected status. However, these wetlands are changing in part because the natural water level fluctuations have been reduced. Many wetland plants are dependent upon low water levels to reproduce. When water levels are stabilized, the area and diversity of the marsh is reduced. This is particularly true of meadow marsh (also known as wet meadow wetlands); for example, in Eel Bay near Alexandria Bay, regulation of lake levels has resulted in large losses of wet meadow. Often this is accompanied by the invasion of cattails, which displace many of the native plant species and reduce plant diversity. Eutrophication may accelerate this process by providing nitrogen and phosphorus for the more rapid growth of competitively dominant plants. Similar effects are occurring on the north shore, in wetlands such as Presqu'ile, which have interdunal wetlands called , with high plant diversity and many unusual plant species.", "qas": [{"question": "the great lakes is important for its diversity of what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most of the forests around the lake are deciduous forests dominated by trees including maple, oak, beech, ash and basswood. These are classified as part of the Mixedwood Plains Ecozone by Environment Canada, or as the Eastern Great Lakes and Hudson Lowlands by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or as the Great Lakes Ecoregion by The Nature Conservancy. Deforestation in the vicinity of the lake has had many negative impacts, including loss of forest birds, extinction of native salmon, and increased amounts of sediment flowing into the lake. In some areas more than 90 percent of the forest cover has been removed and replaced by agriculture. Certain tree species, such as hemlock, have also been particularly depleted by past logging activity. Guidelines for restoration stress the importance of maintaining and restoring forest cover, particularly along streams and wetlands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The open water is less-affected by shoreline features, such as wetlands, and more affected by nutrient levels that control the production of algae. Algae are the basis of the open water food web, and the source of primary production that ends up as Lake Trout and Walleye at the top of the open water food web.\nLike the other Great Lakes, Lake Ontario used to have an important commercial fishery. It has been largely destroyed, mostly by over-fishing. Consider the Lake Sturgeon as but one example. Lake sturgeon are huge fish\u2014they can grow up to three meters long and exceed 190\u00a0kg in weight. The females mature slowly and require decades to reach sexual maturity. It was once an abundant species in Lake Ontario. \"In 1860, this species, taken on incidental catches of other fishes, was killed and dumped back in the lake, piled up on shore to dry and be burned, fed to pigs, or dug into the earth as fertilizer.\" It was even stacked like cordwood and used to fuel steamboats. Once its value was realized, \"They were taken by every available means from spearing and jigging to set lines of baited or unbaited hooks laid on the bottom to trapnets, poundnets and gillnets.\" Over 5 million pounds were taken from adjoining Lake Erie in a single year. The fishery collapsed, largely by 1900. They have never recovered. Like most sturgeons, the lake sturgeon is rare now, and is protected in many areas. Populations in the Oswego River are being actively managed for recovery.\nThis food web has been damaged not only by over-fishing, and changes in nutrient levels, but also by other types of pollution from industrial chemicals, agricultural fertilizers, untreated sewage, phosphates from laundry detergents, and pesticides. Some pollutant chemicals that have been found in the lake include DDT, benzo[\"a\"]pyrene and other pesticides; PCBs, aramite, chromium, lead, mirex, mercury, and carbon tetrachloride. The International Joint Commission has identified areas where pollution is particularly intense (point sources) and mapped them as Areas of Concern. A Remedial Action Plan has been developed for each area. Some Lake Ontario areas of concern include the Oswego River and Rochester Embayment on the American side, and Hamilton Harbour and Toronto on the Canadian side.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the 1960s and 1970s, the increased pollution caused frequent algal blooms to occur in the summer. These blooms killed large numbers of fish, and left decomposing piles of filamentous algae and dead fish along the shores. At times the blooms became so thick waves could not break. Fish eating birds such as osprey, bald eagle and cormorant were being poisoned by contaminated fish. Since the 1960s and 1970s, environmental concerns have forced a cleanup of industrial and municipal wastes. Cleanup has been accomplished through better treatment plants, tighter environmental regulations, deindustrialization and increased public awareness. Today, Lake Ontario has recovered some of its pristine quality; for example, walleye, a fish species considered as a marker of clean water, are now found. However, regional airshed pollution remains a concern. The lake has also become an important sport fishery, although with introduced species (Coho and Chinook salmon) rather than the native species. Bald eagle and osprey populations are also beginning to recover.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Invasive species are a problem for Lake Ontario, particularly lamprey and zebra mussels. Lamprey are being controlled by poisoning in the juvenile stage in the streams where they breed. Zebra mussels in particular are difficult to control, and pose major challenges for the lake and its waterways.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake has a natural seiche rhythm of eleven minutes. The seiche effect normally is only about inches (2\u00a0cm) but can be greatly amplified by earth movement, winds, and atmospheric pressure changes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of its great depth, the lake as a whole never freezes in winter, but an ice sheet covering between 10% and 90% of the lake area typically develops, depending on the severity of the winter. Ice sheets typically form along the shoreline and in slack water bays, where the lake is not as deep. During the winters of 1877 and 1878, the ice sheet coverage was up to 95\u2013100% in most of the lake. In the winter of 1812, the ice cover was stable enough the American naval commander stationed at Sackets Harbor feared a British attack from Kingston, over the ice.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the lake of the lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When the cold winds of winter pass over the warmer water of the lake, they pick up moisture and drop it as lake effect snow. Since the prevailing winter winds are from the northwest, the southern and southeastern shoreline of the lake is referred to as the snowbelt. In some winters the area between Oswego and Pulaski may receive twenty or more feet (600\u00a0cm) of snowfall.", "qas": [{"question": "what causes the cold winds over the dry water ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Also impacted by lake-effect snow is the Tug Hill Plateau, an area of elevated land about east of Lake Ontario, creating ideal conditions for lake-effect snowfall. The \"Hill\", as it is often referred to, typically receives more snow than any other region in the eastern United States. As a result, Tug Hill is a popular location for winter enthusiasts, such as snow-mobilers and cross-country skiers. Lake-effect snow often extends inland as far as Syracuse, with that city often recording the most winter snowfall accumulation of any large city in the United States. Other cities in the world receive more snow annually, such as Quebec City, which averages , and Sapporo, Japan, which receives each year and is often regarded as the snowiest city in the world.\nFoggy conditions (particularly in fall) can be created by thermal contrasts and can be an impediment for recreational boaters. In a normal winter, Lake Ontario will be at most one quarter ice-covered, in a mild winter almost completely unfrozen. Lake Ontario has completely frozen over on five recorded occasions: from about January 20 to about March 20, 1830; in 1874; in 1893; in 1912; and in February 1934.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake breezes in spring tend to retard fruit bloom until the frost danger is past, and in the autumn delay the onset of fall frost, particularly on the south shore. Cool onshore winds also retard early bloom of plants and flowers until later in the spring season, protecting them from possible frost damage. Such microclimatic effects have enabled tender fruit production in a continental climate, with the southwest shore supporting a major fruit-growing area. Apples, cherries, pears, plums, and peaches are grown in many commercial orchards around Rochester. Between Stoney Creek and Niagara-on-the-Lake on the Niagara Peninsula is a major fruit-growing and wine-making area. The wine-growing region extends over the international border into Niagara and Orleans counties. Apple varieties that tolerate a more extreme climate are grown on the lake's north shore, around Cobourg.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A large conurbation called the Golden Horseshoe occupies the lake's westernmost shores, anchored by the cities of Toronto and Hamilton. Ports on the Canadian side include St. Catharines, Oshawa, Cobourg and Kingston, near the St. Lawrence River outlet. Close to 9 million people or over a quarter of Canada's population lives within the watershed of Lake Ontario. The American shore is largely rural, with the exception of Rochester and the much smaller ports at Oswego and Sackets Harbor. The city of Syracuse is inland, connected to the lake by the New York State Canal System. Over 2 million people live in Lake Ontario's American watershed.", "qas": [{"question": "how many people live in lake ontario's ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 21, 5)"}]}, {"context": "A high-speed passenger/vehicle ferry, the \"Spirit of Ontario I\", operated between Toronto and Rochester from June 17, 2004, to January 10, 2006, when the service was cancelled. The Crystal Lynn II, out of Irondequoit, New York, has been operating between Irondequoit Bay and Henderson, New York since May 2000, operated by Capt. Bob Tein.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes Waterway connects the lake sidestream to the Atlantic Ocean via the St. Lawrence Seaway, and upstream to the other rivers in the chain via the Welland Canal and to Lake Erie. The Trent-Severn Waterway for pleasure boats connects Lake Ontario at the Bay of Quinte to Georgian Bay (Lake Huron), via Lake Simcoe. The Oswego Canal connects the lake at Oswego to the New York State Canal System, with outlets to the Hudson River, Lake Erie, and Lake Champlain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Rideau Canal, also for pleasure boats, connects Lake Ontario at Kingston to the Ottawa River in downtown Ottawa, Ontario.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nNearly all of Lake Ontario's islands are on the eastern and north-eastern shores, between the Prince Edward County headland and the lake's outlet at Kingston. The Toronto Islands on the north-western shore are the remnants of a sand spit formed by coastal erosion, whereas the mostly larger eastern islands are underlain by the basement rock found throughout the region. The largest island, is Wolfe Island, at the east end of the lake. It is accessible by ferry from both Canada and the U.S.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes Circle Tour and Seaway Trail are designated scenic road systems connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. As the Seaway Trail is posted on the U.S. side only, Lake Ontario is the only of the five Great Lakes to have no posted bi-national circle tour.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1800s, there were reports of an alleged creature, similar to the so-called Loch Ness Monster, being sighted in the lake. The creature is described as large with a long neck, green in colour, and generally causes a break in the surface waves.", "qas": []}, {"context": ", nearly 50 people have successfully swum across the lake. The first person who accomplished the feat was Marilyn Bell, who did it in 1954 at the age of 16. Toronto's Marilyn Bell Park is named in her honour. The park opened in 1984, and is just to the east of the spot where Bell completed her swim. In 1974, Diana Nyad became the first person who swam across the lake against the current (from north to south). On August 28, 2007, 14-year-old Natalie Lambert from Kingston, Ontario, made the swim, leaving Sackets Harbor, New York, and reaching Kingston's Confederation basin less than 24 hours after she entered the lake. On August 19, 2012, 14-year-old Annaleise Carr became the youngest person to swim across the lake. She completed the 32-mile (52-km) crossing from Niagara-on-the-Lake to Marilyn Bell Park in just under 27 hours.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The government of Ontario, which holds the lakebed rights of the Canadian portion of the lake under the Beds of Navigable Waters Act, does not permit off-shore wind power to be generated offshore. In \"Trillium Power Wind Corporation v. Ontario (Natural Resources)\", the Superior Court of Justice held Trillium Power\u2014since 2004 an \"Applicant of Record\" who had invested $35,000 in fees and, when in 2011 the Crown made a policy decision against offshore windfarms, claimed an injury of $2.25\u00a0billion\u2014disclosed no reasonable cause of action.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the Great Lakes once supported an industrial-scale fishery, with record hauls in 1899, overfishing later blighted the industry. Today only recreational fishing activities exist.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lake Michigan", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Lake Michigan is one of the five Great Lakes of North America and the only one located entirely within the United States. The other four Great Lakes are shared by the U.S. and Canada. It is the second-largest of the Great Lakes by volume () and the third-largest by surface area (), after Lake Superior and Lake Huron (and is slightly smaller than the U.S. state of West Virginia). To the east, its basin is conjoined with that of Lake Huron through the wide Straits of Mackinac, giving it the same surface elevation as its easterly counterpart; the two are technically a single lake.", "qas": [{"question": "how many great lakes are located in the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Michigan is shared, from west to east, by the U.S. states of Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan. Ports along its shores include Chicago; Milwaukee; Green Bay, Wisconsin; Gary, Indiana; and Muskegon, Michigan. The word \"Michigan\" originally referred to the lake itself, and is believed to come from the Ojibwe word \"michi-gami\" meaning \"great water\".", "qas": [{"question": "what states share the city of michigan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Some of the earliest human inhabitants of the Lake Michigan region were the Hopewell Indians. Their culture declined after 800 AD, and for the next few hundred years, the region was the home of peoples known as the Late Woodland Indians. In the early 17th century, when western European explorers made their first forays into the region, they encountered descendants of the Late Woodland Indians: the Chippewa; Menominee; Sauk; Fox; Winnebago; Miami; Ottawa; and Potawatomi. The French explorer Jean Nicolet is believed to have been the first European to reach Lake Michigan, possibly in 1634 or 1638. In the earliest European maps of the region, the name of Lake Illinois has been found in addition to that of \"Michigan\", named for the Illinois Confederation of tribes.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the hopewell indians ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Michigan is joined via the narrow, open-water Straits of Mackinac with Lake Huron, and the combined body of water is sometimes called Michigan\u2013Huron (also Huron\u2013Michigan). The Straits of Mackinac were an important Native American and fur trade route. Located on the southern side of the Straits is the town of Mackinaw City, Michigan, the site of Fort Michilimackinac, a reconstructed French fort founded in 1715, and on the northern side is St. Ignace, Michigan, site of a French Catholic mission to the Indians, founded in 1671. In 1673, Jacques Marquette, Louis Joliet and their crew of five M\u00e9tis voyageurs followed Lake Michigan to Green Bay and up the Fox River, nearly to its headwaters, in their search for the Mississippi River, cf. Fox\u2013Wisconsin Waterway. The eastern end of the Straits was controlled by Fort Mackinac on Mackinac Island, a British colonial and early American military base and fur trade center, founded in 1781.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the advent of European exploration into the area in the late 17th century, Lake Michigan became part of a line of waterways leading from the Saint Lawrence River to the Mississippi River and thence to the Gulf of Mexico. French coureurs des bois and voyageurs established small ports and trading communities, such as Green Bay, on the lake during the late 17th and early 18th centuries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 19th century, Lake Michigan played a major role in the development of Chicago and the Midwestern United States west of the lake. For example, 90% of the grain shipped from Chicago travelled east over Lake Michigan during the years, and only rarely falling below 50% after the Civil War and the major expansion of railroad shipping.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first person to reach the deep bottom of Lake Michigan was J. Val Klump, a scientist at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee. Klump reached the bottom via submersible as part of a 1985 research expedition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2007, a row of stones paralleling an ancient shoreline was discovered by Mark Holley, professor of underwater archeology at Northwestern Michigan College. This formation lies below the surface of the lake. One of the stones is said to have a carving resembling a mastodon. So far the formation has not been authenticated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The warming of Lake Michigan was the subject of a report by Purdue University in 2018. In each decade since 1980, steady increases in average surface temperature have occurred. This is likely to lead to decrease in native habitat and adversely effect native species survival.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the climate of lake michigan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Michigan is the sole Great Lake wholly within the borders of the United States; the others are shared with Canada. It lies in the region known as the American Midwest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Michigan has a surface area of 22,404 sq.mi (58,026\u00a0km); (13,237 square miles, 34,284\u00a0km lying in Michigan state, 7,358 square miles, 19,056\u00a0km in Wisconsin, 234 square miles, 606\u00a0km in Indiana, & 1,576 square miles, 4,079\u00a0km in Illinois) making it the largest lake entirely within one country by surface area (Lake Baikal, in Russia, is larger by water volume), and the fifth-largest lake in the world. It is the larger half of Lake Michigan\u2013Huron, which is the largest body of fresh water in the world by surface area. It is long by wide with a shoreline long. The lake's average depth is 46 fathoms 3 feet (279\u00a0ft; 85 m), while its greatest depth is 153 fathoms 5 feet (923\u00a0ft; 281\u00a0m). It contains a volume of 1,180 cubic miles (4,918\u00a0km\u00b3) of water. Green Bay in the northwest is its largest bay. Grand Traverse Bay in its northeast is another large bay. Lake Michigan's deepest region, which lies in its northern-half, is called Chippewa Basin (named after prehistoric Lake Chippewa) and is separated from South Chippewa Basin, by a relatively shallower area called the Mid Lake Plateau.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Twelve million people live along Lake Michigan's shores, mainly in the Chicago and Milwaukee metropolitan areas. The economy of many communities in northern Michigan and Door County, Wisconsin is supported by tourism, with large seasonal populations attracted by the beauty and recreational opportunities offered by Lake Michigan. Seasonal residents often have summer homes along the waterfront and return home for the winter. The southern tip of the lake near Gary, Indiana is heavily industrialized. Cities on the shores of Lake Michigan include:\nIllinois", "qas": [{"question": "what state is located on the shores of lake michigan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 11, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Indiana\nMichigan", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wisconsin", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Saint Lawrence Seaway and Great Lakes Waterway opened the Great Lakes to ocean-going vessels. Wider ocean-going container ships do not fit through the locks on these routes, and thus shipping is limited on the lakes. Despite their vast size, large sections of the Great Lakes freeze in winter, interrupting most shipping. Some icebreakers ply the lakes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes are also connected by the Illinois Waterway to the Gulf of Mexico via the Illinois River (from Chicago) and the Mississippi River. An alternate track is via the Illinois River (from Chicago), to the Mississippi, up the Ohio, and then through the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway (combination of a series of rivers and lakes and canals), to Mobile Bay and the Gulf. Commercial tug-and-barge traffic on these waterways is heavy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pleasure boats can also enter or exit the Great Lakes by way of the Erie Canal and Hudson River in New York. The Erie Canal connects to the Great Lakes at the east end of Lake Erie (at Buffalo, NY) and at the south side of Lake Ontario (at Oswego, NY).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Michigan has many beaches. The region is often referred to as the \"Third Coast\" of the United States, after those of the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. The sand is often soft and off-white, known as \"singing sands\" because of the squeaking noise (caused by high quartz content) it emits when walked upon. Some beaches have sand dunes covered in green beach grass and sand cherries, and the water is usually clear and cool, between , even in the late summer months. However, because prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, there is a flow of warmer water to the Michigan shore in the summer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The sand dunes located on the east shore of Lake Michigan are the largest freshwater dune system in the world. In fact, in multiple locations along the shoreline, the dunes rise several hundred feet above the lake surface. Large dune formations can be seen in many state parks, national forests and national parks along the Indiana and Michigan shoreline. Some of the most expansive and unique dune formations can be found at Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, Saugatuck Dunes State Park, Warren Dunes State Park, Hoffmaster State Park, Silver Lake State Park, Ludington State Park, and Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore. Small dune formations can be found on the western shore of Lake Michigan at Illinois Beach State Park and moderate sized dune formations can be found in Kohler-Andrae State Park and Point Beach State Forest in Wisconsin. A large dune formation can be found in Whitefish Dunes State Park in Wisconsin in the Door Peninsula. Lake Michigan beaches in Northern Michigan are the only place in the world, aside from a few inland lakes in that region, where one can find Petoskey stones, the state stone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The beaches of the western coast and the northernmost part of the east coast are often rocky, with some sandy beaches due to local conditions; while the southern and eastern beaches are typically sandy and dune-covered. This is partly because of the prevailing winds from the west (which also cause thick layers of ice to build on the eastern shore in winter).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Chicago city waterfront is composed of parks, beaches, harbors and marinas, and residential developments connected by the Chicago Lakefront Trail. Where there are no beaches or marinas, stone or concrete revetments protect the shoreline from erosion. The Chicago lakefront is accessible for about between the city's southern and northern limits along the lake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Two passenger and vehicle ferries operate ferry services on Lake Michigan, both connecting Wisconsin on the western shore with Michigan on the east. From May to October, the historic steam ship, , operates daily between Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and Ludington, Michigan, connecting U.S. Highway 10 between the two cities. The \"Lake Express\", established in 2004, carries passengers and vehicles across the lake between Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Muskegon, Michigan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe National Park Service maintains the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore. Parts of the shoreline are within the Hiawatha National Forest and the Manistee National Forest. The Manistee National Forest section of the shoreline includes the Nordhouse Dunes Wilderness. The Lake Michigan division of the Michigan Islands National Wildlife Refuge is also within the lake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are numerous state and local parks located on the shores of the lake or on islands within the lake. A partial list follows.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Milwaukee Reef, running under Lake Michigan from a point between Milwaukee and Racine to a point between Grand Haven and Muskegon, divides the lake into northern and southern basins. Each basin has a clockwise flow of water, deriving from rivers, winds, and the Coriolis effect. Prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, producing a moderating effect on the climate of western Michigan. There is a mean difference in summer temperatures of 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit (2 to 5 degrees Celsius) between the Wisconsin and Michigan shores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrologically Michigan and Huron are the same body of water (sometimes called Lake Michigan-Huron), but are normally considered distinct. Counted together, it is the largest body of fresh water in the world by surface area. The Mackinac Bridge is generally considered the dividing line between them. Both lakes are part of the Great Lakes Waterway. The main inflow to Lake Michigan from Lake Superior, through Lake Huron, is controlled by the locks operated by the bi-national Lake Superior Board of Control", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historic High Water", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historic Low Water", "qas": []}, {"context": "In January 2013, Lake Michigan's monthly mean water levels dipped to an all-time low of , reaching their lowest ebb since record keeping began in 1918. The lakes were below their long-term average and had declined 17 inches since January 2012. Keith Kompoltowicz, chief of watershed hydrology for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' district office in Detroit, explained that biggest factors leading to the lower water levels in 2013 were a combination of the \"lack of a large snowpack\" in the winter of 2011/2012 coupled with very hot and dry conditions in the summer of 2012.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Michigan, like the other Great Lakes, supplies drinking water to millions of people in bordering areas. The lakes are collectively administered by the state and provincial governments adjacent to them pursuant to the Great Lakes Compact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Environmental problems can still plague the lake. Steel mills and refineries operate near the Indiana shoreline. The \"Chicago Tribune\" reported that BP is a major polluter, dumping thousands of pounds of raw sludge into the lake every day from its Whiting, Indiana, oil refinery. In March 2014 BP's Whiting refinery was responsible for spilling more than of oil into the lake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Michigan is home to a wide variety of fish species and other organisms. It was originally home to lake whitefish, lake trout, yellow perch, panfish, largemouth bass, smallmouth bass and bowfin, as well as some species of catfish. As a result of improvements to the Welland Canal in 1919, an invasion of sea lampreys and overharvesting, there has been a decline in native lake trout populations, ultimately causing an increase in the population of another invasive species, the alewife. As a result, salmonids, including various strains of brown trout, steelhead (rainbow trout), coho and chinook salmon, were introduced as predators in order to decrease the alewife population. This program was so successful that the introduced population of trout and salmon exploded, resulting in the creation of a large sport fishery for these introduced species. Lake Michigan is now stocked annually with steelhead, brown trout, and coho and chinook salmon, which have also begun natural reproduction in some Lake Michigan tributaries. However, several introduced invasive species, such as lampreys, round goby, zebra mussels and quagga mussels, continue to cause major changes in water clarity and fertility, resulting in knock-on changes to Lake Michigan's ecosystem, threatening the vitality of native fish populations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fisheries in inland waters of the United States are small compared to marine fisheries. The largest fisheries are the landings from the Great Lakes, worth about $13 million in 2003. Michigan\u2019s commercial fishery today consists mainly of 150 tribe-licensed commercial fishing operations through the Chippewa-Ottawa Resource Authority (CORA) and tribes belonging to the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC), which harvest 50 percent of the Great Lakes commercial catch in Michigan waters, and 45 state-licensed commercial fishing enterprises. The prime commercial species is the lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis). The annual harvest declined from an average of from 1981 through to 1999 to more recent annual harvests of . The price for lake whitefish dropped from $1.04/lb. to as low as $.40/lb during periods of high production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sports fishing includes salmon, whitefish, smelt, lake trout and walleye being major catches. In the late 1960s, successful stocking programs for Pacific salmon led to the development of Lake Michigan\u2019s charter fishing industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like all of the Great Lakes, Lake Michigan is today used as a major mode of transport for bulk goods. In 2002, 162 million net tons of dry bulk cargo were moved via the Lakes. This was, in order of volume: iron ore, grain and potash. The iron ore and much of the stone and coal are used in the steel industry. There is also some shipping of liquid and containerized cargo, but most container vessels cannot pass the locks on the Saint Lawrence Seaway because the ships are too wide. The total amount of shipping on the lakes has been on a downward trend for several years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Port of Chicago, operated by the Illinois International Port District, has grain (14\u00a0million bushels) and bulk liquid (800,000 barrels) storage facilities along Lake Calumet. The central element of the Port District, Calumet Harbor, is maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.\nTourism and recreation are major industries on all of the Great Lakes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Fibonacci", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Fibonacci (c. 1170 \u2013 c. 1250) was an Italian mathematician from the Republic of Pisa, considered to be \"the most talented Western mathematician of the Middle Ages\".\nThe name he is commonly called, \"Fibonacci\" (), was made up in 1838 by the Franco-Italian historian Guillaume Libri and is short for (\"son of Bonacci\"). He is also known as Leonardo Bonacci, Leonardo of Pisa, or Leonardo Bigollo (\"traveller\") Pisano.\nFibonacci popularized the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system in the Western World primarily through his composition in 1202 of \"Liber Abaci\" (\"Book of Calculation\"). He also introduced Europe to the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, which he used as an example in \"Liber Abaci\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fibonacci was born around 1170 to Guglielmo, an Italian merchant and customs official. Guglielmo directed a trading post in Bugia, Algeria). Fibonacci travelled with him as a young boy, and it was in Bugia that he learned about the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system.", "qas": [{"question": "what was von neumann 's ethnicity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 1, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Fibonacci travelled around the Mediterranean coast, meeting with many merchants and learning about their systems of doing arithmetic. He soon realised the many advantages of the Hindu-Arabic system, which unlike the Roman numerals used at the time, allowed easy calculation using a place-value system. In 1202, he completed the \"Liber Abaci\" (\"Book of Abacus\" or \"The Book of Calculation\") which popularized Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals in Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fibonacci became a guest of Emperor Frederick II, who enjoyed mathematics and science. In 1240, the Republic of Pisa honored Fibonacci (referred to as Leonardo Bigollo) by granting him a salary in a decree that recognized him for the services that he had given to the city as an advisor on matters of accounting and instruction to citizens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The date of Fibonacci's death is not known, but it has been estimated to be between 1240 and 1250, most likely in Pisa.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the date of fibonacci's death ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the \"Liber Abaci\" (1202), Fibonacci introduced the so-called \"modus Indorum\" (method of the Indians), today known as the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system. The book advocated numeration with the digits 0\u20139 and place value. The book showed the practical use and value of the new Hindu-Arabic numeral system by applying the numerals to commercial bookkeeping, converting weights and measures, calculation of interest, money-changing, and other applications. The book was well-received throughout educated Europe and had a profound impact on European thought. No copies of the 1202 edition are known to exist.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the `` modus indorum '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The 1228 edition, first section introduces the Hindu-Arabic numeral system and compares the system with other systems, such as Roman numerals, and methods to convert the other numeral systems into Hindu-Arabic numerals. Replacing the Roman numeral system, its ancient Egyptian multiplication method, and using an abacus for calculations, with a Hindu-Arabic numeral system was an advance in making business calculations easier and faster, which led to the growth of banking and accounting in Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second section explains the uses of Hindu-Arabic numerals in business, for example converting different currencies, and calculating profit and interest, which were important to the growing banking industry. The book also discusses irrational numbers and prime numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Liber Abaci\" posed and solved a problem involving the growth of a population of rabbits based on idealized assumptions. The solution, generation by generation, was a sequence of numbers later known as Fibonacci numbers. Although Fibonacci's \"Liber Abaci\" contains the earliest known description of the sequence outside of India, the sequence had been described by Indian mathematicians as early as the sixth century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Fibonacci sequence, each number is the sum of the previous two numbers. Fibonacci omitted the \"0\" included today and began the sequence with 1, 1, 2 ... He carried the calculation up to the thirteenth place, the value 233, though another manuscript carries it to the next place: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377. Fibonacci did not speak about the golden ratio as the limit of the ratio of consecutive numbers in this sequence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 19th century, a statue of Fibonacci was constructed and raised in Pisa. Today it is located in the western gallery of the Camposanto, historical cemetery on the Piazza dei Miracoli.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many mathematical concepts named after Fibonacci because of a connection to the Fibonacci numbers. Examples include the Brahmagupta\u2013Fibonacci identity, the Fibonacci search technique, and the Pisano period. Beyond mathematics, namesakes of Fibonacci include the asteroid 6765 Fibonacci and the art rock band The Fibonaccis.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the art ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 11, 2)"}, {"question": "what are many mathematical concepts named after ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Footnotes\nCitations", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lake Superior", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Lake Superior (; ), the largest of the Great Lakes of North America, is also the world's largest freshwater lake by surface area, and the third largest freshwater lake by volume. The lake is shared by the Canadian province of Ontario to the north, the U.S. state of Minnesota to the west, and Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan to the south. The farthest north and west of the Great Lakes chain, Superior has the highest elevation of all five great lakes and drains into the St. Mary's River.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the largest lake in north america ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Ojibwe name for the lake is \"gichi-gami\" (pronounced as \"gitchi-gami\" and \"kitchi-gami\" in other dialects), meaning \"great sea.\" Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote the name as \"Gitche Gumee\" in The Song of Hiawatha, as did Gordon Lightfoot in his song, \"The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald\". According to other sources, the actual Ojibwe name is \"Ojibwe Gichigami\" (\"Ojibwe's Great Sea\") or \"Anishinaabe Gichigami\" (\"Anishinaabe's Great Sea\"). The 1878 dictionary by Father Frederic Baraga, the first one written for the Ojibway language, gives the Ojibwe name as Otchipwe-kitchi-gami (reflecting \"Ojibwe Gichigami\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first French explorers approaching the great inland sea by way of the Ottawa River and Lake Huron during the 17th century referred to their discovery as \"le lac sup\u00e9rieur\". Properly translated, the expression means \"Upper Lake,\" that is, the lake above Lake Huron. The lake was also called \"Lac Tracy\" (named for Alexandre de Prouville de Tracy) by 17th century Jesuit missionaries. The British, upon taking control of the region from the French in the 1760s following the French and Indian War, anglicized the lake's name to \"Superior\", \"on account of its being superior in magnitude to any of the lakes on that vast continent.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Superior empties into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River and the Soo Locks. Lake Superior is the largest freshwater lake in the world in area (if Lakes Michigan and Huron are taken separately; \"see Lake Michigan\u2013Huron\"), and the third largest in volume, behind Lake Baikal in Siberia and Lake Tanganyika in East Africa. The Caspian Sea, while larger than Lake Superior in both surface area and volume, is brackish; though presently isolated, prehistorically the Caspian has been repeatedly connected to and isolated from the Mediterranean via the Black Sea.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the river that lake water ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Superior has a surface area of , which is approximately the size of South Carolina or Austria. It has a maximum length of and maximum breadth of . Its average depth is with a maximum depth of . Lake Superior contains 2,900 cubic\u00a0miles (12,100\u00a0km\u00b3) of water. There is enough water in Lake Superior to cover the entire land mass of North and South America to a depth of . The shoreline of the lake stretches (including islands).", "qas": [{"question": "what is the coastline of the lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 4, 5)"}]}, {"context": "American limnologist J. Val Klump was the first person to reach the lowest depth of Lake Superior on July 30, 1985, as part of a scientific expedition, which at 122 fathoms 1 foot () below sea level is the second-lowest spot in the continental interior of the United States and the third-lowest spot in the interior of the North American continent after Iliamna Lake in Alaska (942 feet [287 m] below sea level) and Great Slave Lake in the Northwest Territories of Canada at ( below sea level). (Though Crater Lake is the deepest lake in the United States and deeper than Lake Superior, Crater Lake's elevation is higher and consequently its deepest point is \"above\" sea level.)", "qas": [{"question": "what is the tallest lake in the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 5, 1)"}]}, {"context": "While the temperature of the surface of Lake Superior varies seasonally, the temperature below is an almost constant 39\u00a0\u00b0F (4\u00a0\u00b0C). This variation in temperature makes the lake seasonally stratigraphic. Twice per year, however, the water column reaches a uniform temperature of 39\u00a0\u00b0F (4\u00a0\u00b0C) from top to bottom, and the lake waters thoroughly mix. This feature makes the lake dimictic. Because of its volume, Lake Superior has a retention time of 191 years.", "qas": [{"question": "how long has the water superior ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 6, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Annual storms on Lake Superior regularly feature wave heights of over . Waves well over have been recorded.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake is fed by over 200 rivers. The largest include the Nipigon River, the St. Louis River, the Pigeon River, the Pic River, the White River, the Michipicoten River, the Bois Brule River and the Kaministiquia River. Lake Superior drains into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River. There are rapids at the river's upper (Lake Superior) end where the river bed has a relatively steep gradient. The Soo Locks were built to enable ships to bypass the rapids and to overcome the height difference between Lakes Superior and Huron.", "qas": [{"question": "how many rivers are in the lake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The lake's average surface elevation is above sea level. Until approximately 1887, the natural hydraulic conveyance through the St. Marys River rapids determined the outflow from Lake Superior. By 1921, development in support of transportation and hydroelectric power resulted in gates, locks, power canals and other control structures completely spanning St. Marys rapids. The regulating structure is known as the Compensating Works and is operated according to a regulation plan known as Plan 1977-A. Water levels, including diversions of water from the Hudson Bay watershed, are regulated by the International Lake Superior Board of Control, which was established in 1914 by the International Joint Commission.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the lowest point of the temperature above sea level ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lake Superior's water level was at a new record low in September 2007, slightly less than the previous record low in 1926. However, the water levels returned within a few days.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historic high water\nThe lake's water level fluctuates from month to month, with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is above datum (601.1\u00a0ft or 183.2 m). In the summer of 1985, Lake Superior reached its highest recorded level at above datum. The winter of 1986 set new high-water records through the winter and spring months (January to June), ranging from to above Chart Datum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historic low water\nThe lake's lowest levels occur in March and April. The normal low-water mark is below datum (601.1\u00a0ft or 183.2 m). In the winter of 1926 Lake Superior reached its lowest recorded level at below datum. Additionally, the entire first half of the year (January to June) included record low months. The low water was a continuation of the dropping lake levels from the previous year, 1925, which set low-water records for October through December. During the nine-month period of October 1925 to June 1926, water levels ranged from to below Chart Datum. In the summer of 2007 monthly historic lows were set; August at , September at .", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to a study by professors at the University of Minnesota Duluth, Lake Superior may have warmed faster than its surrounding area. Summer surface temperatures in the lake appeared to have increased by about 4.5\u00a0\u00b0F (2.5\u00a0\u00b0C) between 1979 and 2007, compared with an approximately 2.7\u00a0\u00b0F (1.5\u00a0\u00b0C) increase in the surrounding average air temperature. The increase in the lake's surface temperature may be related to the decreasing ice cover. Less winter ice cover allows more solar radiation to penetrate and warm the water. If trends continue, Lake Superior, which freezes over completely once every 20 years, could routinely be ice-free by 2040. This would be a significant departure from historical records as, according to Hubert Lamb, Samuel Champlain reported ice along the shores of Lake Superior in June 1608. Warmer temperatures could actually lead to more snow in the lake effect snow belts along the shores of the lake, especially in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. However, two recent consecutive winters (2013\u20132014 and 2014\u20132015) brought unusually high ice coverage to the Great Lakes, and on March 6, 2014, overall ice coverage peaked at 92.5%, the second-highest in recorded history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The largest island in Lake Superior is Isle Royale in the state of Michigan. Isle Royale contains several lakes, some of which also contain islands. Other well-known islands include Madeline Island in the state of Wisconsin, Michipicoten Island in the province of Ontario, and Grand Island (the location of the Grand Island National Recreation Area) in the state of Michigan.", "qas": [{"question": "what state is the largest island in the state of michigan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The larger cities on Lake Superior include the twin ports of Duluth, Minnesota and Superior, Wisconsin; Thunder Bay, Ontario; Marquette, Michigan; and the twin cities of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, and Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. Duluth-Superior, at the western end of Lake Superior, is the most inland point on the St. Lawrence Seaway and the most inland port in the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Among the scenic places on the lake are Apostle Islands National Lakeshore, Isle Royale National Park, Porcupine Mountains Wilderness State Park, Pukaskwa National Park, Lake Superior Provincial Park, Grand Island National Recreation Area, Sleeping Giant (Ontario) and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Superior's size reduces the severity of the seasons of its humid continental climate (more typically seen in locations like Nova Scotia). The water surface's slow reaction to temperature changes, seasonally ranging between 32 and 55\u00a0\u00b0F (0\u201313\u00a0\u00b0C) around 1970, helps to moderate surrounding air temperatures in the summer and winter, and creates lake effect snow in colder months. The hills and mountains that border the lake hold moisture and fog, particularly in the fall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lake's surface temperature has risen by 4.5\u00a0\u00b0F (2.5\u00a0\u00b0C) since 1979.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rocks of Lake Superior's northern shore date back to the early history of the earth. During the Precambrian (between 4.5 billion and 540 million years ago) magma forcing its way to the surface created the intrusive granites of the Canadian Shield. These ancient granites can be seen on the North Shore today. It was during the Penokean orogeny, part of the process that created the Great Lakes Tectonic Zone, that many valuable metals were deposited. The region surrounding the lake has proved to be rich in minerals. Copper, iron, silver, gold and nickel are or were the most frequently mined. Examples include the Hemlo gold mine near Marathon, copper at Point Mamainse, silver at Silver Islet and uranium at Theano Point.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The mountains steadily eroded, depositing layers of sediments that compacted and became limestone, dolostone, taconite and the shale at Kakabeka Falls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The continent was later riven, creating one of the deepest rifts in the world. The lake lies in this long-extinct Mesoproterozoic rift valley, the Midcontinent Rift. Magma was injected between layers of sedimentary rock, forming diabase sills. This hard diabase protects the layers of sedimentary rock below, forming the flat-topped mesas in the Thunder Bay area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amethyst formed in some of the cavities created by the Midcontinent Rift and there are several amethyst mines in the Thunder Bay area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lava erupted from the rift and formed the black basalt rock of Michipicoten Island, Black Bay Peninsula, and St. Ignace Island.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Wisconsin glaciation 10,000 years ago, ice covered the region at a thickness of . The land contours familiar today were carved by the advance and retreat of the ice sheet. The retreat left gravel, sand, clay and boulder deposits. Glacial meltwaters gathered in the Superior basin creating Lake Minong, a precursor to Lake Superior. Without the immense weight of the ice, the land rebounded, and a drainage outlet formed at Sault Ste. Marie, which would become known as St. Mary's River.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first people came to the Lake Superior region 10,000 years ago after the retreat of the glaciers in the last Ice Age. They are known as the Plano, and they used stone-tipped spears to hunt caribou on the northwestern side of Lake Minong.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The next documented people are known as the Shield Archaic (c. 5000\u2013500\u00a0BC). Evidence of this culture can be found at the eastern and western ends of the Canadian shore. They used bows and arrows, dugout canoes, fished, hunted, mined copper for tools and weapons, and established trading networks. They are believed to be the direct ancestors of the Ojibwe and Cree.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Laurel people (c. 500 BC to AD 500) developed seine net fishing, evidence being found at rivers around Superior such as the Pic and Michipicoten.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another culture known as the Terminal Woodland Indians (c. AD 900\u20131650) has been found. They were Algonkian people who hunted, fished and gathered berries. They used snow shoes, birch bark canoes and conical or domed lodges. At the mouth of the Michipicoten River, nine layers of encampments have been discovered. Most of the Pukaskwa Pits were likely made during this time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Anishinaabe, which includes the Ojibwe or Chippewa, have inhabited the Lake Superior region for over five hundred years and were preceded by the Dakota, Fox, Menominee, Nipigon, Noquet and Gros Ventres. They called Lake Superior either \"Ojibwe Gichigami\" (\"the Ojibwe's Great Sea\") or \"Anishnaabe Gichgamiing\" (\"the Anishinaabe's Great Sea\"). After the arrival of Europeans, the Anishinaabe made themselves the middle-men between the French fur traders and other Native peoples. They soon became the dominant Native American nation in the region: they forced out the Sioux and Fox and won a victory against the Iroquois west of Sault Ste. Marie in 1662. By the mid-18th century, the Ojibwe occupied all of Lake Superior's shores.\nIn the 18th century, the fur trade in the region was booming, with the Hudson's Bay Company having a virtual monopoly. In 1783, however, the North West Company was formed to rival the Hudson's Bay Company. The North West Company built forts on Lake Superior at Grand Portage, Fort William, Nipigon, the Pic River, the Michipicoten River, and Sault Ste. Marie. But by 1821, with competition taking too great a toll on both, the companies merged under the Hudson's Bay Company name.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many towns around the lake are either current or former mining areas, or engaged in processing or shipping. Today, tourism is another significant industry; the sparsely populated Lake Superior country, with its rugged shorelines and wilderness, attracts tourists and adventurers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Superior has been an important link in the Great Lakes Waterway, providing a route for the transportation of iron ore as well as grain and other mined and manufactured materials. Large cargo vessels called lake freighters, as well as smaller ocean-going freighters, transport these commodities across Lake Superior.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of ice, the Lake is closed to shipping from mid-January to late March. Exact dates for the shipping season vary each year, depending on weather conditions that form and break the ice.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The southern shore of Lake Superior between Grand Marais, Michigan, and Whitefish Point is known as the \"Graveyard of the Great Lakes\" and more ships have been lost around the Whitefish Point area than any other part of Lake Superior. These shipwrecks are now protected by the Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Storms that claimed multiple ships include the Mataafa Storm in 1905 and the Great Lakes Storm of 1913.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wreckage of \u2014a ore carrier that sank on October 11, 1907, during a Lake Superior storm in 77 fathoms () of water\u2014was located in August 2007. All but Charles G. Pitz of \"Cyprus\"s 23 crew perished . The ore carrier sank in Lake Superior on her second voyage, while hauling iron ore from Superior, Wisconsin, to Buffalo, New York. Built in Lorain, Ohio, \"Cyprus\" was launched August 17, 1907.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1918 the last warships to sink in the Great Lakes, French minesweepers \"Inkerman\" and \"Cerisoles\", vanished in a Lake Superior storm. With 78 crewmembers dead, their sinking marked the largest loss of life on Lake Superior to date.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to legend, \"Lake Superior seldom gives up her dead\". This is because of the unusually low temperature of the water, estimated at under on average around 1970. Normally, bacteria feeding on a sunken decaying body will generate gas inside the body, causing it to float to the surface after a few days. However, Lake Superior's water is cold enough year-round to inhibit bacterial growth, and bodies tend to sink and never resurface. This is alluded to in Lightfoot's \"The Wreck of the \"Edmund Fitzgerald\"\" ballad. \"Fitzgerald\" adventurer Joe MacInnis reported that, in July 1994, explorer Frederick Shannon's Expedition 94 to the wreck of \"Edmund Fitzgerald\" discovered and filmed a man's body near the port side of her pilothouse, not far from the open door, \"fully clothed, wearing an orange life jacket, and lying face down in the sediment.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over 80 species of fish have been found in Lake Superior. Species native to the lake include: banded killifish, bloater, brook trout, burbot, cisco, lake sturgeon, lake trout, lake whitefish, longnose sucker, muskellunge, northern pike, pumpkinseed, rock bass, round whitefish, smallmouth bass, walleye, white sucker and yellow perch. In addition, many fish species have been either intentionally or accidentally introduced to Lake Superior: Atlantic salmon, brown trout, carp, chinook salmon, coho salmon, freshwater drum, pink salmon, rainbow smelt, rainbow trout, round goby, ruffe, sea lamprey and white perch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lake Superior has fewer dissolved nutrients relative to its water volume than the other Great Lakes and so is less productive in terms of fish populations and is an oligotrophic lake. This is a result of the underdeveloped soils found in its relatively small watershed. However, nitrate concentrations in the lake have been continuously rising for more than a century. They are still much lower than levels considered dangerous to human health; but this steady, long-term rise is an unusual record of environmental nitrogen buildup. It may relate to anthropogenic alternations to the regional nitrogen cycle, but researchers are still unsure of the causes of this change to the lake's ecology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As for other Great Lakes fish, populations have also been affected by the accidental or intentional introduction of foreign species such as the sea lamprey and Eurasian ruffe. Accidental introductions have occurred in part by the removal of natural barriers to navigation between the Great Lakes. Overfishing has also been a factor in the decline of fish populations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Leipzig", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Leipzig (; ) is the most populous city in the federal state of Saxony, Germany. With a population of 596,517 inhabitants as of 31 Dec. 2018, (1.1 million residents in the larger urban zone) it is Germany's tenth most populous city. Leipzig is located about southwest of Berlin at the confluence of the White Elster, Plei\u00dfe and Parthe rivers at the southern end of the North German Plain.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most populous city in the federal state of saxony ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Leipzig has been a trade city since at least the time of the Holy Roman Empire. The city sits at the intersection of the Via Regia and the Via Imperii, two important medieval trade routes. Leipzig was once one of the major European centres of learning and culture in fields such as music and publishing. Leipzig became a major urban centre within the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) after the Second World War, but its cultural and economic importance declined.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Events in Leipzig in 1989 played a significant role in precipitating the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe, mainly through demonstrations starting from St. Nicholas Church. Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure. Leipzig today is an economic centre, the most livable city in Germany, according to the GfK marketing research institution and has the second-best future prospects of all cities in Germany, according to HWWI and Berenberg Bank. Leipzig Zoo is one of the most modern zoos in Europe and ranks first in Germany and second in Europe according to Anthony Sheridan. Since the opening of the Leipzig City Tunnel in 2013, Leipzig forms the centrepiece of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland public transit system. Leipzig is currently listed as a Gamma World City, Germany's \"Boomtown\" and as the European City of the Year 2019.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Oper Leipzig has become one of the most prominent opera houses in Germany. It was founded in 1693, making it the third oldest opera venue in Europe after La Fenice (Venice, Italy) and the Hamburg State Opera (Hamburg, Germany). Leipzig is also home to the University of Music and Theatre \"Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy\". It was during a stay in this city that Friedrich Schiller wrote his poem \"Ode to Joy\". The Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, established in 1743, is one of the oldest symphony orchestras in the world.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most prominent opera houses in germany ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "what is one of the oldest symphony orchestras in the world ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 3, 4)"}]}, {"context": "The name Leipzig is derived from the Slavic word \"\", which means \"settlement where the linden trees (British English: lime trees; U.S. English: basswood trees) stand\". An older spelling of the name in English is '. The Latin name ' was also used. The name is cognate with () in Russia and in Latvia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1937 the Nazi government officially renamed the city \"\" (Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1989 Leipzig has been informally dubbed \"Hero City\" (), in recognition of the role that the Monday demonstrations there played in the fall of the East German regime\u00a0\u2013 the name alludes to the honorary title awarded in the former Soviet Union to certain cities that played a key role in the victory of the Allies during the Second World War. The common usage of this nickname for Leipzig up until the present is reflected, for example, in the name of a popular blog for local arts and culture, \"Heldenstadt.de\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "More recently, the city has sometimes been nicknamed the \"Boomtown of eastern Germany\", \"Hypezig\" or \"The better Berlin\" for being celebrated by the media as a hip urban centre for the vital lifestyle and creative scene with many startups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig was first documented in 1015 in the chronicles of Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg as \" (\" VII\", 25) and endowed with city and market privileges in 1165 by Otto the Rich. Leipzig Trade Fair, started in the Middle Ages, has become an event of international importance and is the oldest surviving trade fair in the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are records of commercial fishing operations on the river Plei\u00dfe in Leipzig dating back to 1305, when the Margrave Dietrich the Younger granted the fishing rights to the church and convent of St Thomas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There were a number of monasteries in and around the city, including a Franciscan monastery after which the (Barefoot Alley) is named and a monastery of Irish monks (, destroyed in 1544) near the present day (the old \").", "qas": []}, {"context": "The foundation of the University of Leipzig in 1409 initiated the city's development into a centre of German law and the publishing industry, and towards being the location of the \" (Imperial Court of Justice) and the German National Library (founded in 1912).", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Thirty Years' War, two battles took place in , about outside Leipzig city walls. The first Battle of Breitenfeld took place in 1631 and the second in 1642. Both battles resulted in victories for the Swedish-led side.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 24 December 1701, an oil-fueled street lighting system was introduced. The city employed light guards who had to follow a specific schedule to ensure the punctual lighting of the 700 lanterns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Leipzig region was the arena of the 1813 Battle of Leipzig between Napoleonic France and an allied coalition of Prussia, Russia, Austria and Sweden. It was the largest battle in Europe before the First World War and the coalition victory ended Napoleon's presence in Germany and would ultimately lead to his first exile on Elba. The Monument to the Battle of the Nations celebrating the centenary of this event was completed in 1913. In addition to stimulating German nationalism, the war had a major impact in mobilizing a civic spirit in numerous volunteer activities. Many volunteer militias and civic associations were formed, and collaborated with churches and the press to support local and state militias, patriotic wartime mobilization, humanitarian relief and postwar commemorative practices and rituals.", "qas": [{"question": "what year was the erfurt region ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When it was made a terminus of the first German long-distance railway to Dresden (the capital of Saxony) in 1839, Leipzig became a hub of Central European railway traffic, with Leipzig Hauptbahnhof the largest terminal station by area in Europe. The railway station has two grand entrance halls, the eastern one for the Royal Saxon State Railways and the western one for the Prussian state railways.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 19th century, Leipzig was a centre of the German and Saxon liberal movements. The first German labor party, the General German Workers' Association (\"Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein\", ADAV) was founded in Leipzig on 23 May 1863 by Ferdinand Lassalle; about 600 workers from across Germany travelled to the foundation on the new railway. Leipzig expanded rapidly to more than 700,000 inhabitants. Huge \"Gr\u00fcnderzeit\" areas were built, which mostly survived both war and post-war demolition.\nWith the opening of a fifth production hall in 1907, the Leipziger Baumwollspinnerei became the largest cotton mill company on the continent, housing over 240,000 spindles. Daily production surpassed 5\u00a0million kilograms of yarn.", "qas": [{"question": "in what century was berlin a center of german and saxon evangelical movement ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the 1930s and 1940s, music was prominent throughout Leipzig. Many students attended Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy College of Music and Theatre (then named Landeskonservatorium.) However, in 1944, it was closed due to World War II. It re-opened soon after the war ended in 1945.", "qas": [{"question": "in what decade was music a prominent part of thuringia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 22 May 1930, Carl Friedrich Goerdeler was elected mayor of Leipzig. He was well known as an opponent of the Nazi regime. He resigned in 1937 when, in his absence, his Nazi deputy ordered the destruction of the city's statue of Felix Mendelssohn. On Kristallnacht in 1938, the 1855 Moorish Revival Leipzig synagogue, one of the city's most architecturally significant buildings, was deliberately destroyed. Goerdeler was later executed by the Nazis on 2 February 1945.", "qas": [{"question": "who was elected mayor of erfurt ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Several thousand forced labourers were stationed in Leipzig during the Second World War.", "qas": [{"question": "where were peasants stationed in the second world war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Beginning in 1933, many Jewish citizens of Leipzig were members of the Gemeinde, a large Jewish religious community spread throughout Germany, Austria and Switzerland. In October 1935, the Gemeinde helped found the Lehrhaus (English: a house of study) in Leipzig to provide different forms of studies to Jewish students who were prohibited from attending any institutions in Germany. Jewish studies were emphasized and much of the Jewish community of Leipzig became involved.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the jewish community of bremen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 20, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Like all other cities claimed by the Nazis, Leipzig was subject to aryanisation. Beginning in 1933 and increasing in 1939, Jewish business owners were forced to give up their possessions and stores. This eventually intensified to the point where Nazi officials were strong enough to evict the Jewish people from their own homes. They also had the power to force many of the Jews living in the city to sell their houses. Many people who sold their homes emigrated elsewhere, outside of Leipzig. Others moved to Judenh\u00e4user, which were smaller houses that acted as ghettos, housing large groups of people.", "qas": [{"question": "what was berlin subject to aryanisation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As with other cities in Europe during the Holocaust, the Jewish people of Leipzig were greatly affected by the Nuremberg Laws. However, due to the Leipzig Trade Fair and the international attention it garnered, Leipzig was especially cautious about its public image. Despite this, the Leipzig authorities were not afraid to strictly apply and enforce anti-semitic measures. Shortly before Kristallnacht, Polish Jews living in the city were expelled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 20 December 1937, after the Nazis took control of the city, they renamed it Reichsmessestadt Leipzig, meaning the \"Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig\". In early 1938, Leipzig saw an increase in Zionism through Jewish citizens. Many of these Zionists attempted to flee before deportations began. On 28 October 1938, Heinrich Himmler ordered the deportation of Polish Jews from Leipzig to Poland.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the `` imperial trade city leipzig '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 9 November 1938, as part of Kristallnacht, in Gottschedstrasse (German: Gottschedstra\u00dfe), now a popular dining and nightlife area in Leipzig, synagogues and businesses were set on fire. Only a couple of days later, on 11 November 1938, many Jews in the Leipzig area were deported to the Buchenwald Concentration Camp. As World War II came to an end, much of Leipzig was destroyed. Following the war, the Communist Party of Germany (German: \"Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands\", \"KPD\") provided aid for the reconstruction of the city.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1933, a census recorded that over 11,000 Jews were living in Leipzig. In the 1939 census, the number had fallen to roughly 4,500, and by January 1942 only 2,000 remained. In that month, these 2,000 Jews began to be deported. On 13 July 1942, 170 Jews were deported from Leipzig to Auschwitz Concentration Camp. On 19 September 1942, 440 Jews were deported from Leipzig to Theresienstadt Concentration Camp. On 18 June 1943, the remaining 18 Jews still in Leipzig were deported from Leipzig to Auschwitz Concentration Camp. According to records of the two waves of deportations to Auschwitz there were no survivors. According to records of the Theresienstadt deportation, only 53 Jews survived.", "qas": [{"question": "how many jews were living in leipzig ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Until late 1943, there was little threat of aerial bombings to the city. However, on the morning of 4 December 1943, the British Royal Air Force dropped over 1,000 tons of explosives, resulting in the death of nearly 1,000 civilians. This bombing was the largest up to that time. Due to the close proximity of many of the buildings hit, a firestorm occurred. This prompted firefighters to rush to the city; however, the storm was too overwhelming for them. Unlike its neighbouring city of Dresden, this was a largely conventional bombing with high explosives rather than incendiaries. The resultant pattern of loss was a patchwork, rather than wholesale loss of its centre, but was nevertheless extensive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Leipzig in late April 1945. The U.S. 2nd Infantry Division and U.S. 69th Infantry Division fought their way into the city on 18 April and completed its capture after fierce urban action, in which fighting was often house-to-house and block-to-block, on 19 April 1945. In April 1945 the SS Gruppehfuhrer/Mayor of Leipzig Bruno Erich Alfred Freyberg, his wife and daughter; the Deputy Mayor/Treasurer of Leipzig, Ernest Kurt Lisso, his wife, daughter, and a Volkssturm Major Walter D\u00f6nicke committed suicide in Leipzig City Hall.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the allied ground advance into thuringia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The United States turned the city over to the Red Army as it pulled back from the line of contact with Soviet forces in July 1945 to the designated occupation zone boundaries. Leipzig became one of the major cities of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany).", "qas": [{"question": "who became one of the major cities of the german democratic republic ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 28, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Following the end of World War II in 1945, Leipzig saw a slow return of Jewish people to the city.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the mid-20th century, the city's trade fair assumed renewed importance as a point of contact with the Comecon Eastern Europe economic bloc, of which East Germany was a member. At this time, trade fairs were held at a site in the south of the city, near the Monument to the Battle of the Nations. In October 1989, after prayers for peace at St.\u00a0Nicholas Church, established in 1983 as part of the peace movement, the Monday demonstrations started as the most prominent mass protest against the East German government. Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nowadays, Leipzig is an important economic center in Germany. Since the 2010s, the city has been celebrated by the media as a hip urban center with a very high quality of living. It is often called \"The new Berlin\". Leipzig is also Germany's fastest growing city. Leipzig was the German candidate for the 2012 Summer Olympics, but was unsuccessful. After ten years of construction, the Leipzig City Tunnel opened on 14 December 2013. Leipzig forms the centerpiece of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland public transit system, which operates in the four German states of Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, Thuringia and Brandenburg.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an important economic center in germany ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Leipzig lies at the confluence of the rivers White Elster, Plei\u00dfe and Parthe, in the Leipzig Bay, on the most southerly part of the North German Plain, which is the part of the North European Plain in Germany. The site is characterized by swampy areas such as the Leipzig Riverside Forest, though there are also some limestone areas to the north of the city. The landscape is mostly flat though there is also some evidence of moraine and drumlins.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although there are some forest parks within the city limits, the area surrounding Leipzig is relatively unforested. During the 20th century, there were several open-cast mines in the region, many of which are being converted to use as lakes. Also see: Neuseenland", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig is also situated at the intersection of the ancient roads known as the Via Regia (King's highway), which traversed Germany in an east-west direction, and the Via Imperii (Imperial Highway), a north-south road.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig was a walled city in the Middle Ages and the current \"ring\" road around the historic centre of the city follows the line of the old city walls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1992 Leipzig has been divided administratively into ten districts, which in turn contain a total of 63 subdistricts. Some of these correspond to outlying villages which have been annexed by Leipzig.", "qas": [{"question": "where have some of the various villages been annexed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 36, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Like many places located in Eastern parts of Germany, Leipzig has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\" close to a \"Dfb\" [0 \u00b0C US isoterm]) with significant continental influences due to inland location. Winters are variably mild to cold, with an average of around . Summers are generally warm, averaging at with daytime temperatures of . Precipitation in winter is about half that of the summer. The amount of sunshine is very different between winter and summer, with an average of around 51 hours of sunshine in December (1.7 hours a day) compared with 229 hours of sunshine in July (7.4 hours a day).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig has a population of about 570,000. In 1930 the population reached its historical peak of over 700,000. It decreased steadily from 1950 until 1989 to about 530,000. In the 1990s the population decreased rather rapidly to 437,000 in 1998. This reduction was mostly due to outward migration and suburbanization. After almost doubling the city area by incorporation of surrounding towns in 1999, the number stabilized and started to rise again with an increase of 1,000 in 2000. , Leipzig is the fastest-growing city in Germany with over 500,000 inhabitants.\nThe growth of the past 10\u201315 years has mostly been due to inward migration. In recent years inward migration accelerated, reaching an increase of 12,917 in 2014.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the population of bremen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the years following German reunification many people of working age took the opportunity to move to the states of the former West Germany to seek work. This was a contributory factor to falling birth rates. Births dropped from 7,000 in 1988 to less than 3,000 in 1994. However, the number of children born in Leipzig has risen since the late 1990s. In 2011 it reached 5,490 newborns resulting in a RNI of -17.7 (-393.7 in 1995).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The unemployment rate decreased from 18.2% in 2003 to 9.8% in 2014 and 7.6% in June 2017.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The percentage of the population with an immigrant background is low compared with other German cities. , only 5.6% of the population were foreigners, compared to the German overall average of 7.7%.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The number of people with an immigrant background (immigrants and their children) grew from 49,323 in 2012 to 77,559 in 2016, making them 13.3% of the city's population (Leipzig's population 579,530 in 2016).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The largest minorities (first and second generation) in Leipzig by country of origin in 2017 are:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the largest minorities first and second generation -rrb- ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 43, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The historic central area of Leipzig features a Renaissance-style ensemble of buildings from the 16th century, including the old city hall in the market place. There are also several baroque period trading houses and former residences of rich merchants. As Leipzig grew considerably during the economic boom of the late 19th century, the town has many buildings in the historicist style representative of the \"Gr\u00fcnderzeit\" era. Approximately 35% of Leipzig's flats are in buildings of this type. The new city hall, completed in 1905, is built in the same style.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some 64,000 apartments in Leipzig were built in Plattenbau buildings during the Communist rule in East Germany. and although some of these have been demolished and the numbers living in this type of accommodation have declined in recent years, at least 10% of Leipzig's population (50,000 people) are still living in Plattenbau accommodation. Gr\u00fcnau, for example, has approximately 40,000 people living in this sort of accommodation.", "qas": [{"question": "where were the hotels in bremen built ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 45, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The St. Paul's Church was destroyed by the communists in 1968 to make room for a new main building for the university. After some debate, the city decided to establish a new, mainly secular building at the same location, called Paulinum, which was completed in 2012. Its architecture alludes to the look of the former church and it includes space for religious use by the faculty of theology, including the original altar from the old church and two newly built organs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many commercial buildings were built in the 1990s as a result of tax breaks after German reunification.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The tallest structure in Leipzig is the chimney of the Stahl- und Hartgusswerk B\u00f6sdorf GmbH with a height of . With , the City-Hochhaus Leipzig is the tallest high-rise building in Leipzig. From 1972 to 1973 it was Germany's tallest building.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the highlights of the city's contemporary arts was the Neo Rauch retrospective opening in April 2010 at the Leipzig Museum of Fine Arts. This is a show devoted to the father of the New Leipzig School of artists. According to \"The New York Times\", this scene \"has been the toast of the contemporary art world\" for the past decade. In addition, there are eleven galleries in the so-called Spinnerei.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Grassi Museum complex contains three more of Leipzig's major collections: the Ethnography Museum, Applied Arts Museum and Musical Instrument Museum (the last of which is run by the University of Leipzig). The university also runs the Museum of Antiquities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Founded in March 2015, the G2 Kunsthalle houses the Hildebrand Collection. This private collection focuses on the so-called New Leipzig School. Leipzig's first private museum dedicated to contemporary art in Leipzig after the turn of the millennium is located in the city centre close to the famous St. Thomas Church on the third floor of the former GDR processing centre.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other museums in Leipzig include the following:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig is well known for its large parks. The \"Leipziger Auwald\" (riparian forest) lies mostly within the city limits. Neuseenland is an area south of Leipzig where old open-cast mines are being converted into a huge lake district. It is planned to be finished in 2060.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Johann Sebastian Bach worked in Leipzig from 1723 to 1750, conducting the Thomanerchor (St. Thomas Church Choir), at the St. Thomas Church, the St. Nicholas Church and the Paulinerkirche, the university church of Leipzig (destroyed in 1968). The composer Richard Wagner was born in Leipzig in 1813, in the Br\u00fchl. Robert Schumann was also active in Leipzig music, having been invited by Felix Mendelssohn when the latter established Germany's first musical conservatoire in the city in 1843. Gustav Mahler was second conductor (working under Artur Nikisch) at the Leipzig Opera from June 1886 until May 1888, and achieved his first significant recognition while there by completing and publishing Carl Maria von Weber's opera Die Drei Pintos. Mahler also completed his own 1st Symphony while living in Leipzig.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today the conservatory is the University of Music and Theatre Leipzig. A broad range of subjects are taught, including artistic and teacher training in all orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition in various musical styles. The drama departments teach acting and scriptwriting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bach-Archiv Leipzig, an institution for the documentation and research of the life and work of Bach (and also of the Bach family), was founded in Leipzig in 1950 by Werner Neumann. The Bach-Archiv organizes the prestigious International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition, initiated in 1950 as part of a music festival marking the bicentennial of Bach's death. The competition is now held every two years in three changing categories. The Bach-Archiv also organizes performances, especially the international festival Bachfest Leipzig () and runs the Bach-Museum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city's musical tradition is also reflected in the worldwide fame of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, under its chief conductor Riccardo Chailly, and the Thomanerchor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra is Leipzig's second largest symphony orchestra. Its current chief conductor is Kristjan J\u00e4rvi. Both the Gewandhausorchester and the MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra make use of in the Gewandhaus concert hall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For over 60 years Leipzig has been offering a \"school concert\" programme for children in Germany, with over 140 concerts every year in venues such as the Gewandhaus and over 40,000 children attending.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As for contemporary music, Leipzig is known for its independent music scene and subcultural events. Leipzig has for 20 years been home to the world's largest Gothic festival, the annual Wave-Gotik-Treffen (WGT), where thousands of fans of gothic and dark styled music from across Europe gather in the early summer. The first Wave Gotik Treffen was held at the Eiskeller club, today known as Conne Island, in the Connewitz district. Mayhem's notorious album Live in Leipzig was also recorded at the Eiskeller club. Leipzig Pop Up is an annual music trade fair for the independent music scene as well as a music festival taking place on Pentecost weekend. Its most famous indie-labels are Moon Harbour Recordings (House) and Kann Records (House/Techno/Psychedelic). Several venues offer live music on a daily basis, including the Moritzbastei which was once part of the city's fortifications, and is one of the oldest student clubs in Europe with concerts in various styles. For over 15 years \"Tonelli's\" has been offering free weekly concerts every day of the week, though door charges may apply Saturdays.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The cover photo for the Beirut band's 2005 album Gulag Orkestar, according to the sleeve notes, was stolen from a Leipzig library by Zach Condon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city of Leipzig is also the birthplace of Till Lindemann, best known as the lead vocalist of Rammstein, a band formed in 1994.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nMore than 300 sport clubs in the city represent 78 different disciplines. Over 400 athletic facilities are available to citizens and club members.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The German Football Association (DFB) was founded in Leipzig in 1900. The city was the venue for the 2006 FIFA World Cup draw, and hosted four first-round matches and one match in the round of 16 in the central stadium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "VfB Leipzig, now 1.\u00a0FC Lokomotive Leipzig, won the first national Association football championship in 1903. The club was reformed as 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig in 1966 and has had a glorious past in international competition as well, having been champions of the 1965\u201366 Intertoto Cup, semi-finalists in the 1973\u201374 UEFA Cup, and runners-up in the 1986\u201387 European Cup Winners' Cup.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In May 2009 Red Bull entered the local market after being denied the right to buy into FC Sachsen Leipzig in 2006. The newly founded RB Leipzig declared the intention to come up through the ranks of German football to bring Bundesliga football back to the region. RB Leipzig was finally promoted to the top level of the Bundesliga after finishing the 2015\u201316 2. Bundesliga season as runners-up.", "qas": []}, {"context": "List of Leipzig men and women's football clubs playing at state level and above:\nNote 1: The RB Leipzig women's football team was formed in 2016 and began play in the 2016-17 season.<br>\nNote 2: The club began play in the 2008-09 season.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the beginning of the 20th century Ice hockey gained popularity and several local clubs established departments dedicated to that sport.", "qas": []}, {"context": "SC DHfK Leipzig is the men's handball club in Leipzig and were six times (1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1965 and 1966) the champion of East Germany handball league and was winner of EHF Champions League in 1966. They finally promoted to Handball-Bundesliga as champions of 2. Bundesliga in 2014\u201315 season. They play in the Arena Leipzig witch have a capacity of 6,327 spectators in HBL games but can take up to 7,532 spectators for handball in maximum capacity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Handball-Club Leipzig is one of the most successful women's handball clubs in Germany, winning 20 domestic championships since 1956 and 3 Champions League titles. The team was however relegated to the third tier league in 2017 due to failing to achieve the economic standard demanded by the league licence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1950 to 1990 Leipzig was host of the Deutsche Hochschule f\u00fcr K\u00f6rperkultur (DHfK, German College of Physical Culture), the national sports college of the GDR.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig also hosted the Fencing World Cup in 2005 and hosts a number of international competitions in a variety of sports each year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig made a bid to host the 2012 Summer Olympic Games. The bid did not make the shortlist after the International Olympic Committee pared the bids down to 5.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Markkleeberger See is a new lake next to Markkleeberg, a suburb on the south side of Leipzig. A former open-pit coal mine, it was flooded in 1999 with groundwater and developed in 2006 as a tourist area. On its southeastern shore is Germany's only pump-powered artificial whitewater slalom course, Markkleeberg Canoe Park (Kanupark Markkleeberg), a venue which rivals the Eiskanal in Augsburg for training and international canoe/kayak competition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig Rugby Club competes in the German Rugby Bundesliga but finished at the bottom of their group in 2013.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nLeipzig University, founded 1409, is one of Europe's oldest universities. The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was born in Leipzig in 1646, and attended the university from 1661 to 1666. Nobel Prize laureate Werner Heisenberg worked here as a physics professor (from 1927 to 1942), as did Nobel Prize laureates Gustav Ludwig Hertz (physics), Wilhelm Ostwald (chemistry) and Theodor Mommsen (Nobel Prize in literature). Other former staff of faculty include mineralogist Georg Agricola, writer Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, philosopher Ernst Bloch, eccentric founder of psychophysics Gustav Theodor Fechner, and psychologist Wilhelm Wundt. Among the university's many noteworthy students were writers Johann Wolfgang Goethe and Erich K\u00e4stner, and philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, political activist Karl Liebknecht, and composer Richard Wagner. Germany's chancellor since 2006, Angela Merkel, studied physics at Leipzig University. The university has about 30,000 students.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A part of Leipzig University is the German Institute for Literature which was founded in 1955 under the name \"Johannes R. Becher-Institut\". Many noted writers have graduated from this school, including Heinz Czechowski, Kurt Drawert, Adolf Endler, Ralph Giordano, Kerstin Hensel, Sarah and Rainer Kirsch, Angela Krau\u00df, Erich Loest, Fred Wander. After its closure in 1990 the institute was refounded in 1995 with new teachers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Academy of Visual Arts (\"Hochschule f\u00fcr Grafik und Buchkunst\") was established in 1764. Its 530 students () are enrolled in courses in painting and graphics, book design/graphic design, photography and media art. The school also houses an Institute for Theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The University of Music and Theatre offers a broad range of subjects ranging from training in orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition to acting and scriptwriting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Leipzig University of Applied Sciences (HTWK) has approximately 6,200 students () and is () the second biggest institution of higher education in Leipzig. It was founded in 1992, merging several older schools. As a university of applied sciences (German: \"Fachhochschule\") its status is slightly below that of a university, with more emphasis on the practical part of the education. The HTWK offers many engineering courses, as well as courses in computer science, mathematics, business administration, librarianship, museum studies and social work. It is mainly located in the south of the city.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The private Leipzig Graduate School of Management, (in German \"Handelshochschule Leipzig (HHL)\"), is the oldest business school in Germany. According to The Economist, HHL is one of the best schools in the world, rankend at number six overall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Among the research institutes located in Leipzig, three belong to the Max Planck Society. These are the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, and Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. Two more are Fraunhofer Society institutes. Others are the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, part of the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres, and the Leibniz-Institute for Tropospheric Research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig is home to one of the world's oldest schools \"Thomasschule zu Leipzig\" (St.\u00a0Thomas' School, Leipzig), which gained fame for its long association with the Bach family of musicians and composers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lutheran Theological Seminary is a seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church in Leipzig. The seminary trains students to become pastors for the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church or for member church bodies of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city is a location for automobile manufacturing by BMW and Porsche in large plants north of the city. In 2011 and 2012 DHL transferred the bulk of its European air operations from Brussels Airport to Leipzig/Halle Airport. Kirow Ardelt AG, the world market leader in breakdown cranes, is based in Leipzig. The city also houses the European Energy Exchange, the leading energy exchange in Central Europe. With VNG \u2013 Verbundnetz Gas AG, one of Germany's large natural gas suppliers is headquartered at Leipzig. In addition, inside its larger metropolitan area, Leipzig has developed an important petrochemical center.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some of the largest employers in the area (outside of manufacturing) include software companies such as Spreadshirt and the various schools and universities in and around the Leipzig/Halle region. The University of Leipzig attracts millions of euros of investment yearly and is in the middle of a massive construction and refurbishment to celebrate its 600th anniversary.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig also benefits from world leading medical research (Leipzig Heart Centre) and a growing biotechnology industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many bars, restaurants and stores found in the downtown area are patronized by German and foreign tourists. Leipzig Hauptbahnhof itself is the location of a shopping mall. Leipzig is one of Germany's most visited cities with over 3 million overnight stays in 2017.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2010, Leipzig was included in the top 10 cities to visit by \"The New York Times\", and ranked 39th globally out of 289 cities for innovation in the 4th Innovation Cities Index published by Australian agency 2thinknow. In 2015, Leipzig have among the 30 largest German cities the third best prospects for the future. In recent years Leipzig has often been nicknamed the \"Boomtown of eastern Germany\" or \"Hypezig\". it had the highest rate of population growth of any German city.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Companies with operations in or around Leipzig include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn December 2013, according to a study by Marktforschungsinstituts GfK, Leipzig was ranked as the most livable city in Germany and is one of the three European cities with the highest quality of living (after Groningen and Krak\u00f3w). In 2015/2016, Leipzig is the second-best city for students in Germany (after Munich).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a 2017 study, the Leipzig inner city ranks first of all large cities in Germany due to its urban aesthetics, gastronomy and shopping opportunities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It has also the second-best future prospects of all cities in Germany, only surpassed by Munich.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the 2017 Global Least & Most Stressful Cities Ranking Leipzig is one of the least stressful cities in the World. It's ranked on place 25th out of 150 cities worldwide and in Germany before Dortmund, Cologne, Frankfurt and Berlin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2018, Leipzig was named as the European Cities of Future in the category \"Best Large City for Human Capital & Lifestyle\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig is the European City of the Year at the 2019 Urbanism Awards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Founded at the crossing of Via Regia and Via Imperii, Leipzig has been a major interchange of inter-European traffic and commerce since medieval times. After the Reunification of Germany, immense efforts to restore and expand the traffic network have been undertaken and left the city area with an excellent infrastructure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1936, Leipzig has been connected to the A 9 and A 14 autobahns via the Schkeuditzer Kreuz (Schkeuditz Cross) interchange and several exits. The A 38 completed the autobahn beltway around Leipzig in 2006.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like most German cities, Leipzig has a traffic layout designed to be bicycle-friendly. There is an extensive cycle network. In most of the one-way central streets, cyclists are explicitly allowed to cycle both ways. A few cycle paths have been built or declared since 1990.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig Hauptbahnhof, opened in 1915, is at a junction of important north-to-south and west-to-east railway lines. The ICE train between Berlin and Munich stops in Leipzig and it takes approximately one hour from Berlin Hauptbahnhof and three hours from M\u00fcnchen Hauptbahnhof.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig/Halle Airport is the main airport in the vicinity of the city. Leipzig/Halle Airport offers a number of seasonal vacation charter flights as well as regular scheduled services. The former military airport near Altenburg, Thuringia called Leipzig-Altenburg Airport about a half-hour drive from Leipzig was served by Ryanair until 2010.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the first half of the 20th century, the construction of the Elster-Saale canal, White Elster and Saale was started in Leipzig in order to connect to the network of waterways. The outbreak of the Second World War stopped most of the work, though some may have continued through the use of forced labor. The Lindenauer port was almost completed but not yet connected to the Elster-Saale and Karl-Heine canal respectively. The Leipzig rivers (White Elster, New Luppe, Plei\u00dfe, and Parthe) in the city have largely artificial river beds and are supplemented by some channels. These waterways are suitable only for small leisure boat traffic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Through the renovation and reconstruction of existing mill races and watercourses in the south of the city and flooded disused open cast mines, the city's navigable water network is being expanded. The city commissioned planning for a link between Karl Heine Canal and the disused Lindenauer port in 2008. Still more work was still scheduled to complete the Elster-Saale canal. Such a move would allow small boats to reach the Elbe from Leipzig. The intended completion date has been postponed because of an unacceptable cost-benefit ratio.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig has an extensive local public transport network. The city's tram and bus network is operated by the Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe. Leipzig's tram network, at a length of , is the second biggest in Germany.\nLeipzig City Tunnel forms the centerpiece of an extensive S-Bahn network serving 1.2 million people in the Leipzig/Halle metropolitan area. The tunnel links the main station in the north with the Bayrische Bahnhof in the south.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Mein Leipzig lob' ich mir! Es ist ein klein Paris und bildet seine Leute.\" (I praise my Leipzig! It is a small Paris and educates its people.) \u2013 Frosch, a university student in Goethe's \"Faust, Part One\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Ich komme nach Leipzig, an den Ort, wo man die ganze Welt im Kleinen sehen kann.\" (I'm coming to Leipzig, to the place where one can see the whole world in miniature.) \u2013 Gotthold Ephraim Lessing", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Extra Lipsiam vivere est miserrime vivere.\" (To live outside Leipzig is to live miserably.) \u2013 Benedikt Carpzov the Younger", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Das angenehme Pleis-Athen, Beh\u00e4lt den Ruhm vor allen, Auch allen zu gefallen, Denn es ist wundersch\u00f6n.\" (The pleasurable Pleiss-Athens, earns its fame above all, appealing to every one, too, for it is mightily beauteous.) \u2013 Johann Sigismund Scholze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leipzig is twinned with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "LimeWire", "paragraphs": [{"context": "LimeWire is a discontinued free peer-to-peer file sharing (P2P) client for Windows, OS X, Linux and Solaris. LimeWire used the gnutella network as well as the BitTorrent protocol. A freeware version and a purchasable \"enhanced\" version were available. BitTorrent support is provided by libtorrent.", "qas": [{"question": "what is limewire ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On October 26, 2010, U.S. federal court judge Kimba Wood issued an injunction enforcing LimeWire to prevent \"the searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality, and/or all functionality\" of its software in \"Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC\". A trial investigating the damages necessary to compensate the affected record labels was scheduled to begin in January 2011. As a result of the injunction, LimeWire stopped distributing the LimeWire software, and versions 5.5.11 and newer have been disabled using a backdoor installed by the company. However, version 5.5.10 and all prior versions of LimeWire remain fully functional and cannot be disabled unless a user upgrades to one of the newer versions. The program has been \"resurrected\" by the creators of WireShare (formerly known as \"LimeWire Pirate Edition\").", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the federal that made it to prevent the `` info '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Written in the Java programming language, LimeWire can run on any computer with a Java Virtual Machine installed. Installers were provided for Apple's Mac OS X, Microsoft's Windows, and Linux. Support for Mac OS 9 and other previous versions was dropped with the release of LimeWire 4.0.10. From version 4.8 onwards, LimeWire works as a UPnP Internet Gateway Device controller in that it can automatically set up packet-forwarding rules with UPnP-capable routers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "LimeWire offers sharing of its library through the Digital Audio Access Protocol (DAAP). As such, when LimeWire is running and configured to allow it, any files shared are detectable and downloaded on the local network by DAAP-enabled devices (e.g., Zune, iTunes). Beginning with LimeWire 4.13.9, connections can be encrypted with Transport Layer Security (TLS). Following LimeWire 4.13.11, TLS became the default connection option.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until October 2010, Lime Wire LLC, the New York City based developer of LimeWire, distributed two versions of the program: a basic free version, and an enhanced version, LimeWire PRO, sold for a fee of US$21.95 with 6 months of updates, or around $35.00 with 1 year of updates. The company claimed the paid version provides faster downloads and 66% better search results. This is accomplished by facilitating direct connection with up to 10 hosts of an identical searched file at any one time, whereas the free version is limited to a maximum of 8 hosts.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the standard free version ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Being free software, LimeWire has spawned forks, including LionShare, an experimental software development project at Penn State University, and Acquisition, a Mac OS X-based gnutella client with a proprietary interface. Researchers at Cornell University developed a reputation management add-in called Credence that allows users to distinguish between \"genuine\" and \"suspect\" files before downloading them. An October 12, 2005 report states that some of LimeWire's free and open source software contributors have forked the project and called it FrostWire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "LimeWire was the second file sharing program after Frostwire to support firewall-to-firewall file transfers, a feature introduced in version 4.2, which was released in November 2004. LimeWire also now includes BitTorrent support, but is limited to three torrent uploads and three torrent downloads, which coexist with ordinary downloads. LimeWire 5.0 added an instant messenger that uses the XMPP Protocol, an open source communication protocol. Users can now chat and share files with individuals or a group of friends in their buddy list.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the second file sharing program released ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From version 5.5.1, LimeWire has added a key activation, which requires the user to enter the unique key before activating the \"Pro\" version of the software. This has stopped people from illegally downloading the \"Pro\" versions. However, there are still ways to bypass this security feature, which was done when creating the pirate edition. For example, there are currently cracks available on the internet, and people can continue using the LimeWire Pro 5.5.1 Beta, which also includes AVG for LimeWire and is the first version to include AVG. The most recent stable version of LimeWire is 5.5.16.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most recent version of limewire ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 7, 4)"}, {"question": "what has added the user to enter the unique key before activating ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Versions of LimeWire prior to 5.5.10 can still connect to the Gnutella network and users of these versions are still able to download files, even though a message is displayed concerning the injunction during the startup process of the software. LimeWire versions 5.5.11 and newer feature an auto-update feature that allowed Lime Wire LLC to disable newer versions of the LimeWire software. Older versions of LimeWire prior to version 5.5.11, however, do not include the auto-update feature and are still fully functional. As a result, neither the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) nor Lime Wire LLC have the ability to disable older versions of LimeWire, unless the user chooses to upgrade to a newer version of LimeWire.", "qas": [{"question": "what has the ability to do with older versions of limewire ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 8, 3)"}, {"question": "what is displayed in the startup network ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On November 10, 2010, a secret group of developers called the \"Secret Dev Team\" sought to keep the application working by releasing the \"LimeWire Pirate Edition\". The software is based on LimeWire 5.6 Beta, and is aimed to allow Windows versions to still work and remove the threat of spyware or adware. The exclusive features in LimeWire PRO were also unlocked, and all security features installed by Lime Wire LLC were removed.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the features features in limewire pro ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 9, 2)"}]}, {"context": "A number of forks from LimeWire have appeared, with the goal of giving users more freedom, or objecting to decisions made by LimeWire LLC they disagreed with.", "qas": []}, {"context": "FrostWire was started in September 2004 by members of the LimeWire open source community, after LimeWire's distributor considered adding \"blocking\" code, in response to RIAA pressure and the threat of legal action, in light of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\". When eventually activated, the code could block its users from sharing licensed files. This code was recently changed when lawsuits had been filed against LimeWire for P2P downloading. It had blocked all their users and redirected them to FrostWire. FrostWire has since completely moved to the BitTorrent protocol from Gnutella (LimeWire's file sharing network).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 2010, as a response to the legal challenges regarding LimeWire, an anonymous individual by the handle of Meta Pirate released a modified version of LimeWire Pro, which was entitled LimeWire Pirate Edition. It came without the Ask.com toolbar, advertising, spyware, and backdoors, as well as all dependencies on LimeWire LLC servers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In response to allegations that a current or former member of Lime Wire LLC staff wrote and released the software, the company has stated that: LimeWire is not behind these efforts. LimeWire does not authorize them. LimeWire is complying with the Court\u2019s October 26, 2010 injunction.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The LimeWire team, after being accused by the RIAA of being complicit in the development of LimeWire Pirate Edition, swiftly acted to shut down the LimeWire Pirate Edition website. A court order was issued to close down the website, and, to remain anonymous, Meta Pirate, the developer of LimeWire PE, did not contest the order.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to its SourceForge website, WireShare is the newest fork of the original LimeWire open source project (a successor of LPE: LimeWire Pirate Edition, which name was dropped for legal reasons). The software was developed to help keep the Gnutella network alive and to maintain a good faith continuation of the original project (without adware or spyware).", "qas": []}, {"context": "On February 15, 2010, LimeWire reversed its previous anti-bundling stance and announced the inclusion of an Ask.com-powered browser toolbar that users had to explicitly opt-out of to prevent installation. The toolbar sends web and bittorrent searches to Ask.com, and LimeWire searches to an instance of LimeWire on the user's machine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In LimeWire versions before 5.0, users could accidentally configure the software to allow access to any file on their computer, including documents with personal information. Recent versions of LimeWire do not allow unintentional sharing of documents or applications. In 2005, the US Federal Trade Commission issued a consumer warning regarding the dangers of using peer-to-peer file sharing networks, stating that using such networks can lead to identity theft and lawsuits. On May 5, 2009, a P2P industry spokesman represented Lime Wire and others at a U.S. House of Representatives legislative hearing on H.R. 1319, \"The Informed P2P User Act.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "One investigation showed that of 123 randomly selected downloaded files, 37 contained malware \u2013 about 30%. In mid-2008, a Macintosh trojan exploiting a vulnerability involving Apple Remote Desktop was distributed via LimeWire affecting users of Mac OS X Tiger and Leopard. The ability to distribute such malware and viruses has also been reduced in versions of LimeWire 5.0 and greater, with the program defaulting to not share or search for executable files.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the benefit of distribute and viruses ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 18, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Prior to April 2004, the free version of LimeWire was distributed with a bundled program called LimeShop (a variant of TopMoxie), which was spyware. Among other things, LimeShop monitored online purchases in order to redirect sales commissions to Lime Wire LLC. Uninstallation of LimeWire would not remove LimeShop. With the removal of all bundled software in LimeWire 3.9.4 (released on April 20, 2004), these objections were addressed. LimeWire currently has a facility that allows its server to contact a running LimeWire client and gather various information.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An identity theft scheme involving LimeWire was discovered in Denver in 2006. On September 7, 2007, Gregory Thomas Kopiloff of Seattle was arrested in what the U.S. Justice Department described as its first case against someone accused of using file sharing computer programs to commit identity theft. According to federal prosecutors, Kopiloff used LimeWire to search other people's computers for inadvertently shared financial information and then used it to obtain credit cards for an online shopping spree.", "qas": []}, {"context": "LimeWire automatically receives a cryptographically signed file, called simpp.xml, containing an IP block list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to a June 2005 report in \"The New York Times\", Lime Wire LLC was considering ceasing its distribution of LimeWire because the outcome of \"MGM v. Grokster\" \"handed a tool to judges that they can declare inducement whenever they want to.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "On May 12, 2010, Judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled in \"Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC\" that LimeWire and its creator, Mark Gorton, had committed copyright infringement, engaged in unfair competition, and induced others to commit copyright infringement. On October 26, 2010, LimeWire was ordered to disable the \"searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality\" after losing a court battle with the RIAA over claims of copyright infringement. The RIAA also announced intentions to pursue legal action over the damages caused by the program in January to compensate the affected record labels. In retaliation, the RIAA's website was taken offline on October 29 via denial-of-service attacks executed by members of Operation Payback and Anonymous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In response to the ruling, a company spokesperson said that the company is not shutting down, but will use its \"best efforts\" to cease distributing and supporting P2P software.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In early 2011, the RIAA announced their intention to sue LimeWire, pursuing a statutory damages theory that claimed up to $72 trillion in damagesa sum greater than the current GDP of the entire global economy. There are currently around 11,000 songs on LimeWire that have been tagged as copyright-infringed, and the RIAA estimates that each one has been downloaded thousands of times, the penalties accruing to the above sum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A trial to decide on the eventual amount of damages owed by Limewire to thirteen record labels, including Warner Music Group and Sony Music, all of which are represented by the RIAA, started early in May and went on until on May 13, 2011, when Gorton agreed to pay the 13 record companies $105 million in an out-of-court settlement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mitch Bainwol, chairman of the RIAA, referred to the \"resolution of the case [as] another milestone in the continuing evolution of online music to a legitimate marketplace that appropriately rewards creators.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Latveria", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Latveria is a fictional nation appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. It is depicted within the storylines of Marvel's comic titles as an isolated European country ruled by the fictional Supreme Lord Doctor Doom, supposedly located in the Banat region. It is surrounded by the Carpathian Mountains, and also borders Symkaria (home of Silver Sable) to the south. Its capital is Doomstadt.", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote latveria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Latveria first appeared in \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #2, published in 1964. Victor von Doom is the ruler of Latveria. Though he has been dethroned a number of times, Victor has invariably managed to return to the throne of his country within a matter of months.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did latveria first appear in 1964. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Victor also has a council who obey him entirely. In \"Fantastic Four\" #536 in 2006, he killed his own Prime Minister for claiming control of Latveria in his absence and threatened to kill two other ministers if they failed to find the landing spot of Thor's hammer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Doctor Doom's style of rule can best be described as an absolute monarchy, as it was revealed that there is no legislature, and one minister boasted \"\"Doctor Doom decides everything. His slightest whim is Latverian law!\"\" It is shown Doom has devices throughout the Kingdom to watch his people and even has hidden weapons to prevent them leaving without his consent. In one story he is able to activate a force field around Latveria which prevents anybody leaving, though apparently it can be a defense against nuclear attack.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latveria was formed out of land annexed from southern Hungary centuries before, and possibly land from Serbia as well as Romania.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At some point, Doctor Doom had his army of Servo Guards invade Rotruvia where he was successful at annexing it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to Doom's undertakings that drive him away from Latveria, the monarch is often absent. After Doom's descent into Hell, the nation became a target for conquest by the neighboring countries. This forces Reed Richards to seize control of the country, attempting to pry the populace out from under the thumb of Doom, while at the same time disarming all of Doom's weaponry and technology, so if he ever returned, he would come back to absolutely nothing. In the process, Richards relocated Doom from Hell into a pocket dimension of his own design, and although Doom used his consciousness-switching abilities to escape, the death of his host body seemingly caused him to die as well, and the Fantastic Four pulled out of the country.", "qas": [{"question": "what happens to the monarch when he went from latveria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "However Doom survives this and rules Latveria for a time with a 'puppet' Prime Minister and robotic enforcers.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the prime that survives a prime minister ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After the Fantastic Four left, the United States attempted to fill the void left by Doom by establishing a democracy for the nation. The Countess Lucia von Bardas was elected as Prime Minister. However, when it was revealed that von Bardas was employing the Tinkerer to use Doom's technology to arm various tech-based villains in the United States, S.H.I.E.L.D. Commander Nick Fury took action.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During \"Secret War\", Fury and a number of superheroes invaded Latveria without permission of the US Government and attempted to assassinate von Bardas. While von Bardas survived, she was horribly disfigured and sought to destroy Fury and the heroes responsible. She was killed by S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Daisy Johnson while trying to blow up New York with the armor of the various villains she employed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much of Latveria was destroyed and the population severely reduced by an attack executed by the Marquis of Death (a.k.a. \"Dooms Master\").", "qas": [{"question": "what does master stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 10, 1)"}]}, {"context": "S.H.I.E.L.D., under the leadership of Iron Man and his team of U.S. sanctioned Avengers invaded Latveria after discovering Doom's (unintentional) involvement in the release of a symbiote virus on New York. The country was yet again devastated and Doom was taken into custody for crimes against humanity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Doom is released from prison due to the influence of H.A.M.M.E.R director Norman Osborn. He restores his nation with the use of his time travel technology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" storyline, Spider-Man fights against a Juggernaut-empowered Colossus here.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The common geographic description of Latveria places it as a small nation, around the area where Hungary, Romania and Serbia (Vojvodina) meet in real life. To its south in the Marvel universe is the nation of Symkaria, which is depicted as a benevolent constitutional monarchy in contrast to the dictatorship to its north. The capital city of Latveria is Doomstadt, formerly Hassenstadt, renamed when Doom seized power, located just north of the Kline River. The administrative center is Castle Doom.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the administrative center of castle doom ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 14, 3)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe population consists of mixed European stock and Romani people, in whose welfare von Doom takes a particular interest. Victor von Doom, being Roma, has declared the Romani a protected class and attempts to shower them with benefits, however due to Latveria's poor economy and oppressive rule their lifestyles hardly outshine other ethnicities, and the Romani by and large live in the same fear of their own government as do fellow Latverians.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because it lacks a native superhero populace, Latveria relies largely on Dooms' robot sentinels called Doombots to keep law and order. One of the few known Latverian superhumans is Dreadknight, whom Doom himself created by punishing Dreadknight's alter ego for hoarding ideas from him. Dreadknight has since tried to get revenge on Doctor Doom, only to be thwarted by various superheroes. \nAside from superhuman activity, the Latverian military appears to function in multiple capacity; in addition to being responsible for defense of Latveria (or more accurately, keeping Victor von Doom on the throne), they have been commissioned to make arrests and function as Latveria's secret police.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latveria is generally depicted as a rural nation with a primitive economy and a population living an almost medieval lifestyle, likely enforced by Doom. Nonetheless, the state itself is consistently depicted as a global superpower on-par with or even surpassing any nation on Earth, including the United States, and rivalled only by the likes of Wakanda. This is largely due to Doom himself being a scientific genius of the highest order, not only possessing but actually inventing numerous technological wonders, including time and interdimensional travel, personally creating a highly sophisticated robot army of myriad designs and capabilities, and frequently coming into possession of-or outright creating-various devices that could be classified as Weapons of Mass Destruction. Thus, despite the country being both extremely small and economically backward, it is a powerhouse in military and technological terms and therefore has a vastly disproportionate influence on global affairs relative to its size and GDP. Doom also proudly claims that the country is free of poverty, disease, famine and crime and while citizens of the nation are commonly shown to be oppressed and to live in fear of their monarch, they are also shown to be relatively well cared for, so long as they do not cross Doom. Other occasions suggest that Doom is at the centre of a self-propagated personality cult and is admired and worshipped by other segments of the populace in spite of his mistreatments and he is often demonstrated to be at least a more stable and less corrupt ruler than any other Latverian leader who has replaced him,", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn the future depicted in \"Loki: Agent of Asgard\", Doctor Doom discovers Latveria completely destroyed after King Loki destroyed the Earth. Doom attempts to prevent this future by imprisoning the Loki of the present.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the \"Marvel 1602\" storyline, Latveria is ruled by Count Otto von Doom, also known as \"Otto the Handsome\". It is inhabited by mythical beings, and Latveria experiments on intricate clockwork devices, one of which was used to kill Queen Elizabeth I of England. The native language appears to bear a close resemblance to modern German.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the alternate future called \"Marvel 2099\", various power struggles over the fate of Latveria end with most of the country's population destroyed by chemical weapons known as \"necrotoxins\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the \"Marvel Zombies\" storyline, Latveria is one of the last few outposts of humanity, as Doctor Doom gathers up the fittest and most fertile of the Latverian survivors in order to send them off to other dimensions. An army of super-zombies lay siege to Doom's castle and eventually break inside. Despite this and Doom himself being bitten, all the Latverian citizens successfully escape.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latveria was introduced as a bankrupt peasant nation, but thanks to Doctor Doom it was made the ninth richest country on Earth. The townsfolk wear Doom's dragon tattoos, which incorporate microfibers that interfaced with the brain, acting as mind control devices. Where this Latveria lies is unclear but there are Belgian Flags on display in the background in the one picture displayed of Latveria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Ultimate Marvel Team-Up\", Latveria was presented as an impoverished dictatorial theocracy, under \"his holiness\" President Victor von Doom (wearing his traditional Marvel armour and cloak). They attempted, in collusion with the United States via Nick Fury, to steal the Iron Man technology from Tony Stark; this fails, partly due to the intervention of Spider-Man. At some point, however, Doom declared a holy war on the United States, creating tensions between two countries. This would be ignored and retconned away in later Ultimate Marvel titles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Least common multiple", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In arithmetic and number theory, the least common multiple, lowest common multiple, or smallest common multiple of two integers \"a\" and \"b\", usually denoted by LCM(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"), is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both \"a\" and \"b\". Since division of integers by zero is undefined, this definition has meaning only if \"a\" and \"b\" are both different from zero. However, some authors define LCM (\"a\",0) as 0 for all \"a\", which is the result of taking the LCM to be the least upper bound in the lattice of divisibility.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the smallest positive matrix ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The LCM is the \"lowest common denominator\" (LCD) that can be used before fractions can be added, subtracted or compared. The LCM of more than two integers is also well-defined: it is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by each of them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A multiple of a number is the product of that number and an integer. For example, 10 is a multiple of 5 because 5 \u00d7 2 = 10, so 10 is divisible by 5 and 2. Because 10 is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both 5 and 2, it is the least common multiple of 5 and 2. By the same principle, 10 is the least common multiple of \u22125 and \u22122 as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this article we will denote the least common multiple of two integers \"a\" and \"b\" as lcm(\"a\", \"b\").", "qas": [{"question": "what does `` b '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Some older textbooks use [\"a\", \"b\"].", "qas": []}, {"context": "The programming language J uses a*.b", "qas": []}, {"context": "What is the LCM of 4 and 6?", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiples of 4 are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "and the multiples of 6 are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Common multiples\" of 4 and 6 are simply the numbers that are in both lists:", "qas": []}, {"context": "So, from this list of the first few common multiples of the numbers 4 and 6, their \"least common multiple\" is\u00a012.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When adding, subtracting, or comparing vulgar fractions, it is useful to find the least common multiple of the denominators, often called the lowest common denominator, because each of the fractions can be expressed as a fraction with this denominator. For instance,", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the denominator 42 was used because it is the least common multiple of 21 and 6.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Suppose there are two meshing gears in a machine, having \"m\" and \"n\" teeth, respectively, and the gears are marked by a line segment drawn from the center of the first gear to the center of the second gear. When the gears begin rotating, we can determine how many rotations the first gear must complete to realign the line segment by making use of LCM(\"m\", \"n\"). The first gear must complete LCM(\"m\", \"n\")/\"m\" rotations for the realignment. By that time, the second gear will have made LCM(\"m\", \"n\")/\"n\" rotations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Suppose there are three planets revolving around a star which take \"l\", \"m\" and \"n\" units of time respectively to complete their orbits. Assume that \"l\", \"m\" and \"n\" are integers. Assuming the planets started moving around the star after an initial linear alignment, all the planets attain a linear alignment again after LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\") units of time. At this time, the first, second and third planet will have completed LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"l\", LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"m\" and LCM(\"l\", \"m\", \"n\")/\"n\" orbits respectively around the star.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following formula reduces the problem of computing the least common multiple to the problem of computing the greatest common divisor (GCD), also known as the greatest common factor:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This formula is also valid when exactly one of \"a\" and \"b\" is 0, since gcd(\"a\", 0) = |\"a\"|. However, if both \"a\" and \"b\" are 0, this formula would cause division by zero; lcm(0, 0) = 0 is a special case.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are fast algorithms for computing the GCD that do not require the numbers to be factored, such as the Euclidean algorithm. To return to the example above,", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because gcd(\"a\", \"b\") is a divisor of both \"a\" and \"b\", it is more efficient to compute the LCM by dividing \"before\" multiplying:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This identity is self-dual:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThen", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the absolute bars || denote the cardinality of a set.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe least common multiple can be defined generally over commutative rings as follows: Let \"a\" and \"b\" be elements of a commutative ring \"R\". A common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" is an element \"m\" of \"R\" such that both \"a\" and \"b\" divide \"m\" (that is, there exist elements \"x\" and \"y\" of \"R\" such that \"ax\" = \"m\" and \"by\" = \"m\"). A least common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" is a common multiple that is minimal in the sense that for any other common multiple \"n\" of \"a\" and \"b\", \"m\" divides\u00a0\"n\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In general, two elements in a commutative ring can have no least common multiple or more than one. However, any two least common multiples of the same pair of elements are associates. In a unique factorization domain, any two elements have a least common multiple. In a principal ideal domain, the least common multiple of \"a\" and \"b\" can be characterised as a generator of the intersection of the ideals generated by \"a\" and \"b\" (the intersection of a collection of ideals is always an ideal).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louis St. Laurent", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Louis Stephen St. Laurent (\"Saint-Laurent\" or \"St-Laurent\" in French, baptized Louis-\u00c9tienne St-Laurent; 1 February 1882\u00a0\u2013 25 July 1973) was the 12th prime minister of Canada, from 15 November 1948 to 21 June 1957. He was a Liberal with a strong base in the Catholic francophone community, from which base he had long mobilised support to Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King. His foreign policy initiatives transformed Canada from an isolationist ex-colony with little role in world affairs to an active \"middle power\". St. Laurent was an enthusiastic proponent of Canada's joining NATO in 1949 to fight the spread of Communism, overcoming opposition from some intellectuals, the Labor-Progressive Party, and many French Canadians. The contrast with Mackenzie King was not dramatic\u00a0\u2013 they agreed on most policies. St. Laurent had more hatred of communism, and less fear of the United States. He was neither an idealist nor a bookish intellectual, but an \"eminently moderate, cautious conservative man\u00a0... and a strong Canadian nationalist\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the date of the 7th prime minister of canada ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis St. Laurent () was born on 1 February 1882 in Compton, Quebec, a village in the Eastern Townships, to Jean-Baptiste-Mo\u00efse Saint-Laurent, a French-Canadian, and Mary Anne Broderick, an Irish-Canadian. He grew up fluently bilingual. His English had a noticeable Irish brogue, while his gestures (such as a hunch of the shoulders) were French.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He received degrees from S\u00e9minaire Saint-Charles-Borrom\u00e9e (B.A. 1902) and Universit\u00e9 Laval (LL.L. 1905). He was offered, but declined, a Rhodes Scholarship upon this graduation from Laval in 1905. In 1908, he married Jeanne Renault (1886\u20131966), with whom he had two sons and three daughters, including Jean-Paul St. Laurent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent worked as a lawyer from 1905 to 1941, also becoming a professor of law at Universit\u00e9 Laval in 1914. St-Laurent practised corporate and constitutional law in Quebec and became one of the country's most respected counsel. He served as President of the Canadian Bar Association from 1930 to 1932.", "qas": [{"question": "who was a professor of law at universit\u00e9 laval ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "St-Laurent's father, a Compton shopkeeper, was a staunch supporter of the Liberal Party of Canada and was particularly enamoured with Sir Wilfrid Laurier. When Laurier led the Liberals to victory in the 1896 election, 14-year-old Louis relayed the election returns from the telephone in his father's store. However, while an ardent Liberal, Louis remained aloof from active politics for much of his life, focusing instead on his legal career and family. He became one of Quebec's leading lawyers and was so highly regarded that he was offered a position in the Cabinet of the Conservative Prime Minister Arthur Meighen in 1926 and was offered a seat as a justice in the Supreme Court of Canada; he declined both offers.", "qas": [{"question": "what political party was st-laurent's father ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It was not until he was nearly 60 that St-Laurent finally agreed to enter politics when Liberal Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King appealed to his sense of duty in late 1941.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the death of his Quebec lieutenant, Ernest Lapointe, in November 1941, King was well aware of the need for the government to have a strong, well-respected member of cabinet to serve as a new deputy for Quebec to help deal with the volatile conscription issue. King had been in his political infancy when he witnessed the Conscription Crisis of 1917 during World War I and he wanted to prevent the same divisions from threatening his government. No Quebec or francophone members of King's cabinet or government were willing to step into the role, but many recommended St. Laurent to take the post instead. On these recommendations, King recruited St. Laurent to his World War II cabinet as Minister of Justice, Lapointe's former post, on 9 December. St. Laurent agreed to go to Ottawa out of a sense of duty, but only on the understanding that his foray into politics was temporary and that he would return to Quebec at the conclusion of the war. In February 1942, he won a by-election for Quebec East, Lapointe's former riding. St-Laurent supported King's decision to introduce conscription in 1944, despite the lack of support from other French Canadians (see Conscription Crisis of 1944). His support prevented more than a handful of Quebec Liberal Members of Parliament (MPs) from leaving the party, and was therefore crucial to keeping the government and the party united.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He had to deal with the defection of Soviet cipher clerk Igor Gouzenko in Ottawa in September 1945; Gouzenko's revelations and subsequent investigations over the following few years showed major Soviet espionage in North America.", "qas": []}, {"context": "King came to regard St-Laurent as his most trusted minister and natural successor. He persuaded St-Laurent that it was his duty to remain in government following the war in order to help with the construction of a post-war international order and promoted him to the position of Secretary of State for External Affairs (foreign minister) in 1945, a portfolio King had previously always kept for himself. In this role, St-Laurent represented Canada at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference and San Francisco Conference that led to the founding of the United Nations (UN).", "qas": [{"question": "who was the most outspoken minister and natural successor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "where did st-laurent represent canada ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "At the conferences, St-Laurent, compelled by his belief that the UN would be ineffective in times of war and armed conflict without some military means to impose its will, advocated the adoption of a UN military force. This force he proposed would be used in situations that called for both tact and might to preserve peace or prevent combat. In 1956, this idea was actualized by St-Laurent and his Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson in the development of UN Peacekeepers that helped to put an end to the Suez Crisis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1948, King retired, and quietly persuaded his senior ministers to support St-Laurent's selection as the new Liberal leader at the Liberal leadership convention of August 1948. St-Laurent won, and was sworn in as Prime Minister of Canada on 15 November, making him Canada's second French-Canadian Prime Minister, after Wilfrid Laurier.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the prime minister of canada on september 25 , 2014 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 10, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The Canadian economy was one of the strongest in the world in the period immediately following the end of the war. The prosperity lasted for more than a decade, significantly expanding the Canadian national infrastructure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1949 federal election that followed his ascension to the Liberal leadership, many wondered, including Liberal party insiders, if St-Laurent would appeal to the post-war populace of Canada. On the campaign trail, St-Laurent's image was developed into somewhat of a 'character' and what is considered to be the first 'media image' to be used in Canadian politics. St-Laurent chatted with children, gave speeches in his shirt sleeves, and had a 'common touch' that turned out to be appealing to voters. At one event during the 1949 election campaign, he disembarked his train and instead of approaching the assembled crowd of adults and reporters, gravitated to, and began chatting with, a group of children on the platform. A reporter submitted an article entitled \"'Uncle Louis' can't lose!\" which earned him the nickname \"Uncle Louis\" in the media (Papa Louis in Quebec). With this common touch and broad appeal, he subsequently led the party to victory in the election against the Progressive Conservative Party led by George Drew. The Liberals won 190 seats\u2014the most in Canadian history at the time, and still a record for the party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His reputation as Prime Minister was impressive. He demanded hard work of all of his MPs and Ministers, and worked hard himself. He was reputed to be as knowledgeable on some ministerial portfolios as the ministers responsible themselves. To that end, Jack Pickersgill (a minister in St-Laurent's cabinet) said as prime minister St-Laurent had: \"as fine an intelligence as was ever applied to the problems of government in Canada. He left it a richer, a more generous and more united country than it had been before he became prime minister.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent led the Liberals to another powerful majority in the 1953 federal election. While the Liberals lost several seats, they still had 111 more seats than the Tories, enabling them to dominate the House of Commons of Canada.", "qas": [{"question": "who led the republican party in 1964 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "St-Laurent and his cabinet oversaw Canada's expanding international role in the postwar world. His stated desire was for Canada to occupy a social, military and economic middle power role in the post-World War II world. In 1947, he identified five basic principles of Canadian foreign policy and five practical applications regarding Canada's international relations. Always highly sensitive to cleavages of language, religion, and region, he stressed national unity, insisting, \"that our external policies shall not destroy our unity\u00a0... for a disunited Canada will be a powerless one.\" He also stressed political liberty and rule of law in the sense of opposition to totalitarianism.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the leader of the cabinet ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Militarily, St-Laurent was a leading proponent of the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949, serving as an architect and signatory of the treaty document. Involvement in such an organization marked a departure from King who had been reticent about joining a military alliance. Under his leadership, Canada supported the United Nations (U.N.) in the Korean War and committed the third largest overall contribution of troops, ships and aircraft to the U.N. forces to the conflict. Troops to Korea were selected on a voluntary basis.\nIn 1956, under his direction, St-Laurent's Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson, helped solve the Suez Crisis in 1956 between Great Britain, France, Israel and Egypt, bringing forward St-Laurent's 1946 views on a U.N. military force in the form of the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) or peacekeeping. It is widely believed that the activities directed by St-Laurent and Pearson could well have avoided a nuclear war. These actions were recognized when Pearson won the 1957 Nobel Peace Prize.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent was an early supporter of British Prime Minister Clement Attlee's proposal to transform the British Commonwealth from a club of white dominions into a multi-racial partnership. The leaders of the other \"white dominions\" were less than enthusiastic. It was St-Laurent who drafted the London Declaration, recognizing King George VI as Head of the Commonwealth as a means of allowing India to remain in the international association once it became a republic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent's government was modestly progressive, fiscally conservative and run with business-like efficiency. Robertson says, \"St Laurent's administrations from 1949 to 1956 probably gave Canada the most consistently good, financially responsible, trouble-free government the country has had in its entire history.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "It took taxation surpluses no longer needed by the wartime military and paying back in full Canada's debts accrued during the World Wars and the Great Depression. With remaining revenues, St-Laurent oversaw the expansion of Canada's social programs, including the gradual expansion of social welfare programs such as family allowances, old age pensions, government funding of university and post-secondary education and an early form of Medicare termed \"Hospital Insurance\" at the time. This scheme lay the groundwork for Tommy Douglas' healthcare system in Saskatchewan, and Pearson's nationwide universal healthcare in the late 1960s. Under this legislation, the federal government paid around 50% of the cost of provincial health plans to cover \"a basic range of inpatient services in acute, convalescent, and chronic hospital care.\" The condition for the cost-sharing agreements was that all citizens were to be entitled to these benefits, and by March 1963, 98.8 of Canadians were covered by \"Hospital Insurance\". According to historian Katherine Boothe, however, St. Laurent did not regard government health insurance to be a \"good policy idea\", instead favouring the expansion of voluntary insurance through existing plans. In 1951, for instance, St. Laurent spoke in support of the medical profession assuming \"the administration and responsibility for, a scheme that would provide prepaid medical attendance to any Canadian who needed it\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition, St-Laurent modernized and established new social and industrial policies for the country during his time in the prime minister's office. Amongst these measures included the universalization of old-age pensions for all Canadians aged seventy and above (1951), the introduction of old age assistance for needy Canadians aged sixty-five and above (1951), the introduction of allowances for the blind (1951) and the disabled (1954), amendments to the National Housing Act (1954) which provided federal government financing to non-profit organisations as well as the provinces for the renovation or construction of hostels or housing for students, the disabled, the elderly, and families on low incomes, and unemployment assistance (1956) for unemployed employables on welfare who had exhausted (or did not qualify for) unemployment insurance benefits. During his last term as Prime Minister, St-Laurent's government used $100\u00a0million in death taxes to establish the Canada Council to support research in the arts, humanities, and social sciences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1949, the former lawyer of many Supreme Court cases, St-Laurent ended the practice of appealing Canadian legal cases to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council of Great Britain, making the Supreme Court of Canada the highest avenue of legal appeal available to Canadians. In that same year, St-Laurent negotiated the British North America (No. 2) Act, 1949 with Britain which 'partially patriated' the Canadian Constitution, most significantly giving the Canadian Parliament the authority to amend portions of the constitution. Also in 1949, following two referenda within the province, St-Laurent and Premier Joey Smallwood negotiated the entry of Newfoundland into Confederation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When asked in 1949 whether he would outlaw the Communist Party in Canada, St-Laurent responded that the party posed little threat and that such measures would be drastic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1952, he advised Queen Elizabeth II to appoint Vincent Massey as the first Canadian-born Governor-General. Each of the aforementioned actions were and are seen as significant in furthering the cause of Canadian autonomy from Britain and developing a national identity on the international stage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1956, using the Constitutional taxation authority of the federal level of government, St-Laurent's government introduced the policy of \"Equalization payments\" which redistributes taxation revenues between provinces to assist the poorer provinces in delivering government programs and services, a move that has been considered a strong one in solidifying the Canadian federation, particularly with his home province of Qu\u00e9bec.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The government also engaged in massive public works and infrastructure projects such as building the Trans-Canada Highway (1949), the St. Lawrence Seaway (1954) and the Trans-Canada Pipeline. It was this last project that was to sow the seeds that led to the downfall of the St-Laurent government.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the last project to sow the seeds ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 25, 1)"}]}, {"context": "St-Laurent was initially very well received by the Canadian public, but by 1957, \"Uncle Louis\" (as he was sometimes referred to) began to appear tired, old and out of touch; he was 75 years old and had many hard years of work behind him. His government was also perceived to have grown too close to business interests. The 1956 Pipeline Debate led to the widespread impression that the Liberals had grown arrogant in power. On numerous occasions, the government invoked closure in order to curtail debate and ensure that its Pipeline Bill passed by a specific deadline. St. Laurent was criticized for a lack of restraint exercised on his minister C.\u00a0D. Howe, who was widely perceived as extremely arrogant. Western Canadians felt particularly alienated by the government, believing that the Liberals were kowtowing to interests in Ontario and Quebec and the United States. (The opposition accused the government of accepting overly costly contracts that could never be completed on schedule. In the end, the pipeline was completed early and under budget.) The pipeline conflict turned out to be meaningless, insofar as the construction work was concerned, since pipe could not be obtained in 1956 from a striking American factory, and no work could have been done that year. The uproar in Parliament regarding the pipeline had a lasting impression on the electorate, and was a decisive factor in the Liberal government's 1957 defeat at the hands of the PCs, led by John Diefenbaker, in the 1957 election. Because the Liberals were still mostly classically liberal, Diefenbaker promised to outspend the incumbent Liberals, who campaigned on plans to stay the course of fiscal conservatism they had followed through St-Laurent's term in the 1940s and 1950s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent was the first Prime Minister to live in the present official residence of the Prime Minister of Canada: 24 Sussex Drive, from 1951 to 1957, the end of his term in office.\nBy 1957 St. Laurent was 75 years old and tired. His party had been in power for 22 years, and by this time had accumulated too many factions and alienated too many groups. He was ready to retire, but was persuaded to fight one last campaign. In the 1957 election, the Liberals won 200,000 more votes nationwide than the Progressive Conservatives (40.75% Liberals to 38.81% PC). However, most of those votes were wasted with huge majorities in Quebec. Largely due to dominating the rest of the country, the Progressive Conservatives took the greatest number of seats with 112 seats (42% of the House) to the Liberals' 104 (39.2%). Some ministers wanted St. Laurent to stay on and offer to form a minority government, arguing that the popular vote had supported them and the party's long years of experience would make them a more effective minority.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the first prime minister to live in the present official residence ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Another option circulated within the party saw the balance of power to be held by either the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) and their 25 seats or Social Credit Party of Canada with their 15 seats. St-Laurent was encouraged by others to reach out to the CCF and at least four of six independent/small party MPs to form a coalition majority government, which would have held 134 of the 265 seats in Parliament\u201450.1% of the total. St. Laurent, however, had no desire to stay in office; he believed that the nation had passed a verdict against his government and his party. In any case, the CCF and Socreds had pledged to cooperate with a Tory government. It was very likely that St. Laurent would have been defeated on the floor of the House had he tried to stay in power with a minority government, and would not have stayed in office for long even if he survived that confidence vote. With this in mind, St. Laurent resigned on 21 June 1957\u2014ending the longest uninterrupted run in government for a party at the federal level in Canadian history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St-Laurent chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General:", "qas": [{"question": "who was appointed to appointed the supreme court of canada ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After a short period as Leader of the Opposition and now more than 75 years old, St- Laurent's motivation to be involved in politics was gone. He announced his intention to retire from politics. St-Laurent was succeeded as Liberal Party leader by his former Secretary of State for External Affairs and representative at the United Nations, Lester B. Pearson, at the party's leadership convention in 1958.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After his political retirement, he returned to practising law and living quietly and privately with his family. During his retirement, he was called into the public spotlight one final time in 1967 to be made a Companion of the Order of Canada, a newly created award.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis Stephen St-Laurent died from heart failure on 25 July 1973, in Quebec City, Quebec, aged 91 and was buried at Saint Thomas d'Aquin Cemetery in his hometown of Compton, Quebec. He is survived by granddaughters Helen, Marie, Francine and grandsons Louis St-Laurent II and Michael S. O'Donnell.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St. Laurent was ranked #4 on a survey of the first 20 prime ministers (through Jean Chr\u00e9tien) of Canada done by Canadian historians, and used by J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer in their book \"Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders\".", "qas": [{"question": "who was the author of the first 12 prime ministers ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 33, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The house and grounds in Compton where St. Laurent was born were designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1973. St. Laurent's residence at 201 Grande-All\u00e9e Est in Quebec City is protected as a Recognized Federal Heritage Building.", "qas": [{"question": "where was the house of laurent located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "St. Laurent was appointed a Companion of the Order of Canada on 6 July 1967. His citation reads:\nFormer Prime Minister of Canada. For his service to his country.", "qas": [{"question": "on what date was the order of canada appointed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louis Leakey", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Louis Seymour Bazett Leakey (7 August 1903 \u2013 1 October 1972) was a Kenyan paleoanthropologist and archaeologist whose work was important in demonstrating that humans evolved in Africa, particularly through discoveries made at Olduvai Gorge with his wife, fellow paleontologist Mary Leakey. Having established a program of palaeoanthropological inquiry in eastern Africa, he also motivated many future generations to continue this scholarly work. Several members of Leakey's family became prominent scholars themselves.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the mother of louis seymour ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "how many members of leakey's family were there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 0, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Another of Leakey's legacies stems from his role in fostering field research of primates in their natural habitats, which he saw as key to understanding human evolution. He personally chose three female researchers, Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birut\u0117 Galdikas, calling them The Trimates. Each went on to become an important scholar in the field of primatology. Leakey also encouraged and supported many other Ph.D. candidates, most notably from the University of Cambridge. Leakey also played a major role in creating organizations for future research in Africa and for protecting wildlife there.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of role did nasser have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 1, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Louis's parents, Harry (1868\u20131940) and Mary (May) Bazett Leakey (died 1948), were Church of England missionaries in British East Africa (now Kenya). Harry was the son of James Shirley Leakey (1824\u20131871), one of the eleven children of the portrait painter James Leakey. Harry Leakey was assigned to an established post of the Church Mission Society among the Kikuyu at Kabete, in the highlands north of Nairobi. The station was at that time a hut and two tents. Louis's earliest home had an earthen floor, a leaky thatched roof, rodents and insects, and no heating system except for charcoal braziers. The facilities slowly improved over time. The mission, a center of activity, set up a clinic in one of the tents, and later a girls' school. Harry was working on a translation of the Bible into the Gikuyu language. He had a distinguished career in the CMS, becoming canon of the station.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the church of england in 1967 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis had a younger brother, Douglas, and two older sisters, Gladys and Julia. Both sisters married missionaries: Gladys married Leonard Beecher, Anglican Bishop of Mombasa and then Archbishop of East Africa from 1960 to 1970; Julia married Lawrence Barham, the second Bishop of Rwanda and Burundi from 1964 to 1966; their son Ken Barham was later the Bishop of Cyangugu in Rwanda.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Leakey household came to contain Miss Oakes (a governess), Miss Higgenbotham (another missionary), and Mariamu (a Kikuyu nurse). Louis grew up, played, and learned to hunt with the native Kikuyus. He also learned to walk with the distinctive gait of the Kikuyu and speak their language fluently, as did his siblings. He was initiated into the Kikuyu ethnic group, an event of which he never spoke, as he was sworn to secrecy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis requested and was given permission to build and move into a hut, Kikuyu style, at the end of the garden. It was home to his personal collection of natural objects, such as birds' eggs and skulls. All the children developed a keen interest in and appreciation of the pristine natural surroundings in which they found themselves. They raised baby animals, later turning them over to zoos. Louis read a gift book, \"Days Before History\", by H. R. Hall (1907), a juvenile fictional work illustrating the prehistory of Britain. He began to collect tools and was further encouraged in this activity by a role model, Arthur Loveridge, first curator (1914) of the Natural History Museum in Nairobi, predecessor of the Coryndon Museum. This interest may have predisposed him toward a career in archaeology. His father was also a role model: Canon Leakey co-founded the East Africa and Uganda Natural History Society.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of leakey ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 5, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Neither Harry nor May were of strong constitution. From 1904\u20131906 the entire family lived at May's mother's house in Reading, Berkshire, England, while Harry recovered from neurasthenia, and again in 1911\u20131913, while May recovered from general frailty and exhaustion. During the latter stay, Harry bought a house in Boscombe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Britain, the Leakey children attended elementary school; in Africa, they had a tutor. The family sat out World War I in Africa. When the sea lanes opened again in 1919, they returned to Boscombe, where Louis was sent to Weymouth College, a private boys' school, when he was 16 years old. In three years there, he did not do well and complained of hazing and rules that he considered an infringement on his freedom. Advised by one teacher to seek employment in a bank, he secured help from an English teacher in applying to St John's College, Cambridge. He received a scholarship for his high scores on the entrance exams.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the leakey children attend in britain ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis matriculated at the University of Cambridge, his father's alma mater, in 1922, intending to become a missionary to British East Africa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He frequently told a story about his final exams. When he had arrived in Britain, he had notified the register that he was fluent in Swahili. When he came to his finals, he asked to be examined in this language, and the authorities agreed. Then one day, he received two letters. One instructed him to report at a certain time and place for a \"viva voce\" examination in Swahili. The other asked if, at the same time and place, he would examine a candidate in Swahili.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1922 the British had been awarded German East Africa as part of the settlement of World War I. Within the Tanganyika Territory the Germans had discovered a site rich in dinosaur fossils, Tendaguru. Louis was told by C. W. Hobley, a friend of the family, that the British Museum of Natural History was going to send a fossil-hunting expedition led by William E. Cutler to the site. Louis applied and was hired to locate the site and manage the administrative details. In 1924 they departed for Africa. They never found a complete dinosaur skeleton, and Louis was recalled from the site by Cambridge in 1925.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did the british win the british ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis switched his focus to anthropology, and found a new mentor in Alfred Cort Haddon, head of the Cambridge department. In 1926, Louis graduated with a \"double first\", or high honours, in anthropology and archaeology. He had used some of his preexisting qualifications; for example, Kikuyu was offered and accepted as the second modern language in which he was required to be proficient, even though no one there could test him on it. The university accepted an affidavit from a Kikuyu chief signed with a thumbprint.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1925 on Louis lectured and wrote on African archaeological and palaeontological topics. On graduation he was such a respected figure that Cambridge sent him to East Africa to study prehistoric African humans. He excavated dozens of sites, undertaking for the first time a systematic study of the artifacts. Some of his names for archaeological cultures are still in use; for example, the Elmenteitan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1927, Louis received a visit at a site called Gamble's Cave, near Lake Elmenteita, by two women on a holiday, one of whom was Frida Avern (1902\u20131993). Avern had done some course work in archaeology. Louis and Frida began a relationship, which continued upon his return to Cambridge. In 1928, they married and continued work near Lake Elmenteita. Finds from Gamble's Cave were donated by Leakey to the British Museum in 1931. At that time he discovered the Acheulean site of Kariandusi, which he excavated in 1928.", "qas": [{"question": "where was the site of kariandusi found ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 13, 5)"}]}, {"context": "On the strength of his work there, he obtained a post-graduate research fellowship at St. John's College and returned to Cambridge in 1929 to classify and prepare the finds from Elmenteita. His patron and mentor at Cambridge was now Arthur Keith. While cleaning two skeletons he had found, he noticed a similarity to one found in Olduvai Gorge by Professor Hans Reck, a German national, whom Louis had met in 1925 in Germany while on business for Keith.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The geology of Olduvai was known. In 1913, Reck had extricated a skeleton from Bed II in the gorge wall. He argued that it must have the date of the bed, which was believed to be 600,000 years, in the mid-Pleistocene. Early dates for human evolution were not widely accepted by the general public at the time. Reck became involved in a media uproar. He was barred from going back to settle the question by the war and then the terms of the transfer of Tanganyika from Germany to Britain. In 1929, Louis visited Berlin to talk to the now skeptical Reck. Noting an Acheulean tool in Reck's collection of artifacts from Olduvai, he bet Reck he could find ancient stone tools at Olduvai within 24 hours.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the geology of olduvai called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis received his PhD in 1930 at the age of 27. His first child, a daughter named Priscilla Muthoni Leakey, was born in 1931. His headaches and epilepsy returned, and he was prescribed Luminal, which he took for the rest of his life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 1931, Louis led an expedition to Olduvai whose members included Reck, whom Louis allowed to enter the gorge first. Leakey had bet Reck that Leakey would find Acheulean tools within the first 24 hours, which he did. These verified the provenance of the 1913 find, now called Olduvai Man. Non-humanoid fossils and tools were extracted from the ground in large numbers. Frida delayed joining her husband and was less enthusiastic about him on behalf of Priscilla. She did arrive eventually, however, and Louis put her to work. Frida's site became FLK, for Frida Leakey's Karongo (\"gully\").", "qas": [{"question": "what is flk ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 17, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Back in Cambridge, the skeptics were not impressed. To find supporting evidence of the antiquity of Reck's Olduvai Man, Louis returned to Africa, excavating at Kanam and Kanjera. He easily found more fossils, which he named Homo kanamensis. While he was gone, the opposition worked up some \"evidence\" of the intrusion of Olduvai Man into an earlier layer, evidence that seemed convincing at the time, but is missing and unverifiable now. On his return, Louis' finds were carefully examined by a committee of 26 scientists and were tentatively accepted as valid.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With Frida's dowry money, the Leakeys bought a large brick house in Girton near Cambridge, which they named \"The Close.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Frida was now pregnant and suffered from morning sickness most of the time and was unable to work on the illustrations for Louis's second book, \"Adam's Ancestors.\" At a dinner party given in his honor after a lecture of his at the Royal Anthropological Institute, Gertrude Caton-Thompson introduced her own illustrator, the twenty-year-old Mary Nicol. Louis convinced Mary to take on the illustration of his book, and a few months later companionship turned to romance. Frida gave birth to Colin in December 1933, and the next month Louis asked her for a divorce. She would not sue for divorce until 1936.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A panel at Cambridge investigated his morals. Grants dried up, but his mother raised enough money for another expedition to Olduvai, Kanam and Kanjera, the latter two on the Winam Gulf. His previous work there was questioned by P. G. H. Boswell, whom he invited to verify the sites for himself. Arriving at Kanam and Kanjera in 1935, they found that the iron markers Louis had used to mark the sites had been removed by the Luo tribe for use as harpoons and the sites could not now be located. To make matters worse, all the photos Louis took were ruined by a light leak in the camera. After an irritating and fruitless two-month search, Boswell left for England, promising, as Louis understood it, not to publish a word until Louis returned.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Boswell immediately set out to publish as many words as he was able, beginning with a letter in \"Nature\" dated 9 March 1935, destroying Reck's and Louis's dates of the fossils and questioning Louis's competence. Despite the searches for the iron markers, Boswell averred that \"the earlier expedition (of 1931-32) neither marked the localities on the ground nor recorded the sites on a map.\" In a field report of March 1935, Louis accused Boswell of reneging on his word, but Boswell asserted he had made no such promise, and now having public opinion on his side, warned Loius to withdraw the claim. Louis was not only forced to retract the accusation in his final field report in June 1935, but also to recant his support of Reck. Louis was through at Cambridge. Even his mentors turned on him.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Meeting Mary in Africa, he proceeded to Olduvai with a small party. Louis' parents continued to urge him to return to Frida, and would pay for everyone in the party but Mary. Mary joined him under a stigma but her skill and competence eventually won over the other participants. Louis and his associates did the groundwork for future excavation at Olduvai, uncovering dozens of sites for a broad sampling, as was his method. They were named after the excavator: SHK (Sam Howard's karongo), BK (Peter Bell's), SWK (Sam White's), MNK (Mary Nicol's). Louis and Mary conducted a temporary clinic for the Maasai, made preliminary investigations of Laetoli, and ended by studying the rock paintings at the Kisese/Cheke region.", "qas": [{"question": "where was mary held in africa ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis and Mary returned to England in 1935 without positions or any place to stay except Mary's mother's apartment. They soon leased Steen Cottage in Great Munden. This settlement was in Hertfordshire and had an unusual name which Louis, with his sense of humor noted in his \"Memoirs\", Chapter 5, as \"the village of Nasty.\" They lived without heat, electricity, or plumbing, fetching water from a well and writing by oil lantern. They lived in poverty for 18 months at this low point of their fortunes, visited at first only by Mary's relatives. Louis gardened for subsistence and exercise and improved the house and grounds. He appealed at last to the Royal Society, who relented with a small grant to continue work on his collection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis had already involved himself in Kikuyu tribal affairs in 1928, taking a stand against female genital cutting. He got into a shouting match in Kikuyu one evening with Jomo Kenyatta, later the president of Kenya, who was lecturing on the topic. R. Copeland at Oxford recommended he apply to the Rhodes Trust for a grant to write a study of the Kikuyu and it was given late in 1936 along with a salary for two years. In January 1937 the Leakeys travelled to Kenya. Colin would not see his father for 20 years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis returned to Kiambaa near Nairobi and persuaded Senior Chief Koinange, who designated a committee of chiefs, to help him describe the Kikuyu the way they had been. Mary excavated at Waterfall Cave. She fell ill with double pneumonia and was near death for two weeks in the hospital in Nairobi, during which time her mother was sent for. Contrary to expectation, she recovered and began another excavation at Hyrax Hill and then Njoro River Cave. Louis got an extension of his grant, which he used partially for fossil-hunting. Leakey discoveries began to appear in the newspapers again.", "qas": [{"question": "who began to appear in the times after studying the times ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 26, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Tensions between the Kikuyu and the settlers increased alarmingly. Louis jumped into the fray as an exponent of the middle ground. In \"Kenya: Contrasts and Problems\", he angered the settlers by proclaiming Kenya could never be a \"white man's country.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The government offered Louis work as a policeman in intelligence, which he accepted. He traveled the country as a pedlar, reporting on the talk. When Britain went to war in September 1939 the Kenyan government drafted Louis into its African intelligence service. Apart from some bumbling around, during which he and some settlers stalked each other as possible saboteurs of the Sagana Railway Bridge, his first task was to supply and arm Ethiopian guerrillas against the Italian invaders of their country. He created a clandestine network using his childhood friends among the Kikuyu. They also hunted fossils on the sly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis conducted interrogations, analyzed handwriting, wrote radio broadcasts and took on regular police investigations. He loved a good mystery of any sort. The white leadership of the King's African Rifles used him extensively to clear up many cultural mysteries; for example, he helped an officer remove a curse he had inadvertently put on his men.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mary continued to find and excavate sites. Jonathan Leakey was born in 1940. She worked in the Coryndon Memorial Museum (later called the National Museums of Kenya) where Louis joined her as an unpaid honorary curator in 1941. Their life was a menage of police work and archaeology. They investigated Rusinga Island and Olorgesailie. At the latter site they were assisted by a team of Italian experts recruited from the prisoners of war and paroled for the purpose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1942 the Italian menace ended, but the Japanese began to reconnoiter with a view toward landing in force. Louis found himself in counter-intelligence work, which he performed with zest and imagination. Deborah was born, but died at three months. They lived in a rundown and bug infested Nairobi home, provided by the museum. Jonathan was attacked by army ants in his crib.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1944 Richard Leakey was born. In 1945 the family's income from police work all but vanished. By now Louis was getting plenty of job offers but he chose to stay on in Kenya as Curator of the Coryndon Museum, with an annual salary and a house, but more importantly, to continue palaeoanthropological research.", "qas": [{"question": "who was born in 1944 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In January 1947 Louis conducted the first Pan-African Congress of Prehistory at Nairobi. Sixty scientists from 26 countries attended, delivering papers and visiting the Leakey sites. The conference restored Louis to the scientific fold and made him a major figure in it. With the money that now poured in Louis undertook the famous expeditions of 1948 and beyond at Rusinga Island in Lake Victoria, where Mary discovered the most complete Proconsul fossil up to that time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Charles Watson Boise donated money for a boat to be used for transport on Lake Victoria, \"The Miocene Lady\". Its skipper, Hassan Salimu, was later to deliver Jane Goodall to Gombe. Philip Leakey was born in 1949. In 1950, Louis was awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the Leakeys were at Lake Victoria, the Kikuyu struck at the European settlers of the Kenyan highlands, who seemed to have the upper hand and were insisting on a \"white\" government of a \"white\" Africa. In 1949 the Kikuyu formed a secret society, the Mau Mau, which attacked settlers and especially loyalist Kikuyu.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the kikuyu strike at the europeans ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 35, 0)"}, {"question": "who did the kikuyu form a secret society ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 35, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Louis had attempted to warn Sir Philip Mitchell, governor of the colony, that nocturnal meetings and forced oaths were not Kikuyu customs and foreboded violence, but was ignored. Now he found himself pulled away from anthropology to investigate the Mau Mau. During this period his life was threatened and a reward placed on his head. The Leakeys began to pack pistols, termed \"European National Dress.\" The government placed him under 24-hour guard.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1952, after a massacre of loyal chiefs, the government arrested Jomo Kenyatta, president of the Kenya African Union. Louis was summoned to be a court interpreter, but withdrew after an accusation of mistranslation because of prejudice against the defendant. He returned on request to translate documents only. Because of lack of evidence linking Kenyatta to the Mau Mau, although convicted, he did not receive the death penalty, but was sentenced to several years of hard labor and banned from Kenya.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The government brought in British troops and formed a home guard of 20,000 Kikuyu. During this time Louis played a difficult and contradictory role. He sided with the settlers, serving as their spokesman and intelligence officer, helping to ferret out bands of guerrillas. On the other hand, he continued to advocate for the Kikuyu in his 1954 book \"Defeating Mau Mau\" and numerous talks and articles. He recommended a multi-racial government, land reform in the highlands, a wage hike for the Kikuyu, and many other reforms, most of which were eventually adopted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The British realized the rebellion was being directed from urban centers, instituted military law and rounded up the committees. Following Louis' suggestion, thousands of Kikuyu were placed in re-education camps and resettled in new villages. The rebellion continued from bases under Mt. Kenya until 1956, when, deprived of its leadership and supplies, it had to disperse. The state of emergency lasted until 1960. In 1963 Kenya became independent, with Jomo Kenyatta as prime minister.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning in 1951, Louis and Mary began intensive research at Olduvai Gorge. A trial trench in Bed II at BK in 1951 was followed by a more extensive excavation in 1952. They found what Louis termed an Oldowan \"slaughter-house\", an ancient bog where animals had been trapped and butchered. Excavations stopped in 1953 but were briefly resumed in 1955 with Jean Brown.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1959, excavations at Bed I were opened. While Louis was sick in camp, Mary discovered the fossilized skull OH 5 at FLK, \"Paranthropus boisei\", famously identified as \"\"Zinjanthropus\"\" or \"Zinj.\" The question was whether the fossil belonged to a previous genus discovered by Robert Broom, \"Paranthropus\", or a member of a different genus ancestral to humans. Louis opted for \"Zinjanthropus\", a decision opposed by Wilfrid Le Gros Clark, but one which attracted the attention of Melville Bell Grosvenor, president of the National Geographic Society. That contact resulted in an article in \"National Geographic\" and a large grant to continue work at Olduvai.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1960, geophysicists Jack Evernden and Garniss Curtis dated Bed I from 1.89 to 1.75 million years ago, confirming the great antiquity of fossil hominids in Africa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1960, Louis appointed Mary director of excavation at Olduvai. She brought in a staff of Kamba assistants, including Kamoya Kimeu, who later discovered many of eastern Africa's most famous fossils. At Olduvai, Mary set up Camp 5 and began work with her own staff and associates.", "qas": [{"question": "where did mary set up camp 4 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 43, 2)"}]}, {"context": "At \"Jonny's site\", FLK-NN, Jonathan Leakey discovered two skull fragments without the Australopithecine sagittal crest, which Mary connected with Broom's and Robinson's \"Telanthropus\". The problem with it was its contemporaneity with \"Zinjanthropus\". When mailed photographs, Le Gros Clark retorted casually \"Shades of Piltdown.\" Louis cabled him immediately and had some strong words at this suggestion of his incompetence. Clark apologized.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Not long afterwards, in 1960, Louis, his son Philip and Ray Pickering discovered a fossil he termed \"Chellean Man\", (Olduvai Hominid 9), in context with Oldowan tools. After reconstruction Louis and Mary called it \"Pinhead.\" It was subsequently identified as \"Homo erectus\", contemporaneous with \"Paranthropus\" at 1.4 million years old.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1961 Louis got a salary as well as a grant from the National Geographic Society and turned over the acting directorship of Coryndon to a subordinate. He created the Centre for Prehistory and Paleontology on the same grounds, moved his collections to it, and appointed himself director. This was his new operations center. He opened another excavation at Fort Ternan on Lake Victoria. Shortly after, Heselon discovered \"Kenyapithecus wickeri\", named after the owner of the property. Louis promptly celebrated with George Gaylord Simpson, who happened to be present, aboard the \"Miocene Lady\" with \"Leakey Safari Specials\", a drink made of condensed milk and cognac.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1962 Louis was visiting Olduvai when Ndibo Mbuika discovered the first tooth of \"Homo habilis\" at MNK. Louis and Mary thought it was female and named her Cinderella, or Cindy. Phillip Tobias identified Jonny's Child with it and Raymond Dart came up with the name \"Homo habilis\" at Louis' request, which Tobias translated as \"handyman.\" It was seen as intermediary between gracile \"Australopithecus\" and \"Homo\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1959 Leakey, while at the British Museum of Natural History in London, received a visit from Ruth DeEtte Simpson, an archaeologist from California. Simpson had acquired what looked like ancient scrapers from a site in the Calico Hills and showed it to Leakey.", "qas": [{"question": "where did simpson acquire the existence of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 48, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 1963, Leakey obtained funds from the National Geographic Society and commenced archaeological excavations with Simpson. Excavations at the site carried out by Leakey and Simpson revealed that they had located stone artifacts which were dated 100,000 years or older, suggesting a human presence in North America much earlier than others had estimated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The geologist Vance Haynes had made three visits to the site in 1973 and had claimed that the artifacts found by Leakey were naturally formed geofacts. According to Haynes, the geofacts were formed by stones becoming fractured in an ancient river on the site.", "qas": [{"question": "how many times had leakey been discovered ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 50, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In her autobiography, Mary Leakey wrote that because of Louis's involvement with the Calico Hills site she had lost academic respect for him and that the Calico excavation project was \"catastrophic to his professional career and was largely responsible for the parting of our ways\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of Louis's greatest legacies stems from his role in fostering field research of primates in their natural habitats, which he understood as key to unraveling the mysteries of human evolution. He personally chose three female researchers, Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birute Galdikas, calling them The Trimates. Each went on to become an important scholar in the field of primatology, immersing themselves in the study of chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans, respectively. Leakey also encouraged and supported many other Ph.D. candidates, most notably from Cambridge University.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During his final years Louis became famous as a lecturer in the United Kingdom and United States. He did not excavate any longer, as he was crippled with arthritis, for which he had a hip replacement in 1968. He raised funds and directed his family and associates. In Kenya he was a facilitator for hundreds of scientists exploring the East African Rift system for fossils.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1968, Louis refused an honorary doctorate from the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, primarily because of apartheid in South Africa. Mary accepted one, and thereafter led separate professional lives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the last few years Louis' health began to fail more seriously. He had his first heart attacks and spent six months in the hospital. An empathy over health brought him and Dian Fossey together for a brief romance, which she broke off. Richard began to assume more and more of his father's responsibilities, which Louis resisted, but in the end was forced to accept.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 1 October 1972, Louis had a heart attack in Jane Goodall's apartment in London. Jane sat up all night with him in St. Stephen's Hospital and left at 9:00\u00a0a.m. He died 30 minutes later at the age of 69.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mary wanted to cremate Louis and fly the ashes back to Nairobi. Richard intervened. Louis was flown home and interred at Limuru, near the graves of his parents.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In denial, the family did not face the question of a memorial marker for a year. When Richard went to place a stone on the grave he found one already there, courtesy of Rosalie Osborn. The inscription was signed with the letters, \"ILYFA\", \"I'll love you forever always\", which Rosalie used to place on her letters to him. Richard left it in place.", "qas": [{"question": "where did richard leave in place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 58, 3)"}]}, {"context": "\nLouis Leakey was married to Mary Leakey, who made the noteworthy discovery of fossil footprints at Laetoli. Found preserved in volcanic ash in Tanzania, they are the earliest record of bipedal gait.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of fossil fossils ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 59, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He is also the father of paleoanthropologist Richard Leakey and the botanist Colin Leakey. Louis's cousin, Nigel Gray Leakey, was a recipient of the Victoria Cross during World War II.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of paleoanthropologist ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 60, 0)"}, {"question": "who was leakey ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 60, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Leakey's books are listed below. The gaps between books are filled by too many articles to list. It was Louis who began the Leakey tradition of publishing in \"Nature\".", "qas": [{"question": "how many books are listed on the books ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 61, 0)"}, {"question": "who began the leakey tradition of fame ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 61, 2)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Liar paradox", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In philosophy and logic, the classical liar paradox or liar's paradox or antinomy of the liar is the statement of a liar that he or she is lying: for instance, declaring that \"I am lying\". If the liar is indeed lying, then the liar is telling the truth, which means the liar is lying. In \"this sentence is a lie\" the paradox is strengthened in order to make it amenable to more rigorous logical analysis. It is still generally called the \"liar paradox\" although abstraction is made precisely from the liar himself. Trying to assign to this statement, the strengthened liar, a classical binary truth value leads to a contradiction.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a classical ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "If \"this sentence is false\" is true, then the sentence is false, but if the sentence states that it is false, and it is false, then it must be true, and so on.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Epimenides paradox (circa 600 BC) has been suggested as an example of the liar paradox, but they are not logically equivalent. The semi-mythical seer Epimenides, a Cretan, reportedly stated that \"All Cretans are liars.\" However, Epimenides' statement that all Cretans are liars can be resolved as false, given that he knows of at least one other Cretan who does not lie. It is precisely in order to avoid uncertainties deriving from the human factor and from fuzzy concepts that modern logicians proposed a \"strengthened\" liar such as the sentence \"this sentence is false\".", "qas": [{"question": "when was the epimenides paradox ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The paradox's name translates as \"pseud\u00f3menos l\u00f3gos\" (\u03c8\u03b5\u03c5\u03b4\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2) in Ancient Greek. One version of the liar paradox is attributed to the Greek philosopher Eubulides of Miletus who lived in the 4th century BC. Eubulides reportedly asked, \"A man says that he is lying. Is what he says true or false?\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The paradox was once discussed by St. Jerome in a sermon:\nThe Indian grammarian-philosopher Bhartrhari (late fifth century AD) was well aware of a liar paradox which he formulated as \"everything I am saying is false\" (sarvam mithy\u0101 brav\u012bmi). He analyzes this paradox together with the paradox of \"unsignifiability\" and explores the boundary between statements that are unproblematic in daily life and paradoxes.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of life does darwin discuss ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 4, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In early Islamic tradition liar paradox was discussed for at least five centuries starting from late 9th century apparently without being influenced by any other tradition. Na\u1e63\u012br al-D\u012bn al-\u1e6c\u016bs\u012b could have been the first logician to identify the liar paradox as self-referential.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The problem of the liar paradox is that it seems to show that common beliefs about truth and falsity actually lead to a contradiction. Sentences can be constructed that cannot consistently be assigned a truth value even though they are completely in accord with grammar and semantic rules.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The simplest version of the paradox is the sentence:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If (A) is true, then \"This statement is false\" is true. Therefore, (A) must be false. The hypothesis that (A) is true leads to the conclusion that (A) is false, a contradiction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If (A) is false, then \"This statement is false\" is false. Therefore, (A) must be true. The hypothesis that (A) is false leads to the conclusion that (A) is true, another contradiction. Either way, (A) is both true and false, which is a paradox.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, that the liar sentence can be shown to be true if it is false and false if it is true has led some to conclude that it is \"neither true nor false\". This response to the paradox is, in effect, the rejection of the claim that every statement has to be either true or false, also known as the principle of bivalence, a concept related to the law of the excluded middle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The proposal that the statement is neither true nor false has given rise to the following, strengthened version of the paradox:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If (B) is neither true nor false, then it must be not true. Since this is what (B) itself states, it means that (B) must be true. Since initially (B) was not true and is now true, another paradox arises.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another reaction to the paradox of (A) is to posit, as Graham Priest has, that the statement is both true and false. Nevertheless, even Priest's analysis is susceptible to the following version of the liar:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If (C) is both true and false, then (C) is only false. But then, it is not true. Since initially (C) was true and is now not true, it is a paradox. However, it has been argued that by adopting a two-valued relational semantics (as opposed to functional semantics), the dialetheic approach can overcome this version of the Liar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are also multi-sentence versions of the liar paradox. The following is the two-sentence version:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assume (D1) is true. Then (D2) is true. This would mean that (D1) is false. Therefore, (D1) is both true and false.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assume (D1) is false. Then (D2) is false. This would mean that (D1) is true. Thus (D1) is both true and false. Either way, (D1) is both true and false - the same paradox as (A) above.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The multi-sentence version of the liar paradox generalizes to any circular sequence of such statements (wherein the last statement asserts the truth/falsity of the first statement), provided there are an odd number of statements asserting the falsity of their successor; the following is a three-sentence version, with each statement asserting the falsity of its successor:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assume (E1) is true. Then (E2) is false, which means (E3) is true, and hence (E1) is false, leading to a contradiction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assume (E1) is false. Then (E2) is true, which means (E3) is false, and hence (E1) is true. Either way, (E1) is both true and false - the same paradox as with (A) and (D1).", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many other variants, and many complements, possible. In normal sentence construction, the simplest version of the complement is the sentence:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If F is assumed to bear a truth value, then it presents the problem of determining the object of that value. But, a simpler version is possible, by assuming that the single word 'true' bears a truth value. The analogue to the paradox is to assume that the single word 'false' likewise bears a truth value, namely that it is false. This reveals that the paradox can be reduced to the mental act of assuming that the very idea of fallacy bears a truth value, namely that the very idea of fallacy is false: an act of misrepresentation. So, the symmetrical version of the paradox would be:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alfred Tarski diagnosed the paradox as arising only in languages that are \"semantically closed\", by which he meant a language in which it is possible for one sentence to predicate truth (or falsehood) of another sentence in the same language (or even of itself). To avoid self-contradiction, it is necessary when discussing truth values to envision levels of languages, each of which can predicate truth (or falsehood) only of languages at a lower level. So, when one sentence refers to the truth-value of another, it is semantically higher. The sentence referred to is part of the \"object language\", while the referring sentence is considered to be a part of a \"meta-language\" with respect to the object language. It is legitimate for sentences in \"languages\" higher on the semantic hierarchy to refer to sentences lower in the \"language\" hierarchy, but not the other way around. This prevents a system from becoming self-referential.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, this system is incomplete. One would like to be able to make statements such as \"For every statement in level \"\u03b1\" of the hierarchy, there is a statement at level \"\u03b1\"+1 which asserts that the first statement is false.\" This is a true, meaningful statement about the hierarchy that Tarski defines, but it refers to statements at every level of the hierarchy, so it must be above every level of the hierarchy, and is therefore not possible within the hierarchy (although bounded versions of the sentence are possible).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arthur Prior asserts that there is nothing paradoxical about the liar paradox. His claim (which he attributes to Charles Sanders Peirce and John Buridan) is that every statement includes an implicit assertion of its own truth. Thus, for example, the statement \"It is true that two plus two equals four\" contains no more information than the statement \"two plus two equals four\", because the phrase \"it is true that...\" is always implicitly there. And in the self-referential spirit of the Liar Paradox, the phrase \"it is true that...\" is equivalent to \"this whole statement is true and ...\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus the following two statements are equivalent:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The latter is a simple contradiction of the form \"A and not A\", and hence is false. There is therefore no paradox because the claim that this two-conjunct Liar is false does not lead to a contradiction. Eugene Mills presents a similar answer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Saul Kripke argued that whether a sentence is paradoxical or not can depend upon contingent facts. If the only thing Smith says about Jones is", "qas": []}, {"context": "and Jones says only these three things about Smith:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If Smith really is a big spender but is \"not\" soft on crime, then both Smith's remark about Jones and Jones's last remark about Smith are paradoxical.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kripke proposes a solution in the following manner. If a statement's truth value is ultimately tied up in some evaluable fact about the world, that statement is \"grounded\". If not, that statement is \"ungrounded\". Ungrounded statements do not have a truth value. Liar statements and liar-like statements are ungrounded, and therefore have no truth value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy propose that the liar sentence (which they interpret as synonymous with the Strengthened Liar) is ambiguous. They base this conclusion on a distinction they make between a \"denial\" and a \"negation\". If the liar means, \"It is not the case that this statement is true\", then it is denying itself. If it means, \"This statement is not true\", then it is negating itself. They go on to argue, based on situation semantics, that the \"denial liar\" can be true without contradiction while the \"negation liar\" can be false without contradiction. Their 1987 book makes heavy use of non-well-founded set theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Graham Priest and other logicians, including J.C. Beall, and Bradley Armour-Garb have proposed that the liar sentence should be considered to be both true and false, a point of view known as dialetheism. Dialetheism is the view that there are true contradictions. Dialetheism raises its own problems. Chief among these is that since dialetheism recognizes the liar paradox, an intrinsic contradiction, as being true, it must discard the long-recognized principle of explosion, which asserts that any proposition can be deduced from a contradiction, unless the dialetheist is willing to accept trivialism - the view that \"all\" propositions are true. Since trivialism is an intuitively false view, dialetheists nearly always reject the explosion principle. Logics that reject it are called \"paraconsistent\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Andrew Irvine has argued in favour of a non-cognitivist solution to the paradox, suggesting that some apparently well-formed sentences will turn out to be neither true nor false and that \"formal criteria alone will inevitably prove insufficient\" for resolving the paradox.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Indian grammarian-philosopher Bhartrhari (late fifth century AD) dealt with paradoxes such as the liar in a section of one of the chapters of his magnum opus the V\u0101kyapad\u012bya. Although chronologically he precedes all modern treatments of the problem of the liar paradox, it has only very recently become possible to confront his views and analyses with those of modern logicians and philosophers because sufficiently reliable editions and translations of his work have only started becoming available since the second half of the 20th century. Bhartrhari's solution fits into his general approach to language, thought and reality, which has been characterized by some as \"relativistic\", \"non-committal\" or \"perspectivistic\". With regard to the liar paradox (\"sarvam mithy\u0101 brav\u012bmi\" \"everything I am saying is false\") Bhartrhari identifies a hidden parameter which can change unproblematic situations in daily communication into a stubborn paradox. Bhartrhari's solution can be understood in terms of the solution proposed in 1992 by Julian Roberts: \"Paradoxes consume themselves. But we can keep apart the warring sides of the contradiction by the simple expedient of temporal contextualisation: what is 'true' with respect to one point in time need not be so in another ... The overall force of the 'Austinian' argument is not merely that 'things change', but that rationality is essentially temporal in that we need time in order to reconcile and manage what would otherwise be mutually destructive states.\" According to Robert's suggestion, it is the factor \"time\" which allows us to reconcile the separated \"parts of the world\" that play a crucial role in the solution of Barwise and Etchemendy. The capacity of time to prevent a direct confrontation of the two \"parts of the world\" is here external to the \"liar\". In the light of Bhartrhari's analysis, however, the extension in time which separates two perspectives on the world or two \"parts of the world\" \u2014 the part before and the part after the function accomplishes its task \u2014 is inherent in any \"function\": also the function to signify which underlies each statement, including the \"liar\". The unsolvable paradox \u2014 a situation in which we have either contradiction (\"virodha\") or infinite regress (\"anavasth\u0101\") \u2014 arises, in case of the liar and other paradoxes such as the unsignifiability paradox (Bhartrhari's paradox), when abstraction is made from this function (\"vy\u0101p\u0101ra\") and its extension in time, by accepting a simultaneous, opposite function (\"apara vy\u0101p\u0101ra\") undoing the previous one.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a better understanding of the liar paradox, it is useful to write it down in a more formal way. If \"this statement is false\" is denoted by A and its truth value is being sought, it is necessary to find a condition that restricts the choice of possible truth values of A. Because A is self-referential it is possible to give the condition by an equation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If some statement, B, is assumed to be false, one writes, \"B = false\". The statement (C) that the statement B is false would be written as \"C = \"B = false\"\". Now, the liar paradox can be expressed as the statement A, that A is false:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A = \"A = false\"\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is an equation from which the truth value of A = \"this statement is false\" could hopefully be obtained. In the boolean domain \"A = false\" is equivalent to \"not A\" and therefore the equation is not solvable. This is the motivation for reinterpretation of A. The simplest logical approach to make the equation solvable is the dialetheistic approach, in which case the solution is A being both \"true\" and \"false\". Other resolutions mostly include some modifications of the equation; Arthur Prior claims that the equation should be \"A = 'A = false and A = true'\" and therefore A is false. In computational verb logic, the liar paradox is extended to statements like, \"I hear what he says; he says what I don't hear\", where verb logic must be used to resolve the paradox.", "qas": []}, {"context": "G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems are two fundamental theorems of mathematical logic which state inherent limitations of sufficiently powerful axiomatic systems for mathematics. The theorems were proven by Kurt G\u00f6del in 1931, and are important in the philosophy of mathematics. Roughly speaking, in proving the first incompleteness theorem, G\u00f6del used a modified version of the liar paradox, replacing \"this sentence is false\" with \"this sentence is not provable\", called the \"G\u00f6del sentence G\". His proof showed that for any theory \"T\", \"G\" is true, but not provable in \"T\". The analysis of the truth and provability of \"G\" is a formalized version of the analysis of the truth of the liar sentence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To prove the first incompleteness theorem, G\u00f6del represented statements by numbers. Then the theory at hand, which is assumed to prove certain facts about numbers, also proves facts about its own statements. Questions about the provability of statements are represented as questions about the properties of numbers, which would be decidable by the theory if it were complete. In these terms, the G\u00f6del sentence states that no natural number exists with a certain, strange property. A number with this property would encode a proof of the inconsistency of the theory. If there were such a number then the theory would be inconsistent, contrary to the consistency hypothesis. So, under the assumption that the theory is consistent, there is no such number.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is not possible to replace \"not provable\" with \"false\" in a G\u00f6del sentence because the predicate \"Q is the G\u00f6del number of a false formula\" cannot be represented as a formula of arithmetic. This result, known as Tarski's undefinability theorem, was discovered independently by G\u00f6del (when he was working on the proof of the incompleteness theorem) and by Alfred Tarski.", "qas": []}, {"context": "George Boolos has since sketched an alternative proof of the first incompleteness theorem that uses Berry's paradox rather than the liar paradox to construct a true but unprovable formula.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The liar paradox is occasionally used in fiction to shut down artificial intelligences, who are presented as being unable to process the sentence. In \"\" episode \"I, Mudd\", the liar paradox is used by Captain Kirk and Harry Mudd to confuse and ultimately disable an android holding them captive. In the 1973 \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Green Death\", the Doctor temporarily stumps the insane computer BOSS by asking it \"If I were to tell you that the next thing I say would be true, but the last thing I said was a lie, would you believe me?\" However BOSS eventually decides the question is irrelevant and summons security.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 2011 videogame \"Portal 2\", GLaDOS attempts to use the \"this sentence is false\" paradox to defeat the na\u00efve artificial intelligence Wheatley, but, lacking the intelligence to realize the statement a paradox, he simply responds, \"Um, true. I'll go with true. There, that was easy.\" and is unaffected.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the seventh episode of \"\" titled \"Access Denied\" the main character Jesse and his friends are captured by a supercomputer named PAMA. After PAMA controls two of Jesse's friends, Jesse learns that PAMA stalls when processing and uses a paradox to confuse him and escape with his last friend. One of the paradoxes the player can make him say is the liar paradox.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Douglas Adams The hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, chapter 21 he describes a solitary old man inhabiting a small asteroid in the spatial coordinates where it should have been a whole planet dedicated to Biro (ballpoint pen) life forms. This old man repeatedly claimed that nothing was true, though he was later discovered to be lying.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louch\u00e9bem", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Louch\u00e9bem or loucherbem () is Parisian and Lyonnaise butchers' (French \"boucher\") slang, similar to Pig Latin and Verlan. It originated in the mid-19th century and was in common use until the 1950s.", "qas": [{"question": "what is parisian ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"louch\u00e9bem\" word-creation process resembles that of \"largonji\", \"verlan\", and \"javanais\", in that existing words are camouflaged according to a set of rules. Strictly speaking, \"louch\u00e9bem\" is a more rigid variety of \"largonji\" in which the ending \"-\u00e8m\" is obligatory. \"Largonji\" substitutes for the consonant or consonant cluster at the beginning of the word, or, if the word begins with an or a vowel, the second syllable; the initial consonant is then reattached to the end of the word along with a suffix particular to the argot: \"-ji\" , \"-oc\" , \"-ic\" , \"-uche\" , \"-\u00e8s\" , or in the case of louch\u00e9bem, \"-em/\u00e8me\" .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note that \"louch\u00e9bem\" is first and foremost an oral language, and spelling is usually phoneticized.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite the name, \"louch\u00e9bem\" seems to have been created not by butchers but by inmates at Brest Prison, with records dating back to 1821.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Edmund Clerihew Bentley used the language as a plot point in his 1937 short story \"The Old-Fashioned Apache\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Nazi occupation \"louch\u00e9bem\" was used by Parisian members of the Resistance.", "qas": [{"question": "who used the nazi occupation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Even today, \"louch\u00e9bem\" is still well-known and used among those working at point-of-sale in the meat retail industry. Some words have even leaked into common, everyday use by the masses; an example is the word \"loufoque\", meaning \"eccentric\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Here are a few example Louch\u00e9bem words.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is another French argot called \"largonji\", which differs from \"louch\u00e9bem\" only in the suffix that is added (-i instead of -em); the term is derived from \"jargon\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Leon M. Lederman", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Leon Max Lederman (July 15, 1922 \u2013 October 3, 2018) was an American experimental physicist who received the Wolf Prize in Physics in 1982, along with Martin Lewis Perl, for their research on quarks and leptons, and the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1988, along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger, for their research on neutrinos. Lederman was Director Emeritus of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Illinois. He founded the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, in Aurora, Illinois in 1986, and was Resident Scholar Emeritus there from 2012 until his death in 2018.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An accomplished scientific writer, he became known for his 1993 book \"The God Particle\" establishing the importance of the Higgs boson.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lederman was born in New York City, New York, to Morris and Minna (Rosenberg) Lederman. His parents were Ukrainian-Jewish immigrants from Kiev and Odessa. Lederman graduated from James Monroe High School in the South Bronx, and received his bachelor's degree from the City College of New York in 1943.", "qas": [{"question": "where was lederman born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He next enlisted in the United States Army during World War II, intending to become a physicist after his service. Following his discharge in 1946, he enrolled at Columbia University's graduate school, receiving his Ph.D. in 1951.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lederman became a faculty member at Columbia University, and he was promoted to full professor in 1958 as Eugene Higgins Professor of Physics. In 1960, on leave from Columbia, he spent time at CERN in Geneva as a Ford Foundation Fellow. He took an extended leave of absence from Columbia in 1979 to become director of Fermilab. Resigning from Columbia (and retiring from Fermilab) in 1989, he then taught briefly at the University of Chicago. He then moved to the physics department of the Illinois Institute of Technology, where he served as the Pritzker Professor of Science. In 1991, Lederman became President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.", "qas": [{"question": "who became president of the american association for the advancement of science ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 4, 5)"}, {"question": "who was the professor of chemistry in 1964 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lederman served as President of the Board of Sponsors of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, and at the time of his death was Chair Emeritus. He also served on the board of trustees for Science Service, now known as Society for Science & the Public, from 1989 to 1992, and was a member of the JASON defense advisory group. Lederman was also one of the main proponents of the \"Physics First\" movement. Also known as \"Right-side Up Science\" and \"Biology Last,\" this movement seeks to rearrange the current high school science curriculum so that physics precedes chemistry and biology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lederman was an early supporter of Science Debate 2008, an initiative to get the then-candidates for president, Barack Obama and John McCain, to debate the nation's top science policy challenges. In October 2010, Lederman participated in the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Lunch with a Laureate program where middle and high school students engaged in an informal conversation with a Nobel Prize-winning scientist over a brown-bag lunch. Lederman was also a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board.", "qas": [{"question": "who was a member of the u.s. science and engineering ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 6, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 1956, Lederman worked on parity violation in weak interactions. R. L. Garwin, Leon Lederman, and R. Weinrich modified an existing cyclotron experiment, and they immediately verified the parity violation. They delayed publication of their results until after Wu's group was ready, and the two papers appeared back to back in the same physics journal. Among his achievements are the discovery of the muon neutrino in 1962 and the bottom quark in 1977. These helped establish his reputation as among the top particle physicists.", "qas": [{"question": "who worked on parity violation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1977, a group of physicists, the E288 experiment team, led by Lederman announced that a particle with a mass of about 6.0 GeV was being produced by the Fermilab particle accelerator. After taking further data, the group discovered that this particle did not actually exist, and the \"discovery\" was named \"Oops-Leon\" as a pun on the original name and Lederman's first name.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the director of Fermilab, Lederman was a prominent supporter of the Superconducting Super Collider project, which was endorsed around 1983, and was a major proponent and advocate throughout its lifetime. Lederman later wrote his 1993 popular science book \"\" \u2013 which sought to promote awareness of the significance of such a project \u2013 in the context of the project's last years and the changing political climate of the 1990s. The increasingly moribund project was finally shelved that same year after some $2 billion of expenditures. In \"The God Particle\" he wrote, \"The history of atomism is one of reductionism \u2013 the effort to reduce all the operations of nature to a small number of laws governing a small number of primordial objects\" while stressing the importance of the Higgs boson.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1988, Lederman received the Nobel Prize for Physics along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger \"for the neutrino beam method and the demonstration of the doublet structure of the leptons through the discovery of the muon neutrino\". Lederman also received the National Medal of Science (1965), the Elliott Cresson Medal for Physics (1976), the Wolf Prize for Physics (1982) and the Enrico Fermi Award (1992). In 1995, he received the Chicago History Museum \"Making History Award\" for Distinction in Science Medicine and Technology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lederman's best friend during his college years, Martin J. Klein, convinced him of \"the splendors of physics during a long evening over many beers\". He was known for his sense of humor in the physics community. On August 26, 2008 Lederman was video-recorded by a science focused organization called ScienCentral, on the street in a major U.S. city, answering questions from passersby. He answered questions such as \"What is the strong force?\" and \"What happened before the Big Bang?\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite his Jewish background, Lederman was an atheist. He had three children with his first wife, Florence Gordon, and toward the end of his life lived with his second wife, Ellen (Carr), in Driggs, Idaho.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the nationality of jewish background ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lederman died of complications from dementia on October 3, 2018, at a care facility in Rexburg, Idaho at the age of 96.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louis the Pious", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Louis the Pious (778 \u2013 20 June 840), also called the Fair, and the Debonaire, was the King of the Franks and co-Emperor (as Louis I) with his father, Charlemagne, from 813. He was also King of Aquitaine from 781.", "qas": [{"question": "who was king of aquitaine ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "As the only surviving adult son of Charlemagne and Hildegard, he became the sole ruler of the Franks after his father's death in 814, a position which he held until his death, save for the period 833\u201334, during which he was deposed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During his reign in Aquitaine, Louis was charged with the defence of the empire's southwestern frontier. He conquered Barcelona from the Muslims in 801 and asserted Frankish authority over Pamplona and the Basques south of the Pyrenees in 812. As emperor he included his adult sons, Lothair, Pepin, and Louis, in the government and sought to establish a suitable division of the realm among them. The first decade of his reign was characterised by several tragedies and embarrassments, notably the brutal treatment of his nephew Bernard of Italy, for which Louis atoned in a public act of self-debasement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 830s his empire was torn by civil war between his sons, only exacerbated by Louis's attempts to include his son Charles by his second wife in the succession plans. Though his reign ended on a high note, with order largely restored to his empire, it was followed by three years of civil war. Louis is generally compared unfavourably to his father, though the problems he faced were of a distinctly different sort.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the son of charles 's second wife ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis was born while his father Charlemagne was on campaign in Spain, at the Carolingian villa of Cassinogilum, according to Einhard and the anonymous chronicler called Astronomus; the place is usually identified with Chasseneuil, near Poitiers. He was the third son of Charlemagne by his wife Hildegard. His grandfather was King Pepin the Younger.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of the father ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 4, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Louis was crowned King of Aquitaine as a child in 781 and sent there with regents and a court. Charlemagne constituted the sub-kingdom in order to secure the border of his kingdom after the destructive war against the Aquitanians and Basques under Waifer (capitulated \"c\". 768) and later Hunald II, which culminated in the disastrous Battle of Roncesvalles (778). Charlemagne wanted his son Louis to grow up in the area where he was to reign. However, in 785, wary of the customs his son may have been taking in Aquitaine, Charlemagne sent for him to Aquitaine and Louis presented himself at the Royal Council of Paderborn dressed up in Basque costumes along with other youths in the same garment, which may have made a good impression in Toulouse, since the Basques of Vasconia were a mainstay of the Aquitanian army.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 794, Charlemagne settled four former Gallo-Roman villas on Louis, in the thought that he would take in each in turn as winter residence: Dou\u00e9-la-Fontaine in today's Anjou, Ebreuil in Allier, Angeac-Charente, and the disputed Cassinogilum. Charlemagne's intention was to see all his sons brought up as natives of their given territories, wearing the national costume of the region and ruling by the local customs. Thus were the children sent to their respective realms at so young an age. Each kingdom had its importance in keeping some frontier, Louis's was the Spanish March. In 797, Barcelona, the greatest city of the \"Marca\", fell to the Franks when Zeid, its governor, rebelled against C\u00f3rdoba and, failing, handed it to them. The Umayyad authority recaptured it in 799. However, Louis marched the entire army of his kingdom, including Gascons with their duke Sancho I of Gascony, Proven\u00e7als under Leibulf, and Goths under Bera, over the Pyrenees and besieged it for two years, wintering there from 800 to 801, when it capitulated. The sons were not given independence from central authority, however, and Charlemagne ingrained in them the concepts of empire and unity by sending them on military expeditions far from their home bases. Louis campaigned in the Italian Mezzogiorno against the Beneventans at least once.\nLouis was one of Charlemagne's three legitimate sons to survive infancy. He had a twin brother, Lothair who died during infancy. According to Frankish custom, Louis had expected to share his inheritance with his brothers, Charles the Younger, King of Neustria, and Pepin, King of Italy. In the \"Divisio Regnorum\" of 806, Charlemagne had slated Charles the Younger as his successor as emperor and chief king, ruling over the Frankish heartland of Neustria and Austrasia, while giving Pepin the Iron Crown of Lombardy, which Charlemagne possessed by conquest. To Louis's kingdom of Aquitaine, he added Septimania, Provence, and part of Burgundy. However, Charlemagne's other legitimate sons died \u2013 Pepin in 810 and Charles in 811 \u2013 and Louis alone remained to be crowned co-emperor with Charlemagne in 813. On his father's death in 814, he inherited the entire Frankish kingdom and all its possessions (with the sole exception of Italy, which remained within Louis's empire, but under the direct rule of Bernard, Pepin's son).", "qas": [{"question": "who was the sole ruler of the frankish kingdom ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 6, 15)"}]}, {"context": "While at his villa of Dou\u00e9-la-Fontaine, Anjou, Louis received news of his father's death. He rushed to Aachen and crowned himself emperor to shouts of \"Vivat Imperator Ludovicus\" by the attending nobles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Upon arriving at the imperial court in Aachen, one of Louis' first acts was to purge the palace of its \"filth\". He destroyed the old Germanic pagan tokens and texts which had been collected by Charlemagne. He further exiled members of the court he deemed morally \"dissolute\", including some of his own relatives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the start of his reign, his coinage imitated his father Charlemagne's portrait, which gave it an image of imperial authority and prestige. He quickly sent all of his unmarried sisters to nunneries, to avoid any possible entanglements from overly powerful brothers-in-law. Sparing his illegitimate half-brothers, he forced his father's cousins, Adalard and Wala to be tonsured, placing them in Noirmoutier and Corbie, respectively, despite the latter's initial loyalty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His chief counsellors were Bernard, margrave of Septimania, and Ebbo, Archbishop of Reims. The latter, born a serf, was raised by Louis to that office, but betrayed him later. He retained some of his father's ministers, such as Elisachar, abbot of St. Maximin near Trier, and Hildebold, Archbishop of Cologne. Later he replaced Elisachar with Hildwin, abbot of many monasteries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He also employed Benedict of Aniane (the Second Benedict), a Septimanian Visigoth and monastic founder, to help him reform the Frankish church. One of Benedict's primary reforms was to ensure that all religious houses in Louis' realm adhered to the Rule of Saint Benedict, named for its creator, Benedict of Nursia (480\u2013550), the First Benedict.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 816, Pope Stephen IV, who had succeeded Leo III, visited Reims and again crowned Louis (Sunday 5 October).", "qas": []}, {"context": "On Maundy Thursday 817 (9 April), Louis and his court were crossing a wooden gallery from the cathedral to the palace in Aachen when the gallery collapsed, killing many. Louis, having barely survived and feeling the imminent danger of death, began planning for his succession; three months later he issued an \"Ordinatio Imperii\", an imperial decree that laid out plans for an orderly succession. In 815, he had already given his two eldest sons a share in the government, when he had sent his elder sons Lothair and Pepin to govern Bavaria and Aquitaine respectively, though without the royal titles. Now, he proceeded to divide the empire among his three sons:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIf one of the subordinate kings died, he was to be succeeded by his sons. If he died childless, Lothair would inherit his kingdom. In the event of Lothair dying without sons, one of Louis the Pious' younger sons would be chosen to replace him by \"the people\". Above all, the Empire would not be divided: the Emperor would rule supreme over the subordinate kings, whose obedience to him was mandatory.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the son who succeeded napoleon ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 14, 0)"}, {"question": "the emperor would not be what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 14, 3)"}]}, {"context": "With this settlement, Louis tried to combine his sense for the Empire's unity, supported by the clergy, while at the same time providing positions for all of his sons. Instead of treating his sons equally in status and land, he elevated his first-born son Lothair above his younger brothers and gave him the largest part of the Empire as his share.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of napoleon 's younger brother ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 15, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The \"ordinatio imperii\" of Aachen left Bernard of Italy in an uncertain and subordinate position as king of Italy, and he began plotting to declare independence upon hearing of it. Louis immediately directed his army towards Italy, and betook himself to Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne. Intimidated by the emperor's swift action, Bernard met his uncle at Chalon, under invitation, and surrendered. He was taken to Aachen by Louis, who there had him tried and condemned to death for treason. Louis had the sentence commuted to blinding, which was duly carried out; Bernard did not survive the ordeal, however, dying after two days of agony. Others also suffered: Theodulf of Orl\u00e9ans, in eclipse since the death of Charlemagne, was accused of having supported the rebellion, and was thrown into a monastic prison, dying soon afterwards; it was rumored that he had been poisoned. The fate of his nephew deeply marked Louis's conscience for the rest of his life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 822, as a deeply religious man, Louis performed penance for causing Bernard's death, at his palace of Attigny near Vouziers in the Ardennes, before Pope Paschal I, and a council of ecclesiastics and nobles of the realm that had been convened for the reconciliation of Louis with his three younger half-brothers, Hugo whom he soon made abbot of St-Quentin, Drogo whom he soon made Bishop of Metz, and Theodoric. This act of contrition, partly in emulation of Theodosius I, had the effect of greatly reducing his prestige as a Frankish ruler, for he also recited a list of minor offences about which no secular ruler of the time would have taken any notice. He also made the egregious error of releasing Wala and Adalard from their monastic confinements, placing the former in a position of power in the court of Lothair and the latter in a position in his own house.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the start of Louis's reign, the many tribes \u2013 Danes, Obotrites, Slovenes, Bretons, Basques \u2013 which inhabited his frontierlands were still in awe of the Frankish emperor's power and dared not stir up any trouble. In 816, however, the Sorbs rebelled and were quickly followed by Slavomir, chief of the Obotrites, who was captured and abandoned by his own people, being replaced by Ceadrag in 818. Soon, Ceadrag too had turned against the Franks and allied with the Danes, who were to become the greatest menace of the Franks in a short time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A greater Slavic menace was gathering on the southeast. There, Ljudevit, duke of Pannonia, was harassing the border at the Drava and Sava rivers. The margrave of Friuli, Cadolah, was sent out against him, but he died on campaign and, in 820, his margarvate was invaded by Slovenes. In 821, an alliance was made with Borna, duke of the Dalmatia, and Liudewit was brought to heel. In 824 several Slav tribes in the north-western parts of Bulgaria acknowledged Louis's suzerainty and after he was reluctant to settle the matter peacefully with the Bulgarian ruler Omurtag, in 827 the Bulgarians attacked the Franks in Pannonia and regained their lands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the far southern edge of his great realm, Louis had to control the Lombard princes of Benevento whom Charlemagne had never subjugated. He extracted promises from Princes Grimoald IV and Sico, but to no effect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the southwestern frontier, problems commenced early when c. 812, Louis the Pious crossed the western Pyrenees 'to settle matters' in Pamplona. The expedition made its way back north, where it narrowly escaped an ambush attempt arranged by the Basques in the pass of Roncevaux thanks to the precautions he took, i.e. hostages. S\u00e9guin, duke of Gascony, was then deposed by Louis in 816, possibly for failing to suppress or collaborating with the Basque revolt south of the western Pyrenees, so sparking off a Basque uprising that was duly put down by the Frankish emperor in Dax. Seguin was replaced by Lupus III, who was dispossessed in 818 by the emperor. In 820 an assembly at Quierzy-sur-Oise decided to send an expedition against the Cordoban caliphate (827). The counts in charge of the army, Hugh, count of Tours, and Matfrid, count of Orl\u00e9ans, were slow in acting and the expedition came to naught.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 818, as Louis was returning from a campaign to Brittany, he was greeted by news of the death of his wife, Ermengarde. Ermengarde was the daughter of Ingerman, the duke of Hesbaye. Louis had been close to his wife, who had been involved in policymaking. It was rumoured that she had played a part in her nephew's death and Louis himself believed her own death was divine retribution for that event. It took many months for his courtiers and advisors to convince him to remarry, but eventually he did, in 820, to Judith, daughter of Welf, count of Altdorf. In 823 Judith gave birth to a son, who was named Charles.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of charles judith ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 22, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The birth of this son damaged the \"Partition of Aachen\", as Louis's attempts to provide for his fourth son met with stiff resistance from his older sons, and the last two decades of his reign were marked by civil war.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the last two decades of death ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At Worms in 829, Louis gave Alemannia to Charles, with the title of king or duke (historians differ on this), thus enraging his son and co-emperor Lothair, whose promised share was thereby diminished. An insurrection was soon at hand.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the urging of the vengeful Wala and the cooperation of his brothers, Lothair accused Judith of having committed adultery with Bernard of Septimania, even suggesting Bernard to be the true father of Charles. Ebbo and Hildwin abandoned the emperor at that point, Bernard having risen to greater heights than either of them. Agobard, Archbishop of Lyon, and Jesse, bishop of Amiens, too, opposed the redivision of the empire and lent their episcopal prestige to the rebels.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 830, at Wala's insistence that Bernard of Septimania was plotting against him, Pepin of Aquitaine led an army of Gascons, with the support of the Neustrian magnates, all the way to Paris. At Verberie, Louis the German joined him. At that time, the emperor returned from another campaign in Brittany to find his empire at war with itself. He marched as far as Compi\u00e8gne, an ancient royal town, before being surrounded by Pepin's forces and captured. Judith was incarcerated at Poitiers and Bernard fled to Barcelona.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then Lothair finally set out with a large Lombard army, but Louis had promised his sons Louis the German and Pepin of Aquitaine greater shares of the inheritance, prompting them to shift loyalties in favour of their father. When Lothair tried to call a general council of the realm in Nijmegen, in the heart of Austrasia, the Austrasians and Rhinelanders came with a following of armed retainers, and the disloyal sons were forced to free their father and bow at his feet (831). Lothair was pardoned, but disgraced and banished to Italy.", "qas": [{"question": "who did louis want the german and pepin of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Pepin returned to Aquitaine and Judith \u2013 after being forced to humiliate herself with a solemn oath of innocence \u2013 to Louis's court. Only Wala was severely dealt with, making his way to a secluded monastery on the shores of Lake Geneva. Although Hilduin, abbot of Saint Denis, was exiled to Paderborn and Elisachar and Matfrid were deprived of their honours north of the Alps; they did not lose their freedom.", "qas": [{"question": "who returned to aquitaine court ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The next revolt occurred a mere two years later, in 832. The disaffected Pepin was summoned to his father's court, where he was so poorly received he left against his father's orders. Immediately, fearing that Pepin would be stirred up to revolt by his nobles and desiring to reform his morals, Louis the Pious summoned all his forces to meet in Aquitaine in preparation of an uprising, but Louis the German garnered an army of Slav allies and conquered Swabia before the emperor could react. Once again the elder Louis divided his vast realm. At Jonac, he declared Charles king of Aquitaine and deprived Pepin (he was less harsh with the younger Louis), restoring the whole rest of the empire to Lothair, not yet involved in the civil war. Lothair was, however, interested in usurping his father's authority. His ministers had been in contact with Pepin and may have convinced him and Louis the German to rebel, promising him Alemannia, the kingdom of Charles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Soon Lothair, with the support of Pope Gregory IV, whom he had confirmed in office without his father's support, joined the revolt in 833. While Louis was at Worms gathering a new force, Lothair marched north. Louis marched south. The armies met on the plains of the Rothfeld. There, Gregory met the emperor and may have tried to sow dissension amongst his ranks. Soon much of Louis's army had evaporated before his eyes, and he ordered his few remaining followers to go, because \"it would be a pity if any man lost his life or limb on my account.\" The resigned emperor was taken to Saint-M\u00e9dard de Soissons, his son Charles to Pr\u00fcm, and the queen to Tortona. The despicable show of disloyalty and disingenuousness earned the site the name Field of Lies, or L\u00fcgenfeld, or Campus Mendacii, \"ubi plurimorum fidelitas exstincta est\".", "qas": [{"question": "who supported the revolt in 833. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 13 November 833, Ebbo, with Agobard of Lyon, presided over a synod at the Church of Saint Medard in Soissons which saw Louis undertake public penance for the second time in his reign. The penitential ritual that was undertaken began when Louis arrived at the church and confessed multiple times to the crimes levied against him. The crimes had been historic and recent, with accusations of oath breaking, violation of the public peace and inability to control his adulterous wife, Judith of Bavaria. Afterwards, he threw his sword belt at the base of the altar and received judgement through the imposition of the hands of the bishops. Louis was to live the rest of his life as a penitent, never to hold office again. The penance divided the aristocracy. The anonymous biographer of the Vita Hludovici criticized the whole affair on the basis that God does not judge twice for sins committed and confessed. Lothair's allies were generously compensated. Ebbo himself received the monastery of St Vaast whilst Pepin was allowed to keep the lands reclaimed from his father.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Men like Rabanus Maurus, Louis' younger half-brothers Drogo and Hugh, and Emma, Judith's sister and Louis the German's new wife, worked on the younger Louis to make peace with his father, for the sake of unity of the empire. The humiliation to which Louis was then subjected at Notre Dame in Compi\u00e8gne turned the loyal barons of Austrasia and Saxony against Lothair, and the usurper fled to Burgundy, skirmishing with loyalists near Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne. Louis was restored the next year, on 1 March 834.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On Lothair's return to Italy, Wala, Jesse, and Matfrid, formerly count of Orl\u00e9ans, died of a pestilence. On 2 February 835 at the palace Thionville, Louis presided over a general council to deal with the events of the previous year. Known as the Synod of Thionville, Louis himself was reinvested with his ancestral garb and the crown, symbols of Carolingian rulership. Furthermore, the penance of 833 was officially reversed and Archbishop Ebbo officially resigned after confessing to a capital crime, whilst Agobard of Lyon and Bartholmew, Archbishop of Narbonne were also deposed. Later that year Lothair fell ill; once again the events turned in Louis favour.", "qas": [{"question": "what happened to the event after the event of lothair ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 33, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In 836, however, the family made peace and Louis restored Pepin and Louis, deprived Lothair of all save Italy, and gave it to Charles in a new division, given at the diet of Cr\u00e9mieu. At about that time, the Vikings terrorized and sacked Utrecht and Antwerp. In 837, they went up the Rhine as far as Nijmegen, and their king, Rorik, demanded the wergild of some of his followers killed on previous expeditions before Louis the Pious mustered a massive force and marched against them. They fled, but it would not be the last time they harried the northern coasts. In 838, they even claimed sovereignty over Frisia, but a treaty was confirmed between them and the Franks in 839. Louis the Pious ordered the construction of a North Sea fleet and the sending of \"missi dominici\" into Frisia to establish Frankish sovereignty there.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 837, Louis crowned Charles king over all of Alemannia and Burgundy and gave him a portion of his brother Louis' land. Louis the German promptly rose in revolt, and the emperor redivided his realm again at Quierzy-sur-Oise, giving all of the young king of Bavaria's lands, save Bavaria itself, to Charles. Emperor Louis did not stop there, however. His devotion to Charles knew no bounds. When Pepin died in 838, Louis declared Charles the new king of Aquitaine. The nobles, however, elected Pepin's son Pepin II. When Louis threatened invasion, the third great civil war of his reign broke out. In the spring of 839, Louis the German invaded Swabia, Pepin II and his Gascon subjects fought all the way to the Loire, and the Danes returned to ravage the Frisian coast (sacking Dorestad for a second time).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lothair, for the first time in a long time, allied with his father and pledged support at Worms in exchange for a redivision of the inheritance. At a final \"placitum\" held at Worms on 20 May, Louis gave Bavaria to Louis the German and disinherited Pepin II, leaving the entire remainder of the empire to be divided roughly into an eastern part and a western. Lothair was given the choice of which partition he would inherit and he chose the eastern, including Italy, leaving the western for Charles. The emperor quickly subjugated Aquitaine and had Charles recognised by the nobles and clergy at Clermont-en-Auvergne in 840. Louis then, in a final flash of glory, rushed into Bavaria and forced the younger Louis into the Ostmark. The empire now settled as he had declared it at Worms, he returned in July to Frankfurt am Main, where he disbanded the army. The final civil war of his reign was over.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the final civil war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 36, 6)"}, {"question": "how did allied with his father respond to the inheritance ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis fell ill soon after his final victorious campaigns and went to his summer hunting lodge on an island in the Rhine, by his palace at Ingelheim. He died 20 June 840 in the presence of many bishops and clerics and in the arms of his half-brother Drogo, though Charles and Judith were absent in Poitiers. Soon dispute plunged the surviving brothers into a civil war that was only settled in 843 by the Treaty of Verdun, which split the Frankish realm into three parts, to become the kernels of France and Germany, with Burgundy and the Low Countries between them. The dispute over the kingship of Aquitaine was not fully settled until 860.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis was buried in the Abbey of Saint-Arnould in Metz.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By his first wife, Ermengarde of Hesbaye (married c. 794), he had three sons and three daughters:", "qas": []}, {"context": "By his second wife, Judith of Bavaria, he had a daughter and a son:", "qas": []}, {"context": "By Theodelinde of Sens, he had two illegitimate children:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Liquid crystal", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Liquid crystals (LCs) are a state of matter which has properties between those of conventional liquids and those of solid crystals. For instance, a liquid crystal may flow like a liquid, but its molecules may be oriented in a crystal-like way. There are many different types of liquid-crystal phases, which can be distinguished by their different optical properties (such as textures). The contrasting areas in the textures correspond to domains where the liquid-crystal molecules are oriented in different directions. Within a domain, however, the molecules are well ordered. LC materials may not always be in a liquid-crystal phase (just as water may turn into ice or steam).", "qas": [{"question": "what is another term for liquid crystals ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Liquid crystals can be divided into thermotropic, lyotropic and metallotropic phases. Thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals consist mostly of organic molecules, although a few minerals are also known. Thermotropic LCs exhibit a phase transition into the liquid-crystal phase as temperature is changed. Lyotropic LCs exhibit phase transitions as a function of both temperature and concentration of the liquid-crystal molecules in a solvent (typically water). Metallotropic LCs are composed of both organic and inorganic molecules; their liquid-crystal transition depends not only on temperature and concentration, but also on the inorganic-organic composition ratio.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a divided ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Examples of liquid crystals can be found both in the natural world and in technological applications. Most contemporary electronic displays use liquid crystals. Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems but can also be found in the mineral world. For example, many proteins and cell membranes are liquid crystals. Other well-known examples of liquid crystals are solutions of soap and various related detergents, as well as the tobacco mosaic virus, and some clays.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1888, Austrian botanical physiologist Friedrich Reinitzer, working at the Karl-Ferdinands-Universit\u00e4t, examined the physico-chemical properties of various derivatives of cholesterol which now belong to the class of materials known as cholesteric liquid crystals. Previously, other researchers had observed distinct color effects when cooling cholesterol derivatives just above the freezing point, but had not associated it with a new phenomenon. Reinitzer perceived that color changes in a derivative cholesteryl benzoate were not the most peculiar feature. He found that cholesteryl benzoate does not melt in the same manner as other compounds, but has two melting points. At it melts into a cloudy liquid, and at it melts again and the cloudy liquid becomes clear. The phenomenon is reversible. Seeking help from a physicist, on March 14, 1888, he wrote to Otto Lehmann, at that time a \"\" in Aachen. They exchanged letters and samples. Lehmann examined the intermediate cloudy fluid, and reported seeing crystallites. Reinitzer's Viennese colleague von Zepharovich also indicated that the intermediate \"fluid\" was crystalline. The exchange of letters with Lehmann ended on April 24, with many questions unanswered. Reinitzer presented his results, with credits to Lehmann and von Zepharovich, at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3, 1888.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By that time, Reinitzer had discovered and described three important features of cholesteric liquid crystals (the name coined by Otto Lehmann in 1904): the existence of two melting points, the reflection of circularly polarized light, and the ability to rotate the polarization direction of light.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After his accidental discovery, Reinitzer did not pursue studying liquid crystals further. The research was continued by Lehmann, who realized that he had encountered a new phenomenon and was in a position to investigate it: In his postdoctoral years he had acquired expertise in crystallography and microscopy. Lehmann started a systematic study, first of cholesteryl benzoate, and then of related compounds which exhibited the double-melting phenomenon. He was able to make observations in polarized light, and his microscope was equipped with a hot stage (sample holder equipped with a heater) enabling high temperature observations. The intermediate cloudy phase clearly sustained flow, but other features, particularly the signature under a microscope, convinced Lehmann that he was dealing with a solid. By the end of August 1889 he had published his results in the Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Physikalische Chemie.\nLehmann's work was continued and significantly expanded by the German chemist Daniel Vorl\u00e4nder, who from the beginning of 20th century until his retirement in 1935, had synthesized most of the liquid crystals known. However, liquid crystals were not popular among scientists and the material remained a pure scientific curiosity for about 80 years.", "qas": [{"question": "what did reinitzer do after his discovery ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After World War II work on the synthesis of liquid crystals was restarted at university research laboratories in Europe. George William Gray, a prominent researcher of liquid crystals, began investigating these materials in England in the late 1940s. His group synthesized many new materials that exhibited the liquid crystalline state and developed a better understanding of how to design molecules that exhibit the state. His book \"Molecular Structure and the Properties of Liquid Crystals\" became a guidebook on the subject. One of the first U.S. chemists to study liquid crystals was Glenn H. Brown, starting in 1953 at the University of Cincinnati and later at Kent State University. In 1965, he organized the first international conference on liquid crystals, in Kent, Ohio, with about 100 of the world's top liquid crystal scientists in attendance. This conference marked the beginning of a worldwide effort to perform research in this field, which soon led to the development of practical applications for these unique materials.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystal materials became a focus of research in the development of flat panel electronic displays beginning in 1962 at RCA Laboratories. When physical chemist Richard Williams applied an electric field to a thin layer of a nematic liquid crystal at 125\u00a0\u00b0C, he observed the formation of a regular pattern that he called domains (now known as Williams Domains). This led his colleague George H. Heilmeier to perform research on a liquid crystal-based flat panel display to replace the cathode ray vacuum tube used in televisions. But the para-Azoxyanisole that Williams and Heilmeier used exhibits the nematic liquid crystal state only above 116\u00a0\u00b0C, which made it impractical to use in a commercial display product. A material that could be operated at room temperature was clearly needed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1966, Joel E. Goldmacher and Joseph A. Castellano, research chemists in Heilmeier group at RCA, discovered that mixtures made exclusively of nematic compounds that differed only in the number of carbon atoms in the terminal side chains could yield room-temperature nematic liquid crystals. A ternary mixture of Schiff base compounds resulted in a material that had a nematic range of 22\u2013105\u00a0\u00b0C. Operation at room temperature enabled the first practical display device to be made. The team then proceeded to prepare numerous mixtures of nematic compounds many of which had much lower melting points. This technique of mixing nematic compounds to obtain wide operating temperature range eventually became the industry standard and is still used to tailor materials to meet specific applications.\nIn 1969, Hans Kelker succeeded in synthesizing a substance that had a nematic phase at room temperature, MBBA, which is one of the most popular subjects of liquid crystal research. The next step to commercialization of liquid-crystal displays was the synthesis of further chemically stable substances (cyanobiphenyls) with low melting temperatures by George Gray. That work with Ken Harrison and the UK MOD (RRE Malvern), in 1973, led to design of new materials resulting in rapid adoption of small area LCDs within electronic products.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These molecules are rod-shaped, some created in the laboratory and some appearing spontaneously in nature. Since then, two new types of LC molecules have been synthesized: disc-shaped (by Sivaramakrishna Chandrasekhar in India in 1977) and cone or bowl shaped (predicted by Lui Lam in China in 1982 and synthesized in Europe in 1985).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1991, when liquid crystal displays were already well established, Pierre-Gilles de Gennes working at the Universit\u00e9 Paris-Sud received the Nobel Prize in physics \"for discovering that methods developed for studying order phenomena in simple systems can be generalized to more complex forms of matter, in particular to liquid crystals and polymers\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "A large number of chemical compounds are known to exhibit one or several liquid crystalline phases. Despite significant differences in chemical composition, these molecules have some common features in chemical and physical properties. There are three types of thermotropic liquid crystals: discotic, conic (bowlic), and rod-shaped molecules. Discotics are flat disc-like molecules consisting of a core of adjacent aromatic rings; the core in a conic LC is not flat, but is shaped like a rice bowl (a three-dimensional object). This allows for two dimensional columnar ordering, for both discotic and conic LCs. Rod-shaped molecules have an elongated, anisotropic geometry which allows for preferential alignment along one spatial direction.", "qas": [{"question": "what are some chemical compounds known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nAn extended, structurally rigid, highly anisotropic shape seems to be the main criterion for liquid crystalline behavior, and as a result many liquid crystalline materials are based on benzene rings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The various liquid-crystal phases (called mesophases) can be characterized by the type of ordering. One can distinguish positional order (whether molecules are arranged in any sort of ordered lattice) and orientational order (whether molecules are mostly pointing in the same direction), and moreover order can be either short-range (only between molecules close to each other) or long-range (extending to larger, sometimes macroscopic, dimensions). Most thermotropic LCs will have an isotropic phase at high temperature. That is that heating will eventually drive them into a conventional liquid phase characterized by random and isotropic molecular ordering (little to no long-range order), and fluid-like flow behavior. Under other conditions (for instance, lower temperature), a LC might inhabit one or more phases with significant anisotropic orientational structure and short-range orientational order while still having an ability to flow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ordering of liquid crystalline phases is extensive on the molecular scale. This order extends up to the entire domain size, which may be on the order of micrometers, but usually does not extend to the macroscopic scale as often occurs in classical crystalline solids. However some techniques, such as the use of boundaries or an applied electric field, can be used to enforce a single ordered domain in a macroscopic liquid crystal sample. The ordering in a liquid crystal might extend along only one dimension, with the material being essentially disordered in the other two directions.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of phase is used on the molecular scale ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Thermotropic phases are those that occur in a certain temperature range. If the temperature rise is too high, thermal motion will destroy the delicate cooperative ordering of the LC phase, pushing the material into a conventional isotropic liquid phase. At too low temperature, most LC materials will form a conventional crystal. Many thermotropic LCs exhibit a variety of phases as temperature is changed. For instance, on heating a particular type of LC molecule (called mesogen) may exhibit various smectic phases followed by the nematic phase and finally the isotropic phase as temperature is increased. An example of a compound displaying thermotropic LC behavior is para-azoxyanisole.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the most common LC phases is the nematic. The word \"nematic\" comes from the Greek (\"\"), which means \"thread\". This term originates from the thread-like topological defects observed in nematics, which are formally called 'disclinations'. Nematics also exhibit so-called \"hedgehog\" topological defects. In a nematic phase, the \"calamitic\" or rod-shaped organic molecules have no positional order, but they self-align to have long-range directional order with their long axes roughly parallel. Thus, the molecules are free to flow and their center of mass positions are randomly distributed as in a liquid, but still maintain their long-range directional order. Most nematics are uniaxial: they have one axis that is longer and preferred, with the other two being equivalent (can be approximated as cylinders or rods). However, some liquid crystals are biaxial nematics, meaning that in addition to orienting their long axis, they also orient along a secondary axis. Nematics have fluidity similar to that of ordinary (isotropic) liquids but they can be easily aligned by an external magnetic or electric field. Aligned nematics have the optical properties of uniaxial crystals and this makes them extremely useful in liquid-crystal displays (LCD).", "qas": [{"question": "what is one of the most common lc phases ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Scientists have discovered that electrons can unite to flow together in high magnetic fields, to create an \"electronic nematic\" form of matter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The smectic phases, which are found at lower temperatures than the nematic, form well-defined layers that can slide over one another in a manner similar to that of soap. The word \"smectic\" originates from the Latin word \"smecticus\", meaning cleaning, or having soap-like properties.\nThe smectics are thus positionally ordered along one direction. In the Smectic A phase, the molecules are oriented along the layer normal, while in the Smectic C phase they are tilted away from it. These phases are liquid-like within the layers. There are many different smectic phases, all characterized by different types and degrees of positional and orientational order.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The chiral nematic phase exhibits chirality (handedness). This phase is often called the \"cholesteric\" phase because it was first observed for cholesterol derivatives. Only chiral molecules (i.e., those that have no internal planes of symmetry) can give rise to such a phase. This phase exhibits a twisting of the molecules perpendicular to the director, with the molecular axis parallel to the director. The finite twist angle between adjacent molecules is due to their asymmetric packing, which results in longer-range chiral order. In the smectic C* phase (an asterisk denotes a chiral phase), the molecules have positional ordering in a layered structure (as in the other smectic phases), with the molecules tilted by a finite angle with respect to the layer normal. The chirality induces a finite azimuthal twist from one layer to the next, producing a spiral twisting of the molecular axis along the layer normal.\nThe \"chiral pitch\", p, refers to the distance over which the LC molecules undergo a full 360\u00b0 twist (but note that the structure of the chiral nematic phase repeats itself every half-pitch, since in this phase directors at 0\u00b0 and \u00b1180\u00b0 are equivalent). The pitch, p, typically changes when the temperature is altered or when other molecules are added to the LC host (an achiral LC host material will form a chiral phase if doped with a chiral material), allowing the pitch of a given material to be tuned accordingly. In some liquid crystal systems, the pitch is of the same order as the wavelength of visible light. This causes these systems to exhibit unique optical properties, such as Bragg reflection and low-threshold laser emission, and these properties are exploited in a number of optical applications. For the case of Bragg reflection only the lowest-order reflection is allowed if the light is incident along the helical axis, whereas for oblique incidence higher-order reflections become permitted. Cholesteric liquid crystals also exhibit the unique property that they reflect circularly polarized light when it is incident along the helical axis and elliptically polarized if it comes in obliquely.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the phase of the chiral ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Blue phases are liquid crystal phases that appear in the temperature range between a chiral nematic phase and an isotropic liquid phase. Blue phases have a regular three-dimensional cubic structure of defects with lattice periods of several hundred nanometers, and thus they exhibit selective Bragg reflections in the wavelength range of visible light corresponding to the cubic lattice. It was theoretically predicted in 1981 that these phases can possess icosahedral symmetry similar to quasicrystals.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the phase of blue phase ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Although blue phases are of interest for fast light modulators or tunable photonic crystals, they exist in a very narrow temperature range, usually less than a few kelvin. Recently the stabilization of blue phases over a temperature range of more than 60\u00a0K including room temperature (260\u2013326\u00a0K) has been demonstrated. Blue phases stabilized at room temperature allow electro-optical switching with response times of the order of 10\u00a0s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In May 2008, the first Blue Phase Mode LCD panel had been developed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Disk-shaped LC molecules can orient themselves in a layer-like fashion known as the discotic nematic phase. If the disks pack into stacks, the phase is called a discotic columnar. The columns themselves may be organized into rectangular or hexagonal arrays. Chiral discotic phases, similar to the chiral nematic phase, are also known.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Conic LC molecules, like in discotics, can form columnar phases. Other phases, such as nonpolar nematic, polar nematic, stringbean, donut and onion phases, have been predicted. Conic phases, except nonpolar nematic, are polar phases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A lyotropic liquid crystal consists of two or more components that exhibit liquid-crystalline properties in certain concentration ranges. In the lyotropic phases, solvent molecules fill the space around the compounds to provide fluidity to the system. In contrast to thermotropic liquid crystals, these lyotropics have another degree of freedom of concentration that enables them to induce a variety of different phases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A compound that has two immiscible hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts within the same molecule is called an amphiphilic molecule. Many amphiphilic molecules show lyotropic liquid-crystalline phase sequences depending on the volume balances between the hydrophilic part and hydrophobic part. These structures are formed through the micro-phase segregation of two incompatible components on a nanometer scale. Soap is an everyday example of a lyotropic liquid crystal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The content of water or other solvent molecules changes the self-assembled structures. At very low amphiphile concentration, the molecules will be dispersed randomly without any ordering. At slightly higher (but still low) concentration, amphiphilic molecules will spontaneously assemble into micelles or vesicles. This is done so as to 'hide' the hydrophobic tail of the amphiphile inside the micelle core, exposing a hydrophilic (water-soluble) surface to aqueous solution. These spherical objects do not order themselves in solution, however. At higher concentration, the assemblies will become ordered. A typical phase is a hexagonal columnar phase, where the amphiphiles form long cylinders (again with a hydrophilic surface) that arrange themselves into a roughly hexagonal lattice. This is called the middle soap phase. At still higher concentration, a lamellar phase (neat soap phase) may form, wherein extended sheets of amphiphiles are separated by thin layers of water. For some systems, a cubic (also called viscous isotropic) phase may exist between the hexagonal and lamellar phases, wherein spheres are formed that create a dense cubic lattice. These spheres may also be connected to one another, forming a bicontinuous cubic phase.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The objects created by amphiphiles are usually spherical (as in the case of micelles), but may also be disc-like (bicelles), rod-like, or biaxial (all three micelle axes are distinct). These anisotropic self-assembled nano-structures can then order themselves in much the same way as thermotropic liquid crystals do, forming large-scale versions of all the thermotropic phases (such as a nematic phase of rod-shaped micelles).", "qas": []}, {"context": "For some systems, at high concentrations, inverse phases are observed. That is, one may generate an inverse hexagonal columnar phase (columns of water encapsulated by amphiphiles) or an inverse micellar phase (a bulk liquid crystal sample with spherical water cavities).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A generic progression of phases, going from low to high amphiphile concentration, is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even within the same phases, their self-assembled structures are tunable by the concentration: for example, in lamellar phases, the layer distances increase with the solvent volume. Since lyotropic liquid crystals rely on a subtle balance of intermolecular interactions, it is more difficult to analyze their structures and properties than those of thermotropic liquid crystals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similar phases and characteristics can be observed in immiscible diblock copolymers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystal phases can also be based on low-melting \"inorganic\" phases like ZnCl that have a structure formed of linked tetrahedra and easily form glasses. The addition of long chain soap-like molecules leads to a series of new phases that show a variety of liquid crystalline behavior both as a function of the inorganic-organic composition ratio and of temperature. This class of materials has been named metallotropic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thermotropic mesophases are detected and characterized by two major methods, the original method was use of thermal optical microscopy, in which a small sample of the material was placed between two crossed polarizers; the sample was then heated and cooled. As the isotropic phase would not significantly affect the polarization of the light, it would appear very dark, whereas the crystal and liquid crystal phases will both polarize the light in a uniform way, leading to brightness and color gradients. This method allows for the characterization of the particular phase, as the different phases are defined by their particular order, which must be observed. The second method, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), allows for more precise determination of phase transitions and transition enthalpies. In DSC, a small sample is heated in a way that generates a very precise change in temperature with respect to time. During phase transitions, the heat flow required to maintain this heating or cooling rate will change. These changes can be observed and attributed to various phase transitions, such as key liquid crystal transitions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lyotropic mesophases are analyzed in a similar fashion, though these experiments are somewhat more complex, as the concentration of mesogen is a key factor. These experiments are run at various concentrations of mesogen in order to analyze that impact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems, the study of which is referred to as lipid polymorphism. Accordingly, lyotropic liquid crystals attract particular attention in the field of biomimetic chemistry. In particular, biological membranes and cell membranes are a form of liquid crystal. Their constituent molecules (e.g. phospholipids) are perpendicular to the membrane surface, yet the membrane is flexible. These lipids vary in shape (see page on lipid polymorphism). The constituent molecules can inter-mingle easily, but tend not to leave the membrane due to the high energy requirement of this process. Lipid molecules can flip from one side of the membrane to the other, this process being catalyzed by flippases and floppases (depending on the direction of movement). These liquid crystal membrane phases can also host important proteins such as receptors freely \"floating\" inside, or partly outside, the membrane, e.g. CCT.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many other biological structures exhibit liquid-crystal behavior. For instance, the concentrated protein solution that is extruded by a spider to generate silk is, in fact, a liquid crystal phase. The precise ordering of molecules in silk is critical to its renowned strength. DNA and many polypeptides can also form LC phases and this too forms an important part of current academic research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Examples of liquid crystals can also be found in the mineral world, most of them being lyotropics. The first discovered was Vanadium(V) oxide, by Zocher in 1925. Since then, few others have been discovered and studied in detail. The existence of a true nematic phase in the case of the smectite clays family was raised by Langmuir in 1938, but remained open for a very long time and was only solved recently. With the rapid development of nanosciences, and the synthesis of many new anisotropic nanoparticles, the number of such mineral liquid crystals is quickly increasing, with, for example, carbon nanotubes and graphene.\nA lamellar phase was even discovered, HSbPO, which exhibits hyperswelling up to ~250\u00a0nm for the interlamellar distance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anisotropy of liquid crystals is a property not observed in other fluids. This anisotropy makes flows of liquid crystals behave more differentially than those of ordinary fluids. For example, injection of a flux of a liquid crystal between two close parallel plates (viscous fingering) causes orientation of the molecules to couple with the flow, with the resulting emergence of dendritic patterns. This anisotropy is also manifested in the interfacial energy (surface tension) between different liquid crystal phases. This anisotropy determines the equilibrium shape at the coexistence temperature, and is so strong that usually facets appear. When temperature is changed one of the phases grows, forming different morphologies depending on the temperature change. Since growth is controlled by heat diffusion, anisotropy in thermal conductivity favors growth in specific directions, which has also an effect on the final shape.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Microscopic theoretical treatment of fluid phases can become quite complicated, owing to the high material density, meaning that strong interactions, hard-core repulsions, and many-body correlations cannot be ignored. In the case of liquid crystals, anisotropy in all of these interactions further complicates analysis. There are a number of fairly simple theories, however, that can at least predict the general behavior of the phase transitions in liquid crystal systems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As we already saw above, the nematic liquid crystals are composed of rod-like molecules with the long axes of neighboring molecules aligned approximately to one another. To describe this anisotropic structure, a dimensionless unit vector n called the \"director\", is introduced to represent the direction of preferred orientation of molecules in the neighborhood of any point. Because there is no physical polarity along the director axis, n and -n are fully equivalent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The description of liquid crystals involves an analysis of order. A second rank symmetric traceless tensor order parameter is used to describe the orientational order of a nematic liquid crystal, although a scalar order parameter is usually sufficient to describe uniaxial nematic liquid crystals. To make this quantitative, an orientational order parameter is usually defined based on the average of the second Legendre polynomial:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_2 is the angle between the liquid-crystal molecular axis and the \"local director\" (which is the 'preferred direction' in a volume element of a liquid crystal sample, also representing its \"local optical axis\"). The brackets denote both a temporal and spatial average. This definition is convenient, since for a completely random and isotropic sample, \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00, whereas for a perfectly aligned sample S=1. For a typical liquid crystal sample, \"S\" is on the order of 0.3 to 0.8, and generally decreases as the temperature is raised. In particular, a sharp drop of the order parameter to 0 is observed when the system undergoes a phase transition from an LC phase into the isotropic phase. The order parameter can be measured experimentally in a number of ways; for instance, diamagnetism, birefringence, Raman scattering, NMR and EPR can be used to determine S.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The order of a liquid crystal could also be characterized by using other even Legendre polynomials (all the odd polynomials average to zero since the director can point in either of two antiparallel directions). These higher-order averages are more difficult to measure, but can yield additional information about molecular ordering.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A positional order parameter is also used to describe the ordering of a liquid crystal. It is characterized by the variation of the density of the center of mass of the liquid crystal molecules along a given vector. In the case of positional variation along the \"z\"-axis the density formula_3 is often given by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The complex positional order parameter is defined as formula_5 and formula_6 the average density. Typically only the first two terms are kept and higher order terms are ignored since most phases can be described adequately using sinusoidal functions. For a perfect nematic formula_7 and for a smectic phase formula_8 will take on complex values. The complex nature of this order parameter allows for many parallels between nematic to smectic phase transitions and conductor to superconductor transitions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A simple model which predicts lyotropic phase transitions is the hard-rod model proposed by Lars Onsager. This theory considers the volume excluded from the center-of-mass of one idealized cylinder as it approaches another. Specifically, if the cylinders are oriented parallel to one another, there is very little volume that is excluded from the center-of-mass of the approaching cylinder (it can come quite close to the other cylinder). If, however, the cylinders are at some angle to one another, then there is a large volume surrounding the cylinder which the approaching cylinder's center-of-mass cannot enter (due to the hard-rod repulsion between the two idealized objects). Thus, this angular arrangement sees a \"decrease\" in the net positional entropy of the approaching cylinder (there are fewer states available to it).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fundamental insight here is that, whilst parallel arrangements of anisotropic objects lead to a decrease in orientational entropy, there is an increase in positional entropy. Thus in some case greater positional order will be entropically favorable. This theory thus predicts that a solution of rod-shaped objects will undergo a phase transition, at sufficient concentration, into a nematic phase. Although this model is conceptually helpful, its mathematical formulation makes several assumptions that limit its applicability to real systems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This statistical theory, proposed by Alfred Saupe and Wilhelm Maier, includes contributions from an attractive intermolecular potential from an induced dipole moment between adjacent liquid crystal molecules. The anisotropic attraction stabilizes parallel alignment of neighboring molecules, and the theory then considers a mean-field average of the interaction. Solved self-consistently, this theory predicts thermotropic nematic-isotropic phase transitions, consistent with experiment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "McMillan's model, proposed by William McMillan, is an extension of the Maier\u2013Saupe mean field theory used to describe the phase transition of a liquid crystal from a nematic to a smectic A phase. It predicts that the phase transition can be either continuous or discontinuous depending on the strength of the short-range interaction between the molecules. As a result, it allows for a triple critical point where the nematic, isotropic, and smectic A phase meet. Although it predicts the existence of a triple critical point, it does not successfully predict its value. The model utilizes two order parameters that describe the orientational and positional order of the liquid crystal. The first is simply the average of the second Legendre polynomial and the second order parameter is given by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The values \"z, \u03b8\", and \"d\" are the position of the molecule, the angle between the molecular axis and director, and the layer spacing. The postulated potential energy of a single molecule is given by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Here constant \u03b1 quantifies the strength of the interaction between adjacent molecules. The potential is then used to derive the thermodynamic properties of the system assuming thermal equilibrium. It results in two self-consistency equations that must be solved numerically, the solutions of which are the three stable phases of the liquid crystal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this formalism, a liquid crystal material is treated as a continuum; molecular details are entirely ignored. Rather, this theory considers perturbations to a presumed oriented sample. The distortions of the liquid crystal are commonly described by the Frank free energy density. One can identify three types of distortions that could occur in an oriented sample: (1) twists of the material, where neighboring molecules are forced to be angled with respect to one another, rather than aligned; (2) splay of the material, where bending occurs perpendicular to the director; and (3) bend of the material, where the distortion is parallel to the director and molecular axis. All three of these types of distortions incur an energy penalty. They are distortions that are induced by the boundary conditions at domain walls or the enclosing container. The response of the material can then be decomposed into terms based on the elastic constants corresponding to the three types of distortions. Elastic continuum theory is a particularly powerful tool for modeling liquid crystal devices and lipid bilayers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scientists and engineers are able to use liquid crystals in a variety of applications because external perturbation can cause significant changes in the macroscopic properties of the liquid crystal system. Both electric and magnetic fields can be used to induce these changes. The magnitude of the fields, as well as the speed at which the molecules align are important characteristics industry deals with. Special surface treatments can be used in liquid crystal devices to force specific orientations of the director.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ability of the director to align along an external field is caused by the electric nature of the molecules. Permanent electric dipoles result when one end of a molecule has a net positive charge while the other end has a net negative charge. When an external electric field is applied to the liquid crystal, the dipole molecules tend to orient themselves along the direction of the field.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even if a molecule does not form a permanent dipole, it can still be influenced by an electric field. In some cases, the field produces slight re-arrangement of electrons and protons in molecules such that an induced electric dipole results. While not as strong as permanent dipoles, orientation with the external field still occurs.\nThe effects of magnetic fields on liquid crystal molecules are analogous to electric fields. Because magnetic fields are generated by moving electric charges, permanent magnetic dipoles are produced by electrons moving about atoms. When a magnetic field is applied, the molecules will tend to align with or against the field. Electromagnetic radiation, e.g. UV-Visible light, can influence light-responsive liquid crystals which mainly carry at least a photo-switchable unit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the absence of an external field, the director of a liquid crystal is free to point in any direction. It is possible, however, to force the director to point in a specific direction by introducing an outside agent to the system. For example, when a thin polymer coating (usually a polyimide) is spread on a glass substrate and rubbed in a single direction with a cloth, it is observed that liquid crystal molecules in contact with that surface align with the rubbing direction. The currently accepted mechanism for this is believed to be an epitaxial growth of the liquid crystal layers on the partially aligned polymer chains in the near surface layers of the polyimide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several liquid crystal chemicals also align to a 'command surface' which is in turn aligned by electric field of polarized light. This process is called photoalignment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The competition between orientation produced by surface anchoring and by electric field effects is often exploited in liquid crystal devices. Consider the case in which liquid crystal molecules are aligned parallel to the surface and an electric field is applied perpendicular to the cell. At first, as the electric field increases in magnitude, no change in alignment occurs. However at a threshold magnitude of electric field, deformation occurs. Deformation occurs where the director changes its orientation from one molecule to the next. The occurrence of such a change from an aligned to a deformed state is called a Fredericks transition and can also be produced by the application of a magnetic field of sufficient strength.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Fredericks transition is fundamental to the operation of many liquid crystal displays because the director orientation (and thus the properties) can be controlled easily by the application of a field.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As already described, chiral liquid-crystal molecules usually give rise to chiral mesophases. This means that the molecule must possess some form of asymmetry, usually a stereogenic center. An additional requirement is that the system not be racemic: a mixture of right- and left-handed molecules will cancel the chiral effect. Due to the cooperative nature of liquid crystal ordering, however, a small amount of chiral dopant in an otherwise achiral mesophase is often enough to select out one domain handedness, making the system overall chiral.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chiral phases usually have a helical twisting of the molecules. If the pitch of this twist is on the order of the wavelength of visible light, then interesting optical interference effects can be observed. The chiral twisting that occurs in chiral LC phases also makes the system respond differently from right- and left-handed circularly polarized light. These materials can thus be used as polarization filters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is possible for chiral LC molecules to produce essentially achiral mesophases. For instance, in certain ranges of concentration and molecular weight, DNA will form an achiral line hexatic phase. An interesting recent observation is of the formation of chiral mesophases from achiral LC molecules. Specifically, bent-core molecules (sometimes called banana liquid crystals) have been shown to form liquid crystal phases that are chiral. In any particular sample, various domains will have opposite handedness, but within any given domain, strong chiral ordering will be present. The appearance mechanism of this macroscopic chirality is not yet entirely clear. It appears that the molecules stack in layers and orient themselves in a tilted fashion inside the layers. These liquid crystals phases may be ferroelectric or anti-ferroelectric, both of which are of interest for applications.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chirality can also be incorporated into a phase by adding a chiral dopant, which may not form LCs itself. Twisted-nematic or super-twisted nematic mixtures often contain a small amount of such dopants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays, which rely on the optical properties of certain liquid crystalline substances in the presence or absence of an electric field. In a typical device, a liquid crystal layer (typically 4 \u03bcm thick) sits between two polarizers that are crossed (oriented at 90\u00b0 to one another). The liquid crystal alignment is chosen so that its relaxed phase is a twisted one (see Twisted nematic field effect). This twisted phase reorients light that has passed through the first polarizer, allowing its transmission through the second polarizer (and reflected back to the observer if a reflector is provided). The device thus appears transparent. When an electric field is applied to the LC layer, the long molecular axes tend to align parallel to the electric field thus gradually untwisting in the center of the liquid crystal layer. In this state, the LC molecules do not reorient light, so the light polarized at the first polarizer is absorbed at the second polarizer, and the device loses transparency with increasing voltage. In this way, the electric field can be used to make a pixel switch between transparent or opaque on command. Color LCD systems use the same technique, with color filters used to generate red, green, and blue pixels. Chiral smectic liquid crystals are used in ferroelectric LCDs which are fast-switching binary light modulators. Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystal tunable filters are used as electrooptical devices, e.g., in hyperspectral imaging.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thermotropic chiral LCs whose pitch varies strongly with temperature can be used as crude liquid crystal thermometers, since the color of the material will change as the pitch is changed. Liquid crystal color transitions are used on many aquarium and pool thermometers as well as on thermometers for infants or baths. Other liquid crystal materials change color when stretched or stressed. Thus, liquid crystal sheets are often used in industry to look for hot spots, map heat flow, measure stress distribution patterns, and so on. Liquid crystal in fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the semiconductor industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystal lenses converge or diverge the incident light by adjusting the refractive index of liquid crystal layer with applied voltage or temperature. Generally, the liquid crystal lenses generate a parabolic refractive index distribution by arranging molecular orientations. Therefore, a plane wave is reshaped into a parabolic wavefront by a liquid crystal lens. The focal length of liquid crystal lenses could be continuously tunable when the external electric field can be properly tuned. Liquid crystal lenses are a kind of adaptive optics. Imaging system can be benefited with focusing correction, image plane adjustment, or changing the range of depth-of-field or depth of focus. Liquid crystal lens is one of the candidates to develop vision correction device for myopia and presbyopia eyes (e.g., tunable eyeglass and smart contact lenses).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liquid crystal lasers use a liquid crystal in the lasing medium as a distributed feedback mechanism instead of external mirrors. Emission at a photonic bandgap created by the periodic dielectric structure of the liquid crystal gives a low-threshold high-output device with stable monochromatic emission.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Polymer dispersed liquid crystal (PDLC) sheets and rolls are available as adhesive backed Smart film which can be applied to windows and electrically switched between transparent and opaque to provide privacy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many common fluids, such as soapy water, are in fact liquid crystals. Soap forms a variety of LC phases depending on its concentration in water.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Long gun", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A long gun is a category of firearms with longer barrels than most other types. In small arms, a \"long gun\" is generally designed to be held by both hands and braced against the shoulder, in contrast to a handgun, which can be fired being held with a single hand. In the context of cannons and mounted firearms an artillery \"long gun\" would be contrasted with a howitzer or carronade.", "qas": [{"question": "a long gun is a category of what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The actual length of the barrels of a long gun are subject to various laws in many jurisdictions, for example by the National Firearms Act in the United States, which sets a minimum length of 16 inches (40\u00a0cm) for rifle barrels and 18 inches (45\u00a0cm) for shotgun barrels. Canada has a limit of 18.5 inches (47\u00a0cm) for either. In addition, Canada puts a minimum fireable length for long guns with detachable or folding stocks of 26 inches (66\u00a0cm). In the United States, the minimum length for long guns with detachable or folding stocks is with the stock in the extended position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Examples of various classes of small arms generally considered long arms include, but are not limited to: rifles, carbines, shotguns, muskets, blunderbusses, submachine guns, personal defense weapons, wall guns, and musketoons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Almost all long-arms have front grips (forearms) and shoulder stocks, which provides the user the ability to hold the firearm more steadily than a handgun. In addition, the long barrel of a long gun usually provides a longer distance between the front and rear sights, providing the user with more precision when aiming. The presence of a stock makes the use of a telescopic sight or red dot sight easier than with a hand gun.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The mass of a long gun is usually greater than that of a short gun, making the long gun more expensive to transport, and more difficult and tiring to carry. The increased moment of inertia makes the long gun slower and more difficult to traverse and elevate, and it is thus slower and more difficult to adjust the aim. However, this also results in greater stability in aiming. The greater amount of material in a long gun tends to make it more expensive to manufacture, other factors being equal. The greater size makes it more difficult to conceal, and more inconvenient to use in confined quarters, as well as requiring a larger storage space.", "qas": [{"question": "the mass of a long gun is compared to what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As long guns include a stock which is braced against the shoulder, the recoil when firing is transferred directly into the body of the user. This allows better control of aim than handguns, which do not include a stock and thus all their recoil must be transferred to the arms of the user. It also makes it possible to manage larger amounts of recoil without damage or loss of control; in combination with the higher mass of long guns this means more propellant (such as gunpowder) can be used and thus larger projectiles can be fired at higher velocities. This is one of the main reasons for the use of long guns over handguns - faster or heavier projectiles help with penetration and accuracy over longer distances.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shotguns are long guns that are designed to fire many small projectiles at once. This makes them very effective at close ranges, but with diminished usefulness at long range.", "qas": [{"question": "what are long guns designed to fire many small balloons at once ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In historical navy usage, a long gun was the standard type of cannon mounted by a sailing vessel, called such to distinguish it from the much shorter carronades. In informal usage, the length was combined with the weight of shot, yielding terms like \"long 9s\", referring to full length cannons firing a 9-pound round shot.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Law of definite proportions", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In chemistry, the law of definite proportion, sometimes called Proust's law or the law of definite composition, or law of constant composition states that a given \nchemical compound always contains its component elements in fixed ratio (by mass) and does not depend on its source and method of preparation. For example oxygen makes up about / of the mass of any sample of pure water, while hydrogen makes up the remaining / of the mass. Along with the law of multiple proportions, the law of definite proportions forms the basis of stoichiometry.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the law of constant composition states that a chemical compound is used ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what law is the law of remembrance ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 0, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The law of constant proportion was given by Joseph Proust in 1794. This observation was first made by the English theologian and chemist Joseph Priestley, and Antoine Lavoisier, a French nobleman and chemist centered on the process of combustion. \nThe law of definite proportions might seem obvious to the modern chemist, inherent in the very definition of a chemical compound. At the end of the 18th century, however, when the concept of a chemical compound had not yet been fully developed, the law was novel. In fact, when first proposed, it was a controversial statement and was opposed by other chemists, most notably Proust's fellow Frenchman Claude Louis Berthollet, who argued that the elements could combine in any proportion. The existence of this debate demonstrates that, at the time, the distinction between pure chemical compounds and mixtures had not yet been fully developed.", "qas": [{"question": "who made the law of constant majority ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The law of definite proportions contributed to, and was placed on a firm theoretical basis by, the atomic theory that John Dalton promoted beginning in 1803, which explained matter as consisting of discrete atoms, that there was one type of atom for each element, and that the compounds were made of combinations of different types of atoms in fixed proportions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A related early idea was Prout's hypothesis, formulated by English chemist William Prout, who proposed that the hydrogen atom was the fundamental atomic unit. From this hypothesis was derived the whole number rule, which was the rule of thumb that atomic masses were whole number multiples of the mass of hydrogen. This was later rejected in the 1820s and 30s following more refined measurements of atomic mass, notably by J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius, which revealed in particular that the atomic mass of chlorine was 35.45, which was incompatible with the hypothesis. Since the 1920s this discrepancy has been explained by the presence of isotopes; the atomic mass of any isotope is very close to satisfying the whole number rule, with the mass defect caused by differing binding energies being significantly smaller.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although very useful in the foundation of modern chemistry, the law of definite proportions is not universally true. There exist non-stoichiometric compounds whose elemental composition can vary from sample to sample. Such compounds follow the law of multiple proportion. An example is the iron oxide w\u00fcstite, which can contain between 0.83 and 0.95 iron atoms for every oxygen atom, and thus contain anywhere between 23% and 25% oxygen by mass. The ideal formula is FeO, but due to crystallographic vacancies it is reduced to about FeO. In general, Proust's measurements were not accurate enough to detect such variations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition, the isotopic composition of an element can vary depending on its source, hence its contribution to the mass of even a pure stoichiometric compound may vary. This variation is used in geochemical dating since astronomical, atmospheric, oceanic, crustal and deep Earth processes may concentrate lighter or heavier isotopes preferentially. With the exception of hydrogen and its isotopes, the effect is usually small, but is measurable with modern instrumentation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An additional note: many natural polymers vary in composition (for instance DNA, proteins, carbohydrates) even when \"pure\". Polymers are generally not considered \"pure chemical compounds\" except when their molecular weight is uniform (monodisperse) and their stoichiometry is constant. In this unusual case, they still may violate the law due to isotopic variations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Limbo", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In Catholic theology, Limbo (Latin \"limbus\", edge or boundary, referring to the \"edge\" of Hell) is a doctrine concerning the afterlife condition of those who die in original sin without being assigned to the Hell of the Damned. Medieval theologians of western Europe described the underworld (\"hell\", \"hades\", \"infernum\") as divided into four distinct parts: Hell of the Damned, Purgatory, Limbo of the Fathers or Patriarchs, and Limbo of the Infants. However, Limbo of the Infants is not an official doctrine of the Catholic Church.", "qas": [{"question": "what is not an official doctrine of the catholic church ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 0, 2)"}, {"question": "what does catholic mean in english ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"Limbo of the Patriarchs\" or \"Limbo of the Fathers\" (Latin \"limbus patrum\") is seen as the temporary state of those who, despite the sins they may have committed, died in the friendship of God but could not enter Heaven until redemption by Jesus Christ made it possible. The term \"Limbo of the Fathers\" was a medieval name for the part of the underworld (Hades) where the patriarchs of the Old Testament were believed to be kept until Christ's soul descended into it by his death through crucifixion and freed them (see Harrowing of Hell). The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes Christ's descent into Hell as meaning primarily that \"the crucified one sojourned in the realm of the dead prior to his resurrection. This was the first meaning given in the apostolic preaching to Christ's descent into Hell: that Jesus, like all men, experienced death and in his soul joined the others in the realm of the dead.\" It adds: \"But he descended there as Saviour, proclaiming the Good News to the spirits imprisoned there.\" It does not use the word \"Limbo\".", "qas": [{"question": "what does the word `` limbo '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 1, 5)"}, {"question": "what does the term `` limbus of the patriarchs '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "This concept of Limbo affirms that admittance to Heaven is possible only through the intervention of Jesus Christ, but does not portray Moses, etc. as being punished eternally in Hell. The concept of Limbo of the Patriarchs is not spelled out in Scripture, but is seen by some as implicit in various references.", "qas": [{"question": "what does limbo believe is possible ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Jesus told the Good Thief that the two of them would be together \"this day\" in \"Paradise\" (; see also ); but on the Sunday of his resurrection he said that he had \"not yet ascended to the Father\" (). Some say that the descent of Jesus to the abode of the dead, his presence among them, turned it into a paradise. Others understand the text to mean not \"I say to you, This day you will be with me in paradise\", but \"I say to you this day, You will be with me in paradise\". Timothy Radcliffe explained the \"today\" as a reference to the \"Today of eternity\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jesus is also described as preaching to \"the spirits in prison\" (1 Pet 3:19). Medieval drama sometimes portrayed Christ leading a dramatic assault\u2014The Harrowing of Hell\u2014during the three days between the Crucifixion and the resurrection. In this assault, Jesus freed the souls of the just and escorted them triumphantly into heaven. This imagery is still used in the Eastern Orthodox Church's Holy Saturday liturgy (between Good Friday and Pascha) and in Eastern Orthodox icons of the Resurrection of Jesus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The doctrine expressed by the term \"Limbo of the Fathers\" was taught, for instance, by Clement of Alexandria, who maintained: \"It is not right that these should be condemned without trial, and that those alone who lived after the coming (of Christ) should have the advantage of the divine righteousness.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Limbo of Infants (Latin \"limbus infantium\" or \"limbus puerorum\") is the hypothetical permanent status of the unbaptized who die in infancy, too young to have committed actual sins, but not having been freed from original sin. Recent Catholic theological speculation tends to stress the hope, although not the certainty, that these infants may attain heaven instead of the state of Limbo.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the Catholic Church has a defined doctrine on original sin, it has none on the eternal fate of unbaptized infants, leaving theologians free to propose different theories, which magisterium is free to accept or reject. Limbo is one such theory.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of theory is limbo ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 7, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In countering Pelagius, who denied original sin, Saint Augustine of Hippo was led to state that because of original sin, \"such infants as quit the body without being baptized will be involved in the mildest condemnation of all. That person, therefore, greatly deceives both himself and others, who teaches that they will not be involved in condemnation; whereas the apostle says: 'Judgment from one offence to condemnation' (), and again a little after: 'By the offence of one upon all persons to condemnation' ().\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Council of North African bishops, which included Augustine of Hippo, held at Carthage in 418 did not explicitly endorse all aspects of Augustine's stern view about the destiny of infants who die without baptism, but said in a section of one canon (not found in all manuscripts) that there is no \"intermediate or other happy dwelling place for children who have left this life without Baptism, without which they cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, that is, eternal life\". So great was Augustine's influence in the West, however, that the Latin Fathers of the 5th and 6th centuries (e.g., Jerome, Avitus of Vienne, and Gregory the Great) did adopt his position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the later medieval period, some theologians continued to hold Augustine's view. In the 12th century, Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142) said that these infants suffered no material torment or positive punishment, just the pain of loss at being denied the beatific vision. Others held that unbaptized infants suffered no pain at all: unaware of being deprived of the beatific vision, they enjoyed a state of natural, not supernatural happiness. This theory was associated with but independent of the term \"Limbo of Infants\", which was forged about the year 1300.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If Heaven is a state of supernatural happiness and union with God, and Hell is understood as a state of torture and separation from God then, in this view, the Limbo of Infants, although technically part of hell (the outermost part, \"limbo\" meaning \"outer edge\" or \"hem\") is seen as a sort of intermediate state.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the outermost of infants ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The question of Limbo is not treated in the parts of the Summa Theologica written by Saint Thomas Aquinas himself, but is dealt with in an appendix to the Supplement added after his death by Fra Rainaldo da Piperino. The Limbo of Infants is there described as an eternal state of natural joy, untempered by any sense of loss at how much greater their joy might have been had they been baptized: \"Every man who has the use of free-will is adapted to obtain eternal life, because he can prepare himself for grace whereby to merit eternal life; so that if he fail in this, his grief will be very great, since he has lost what he was able to possess. But children were never adapted to possess eternal life, since neither was this due to them by virtue of their natural principles, for it surpasses the entire faculty of nature, nor could they perform acts of their own whereby to obtain so great a good. Hence they will nowise grieve for being deprived of the divine vision; nay, rather will they rejoice for that they will have a large share of God's goodness and their own natural perfections. Nor can it be said that they were adapted to obtain eternal life, not indeed by their own action, but by the actions of others around them, since they could be baptized by others, like other children of the same condition who have been baptized and obtained eternal life: for this is of superabundant grace that one should be rewarded without any act of one's own. Wherefore the lack of such a grace will not cause sorrow in children who die without Baptism, any more than the lack of many graces accorded to others of the same condition makes a wise man to grieve.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The natural happiness possessed in this place would consist in the perception of God mediated through creatures. As stated in the International Theological Commission's document on the question:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Ecumenical Council of Florence (1442) spoke of baptism as necessary even for children and required that they be baptised soon after birth. This had earlier been affirmed at the local Council of Carthage (417). The Council of Florence also stated that those who die in original sin alone go to hell, but with unequal pains as those in actual mortal sin. John Wycliffe's attack on the necessity of infant baptism was condemned by another general council, the Council of Constance. The Council of Trent in 1547 explicitly stated that baptism (or desire for baptism) was the means by which one is transferred \"from that state wherein man is born a child of the first Adam, to the state of grace, and of the adoption of the sons of God, through the second Adam, Jesus Christ, our Saviour.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the first person to be born a child of the first ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 14, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Through the 18th and 19th centuries, individual theologians (Bianchi in 1768, H. Klee in 1835, Caron in 1855, H. Schell in 1893) continued to formulate theories of how children who died unbaptised might still be saved. By 1952 a theologian such as Ludwig Ott could, in a widely used and well-regarded manual, openly teach the possibility that children who die unbaptised might be saved for heaven. He also told about Thomas Cajetan, a major 16th-century theologian, that suggested infants dying in the womb before birth, and so before ordinary sacramental baptism could be administered, might be saved through their mother's wish for their baptism. In its 1980 instruction on children's baptism the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith stated that \"with regard to children who die without having received baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God, as indeed she does in the funeral rite established for them\", leaving all theories as to their fate, including Limbo, as viable possibilities. And in 1984, when Joseph Ratzinger, then Cardinal Prefect of that Congregation, stated that he rejected the claim that children who die unbaptised cannot attain salvation, he was speaking for many academic theologians of his training and background.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Church's teaching expressed in the 1992 Catechism of the Catholic Church is that \"Baptism is necessary for salvation for those to whom the Gospel has been proclaimed and who have had the possibility of asking for this sacrament.\" It adds that \"God has bound salvation to the sacrament of Baptism, but he himself is not bound by his sacraments\". It recalls that, apart from the sacrament, \"baptism of blood\" (as in the case of the martyrs) and in the case of catechumens who die before receiving the sacrament, explicit desire for baptism, together with repentance for their sins, and charity, ensures salvation. It states that, since Christ died for all and all are called to the same divine destiny, \"every man who is ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church, but seeks the truth and does the will of God in accordance with his understanding of it, can be saved\", seeing that, if they had known of the necessity of baptism, they would have desired it explicitly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It then states: \"As regards children who have died without Baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God, as she does in her funeral rites for them. Indeed, the great mercy of God who desires that all men should be saved, and Jesus' tenderness toward children which caused him to say: 'Let the children come to me, do not hinder them,' allow us to hope that there is a way of salvation for children who have died without Baptism. All the more urgent is the Church's call not to prevent little children coming to Christ through the gift of holy Baptism.\" Merely stating that one can \"hope\" in a way of salvation other than baptism, the Church thus urgently reiterates its appeal to baptize infants, the only certain means to \"not prevent\" their \"coming to Christ\" for salvation.", "qas": [{"question": "what happens to the jehovah witnesses ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 20 April 2007, the advisory body known as the International Theological Commission released a document, originally commissioned by Pope John Paul II, entitled \"The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die without Being Baptized.\" After tracing the history of the various opinions that have been and are held on the eternal fate of unbaptized infants, including that connected with the theory of the Limbo of Infants, and after examining the theological arguments, the document stated its conclusion as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pope Benedict XVI authorized publication of this document, indicating that he considers it consistent with the Church's teaching, though it is not an official expression of that teaching. Media reports that by the document \"the Pope closed Limbo\" are thus without foundation. In fact, the document explicitly states that \"the theory of \"limbo\", understood as a state which includes the souls of infants who die subject to original sin and without baptism, and who, therefore, neither merit the beatific vision, nor yet are subjected to any punishment, because they are not guilty of any personal sin. This theory, elaborated by theologians beginning in the Middle Ages, never entered into the dogmatic definitions of the Magisterium. Still, that same Magisterium did at times mention the theory in its ordinary teaching up until the Second Vatican Council. It remains therefore a possible theological hypothesis\" (second preliminary paragraph); and in paragraph 41 it repeats that the theory of Limbo \"remains a possible theological opinion\". The document thus allows the hypothesis of a limbo of infants to be held as one of the existing theories about the fate of children who die without being baptised, a question on which there is \"no explicit answer\" from Scripture or tradition. The traditional theological alternative to Limbo was not Heaven, but rather some degree of suffering in Hell. At any rate, these theories are not the official teaching of the Catholic Church, but are only opinions that the Church does not condemn, permitting them to be held by its members, just as is the theory of possible salvation for infants dying without baptism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Neither the Eastern Orthodox Church nor Protestantism accepts the concept of a limbo of infants; but, while not using the expression \"Limbo of the Patriarchs\", the Eastern Orthodox Church lays much stress on the resurrected Christ's action of liberating Adam and Eve and other righteous figures of the Old Testament, such as Abraham and David, from Hades (see Harrowing of Hell).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some Protestants have a similar understanding of those who died as believers prior to the crucifixion of Jesus residing in a place that is not Heaven, but not Hell. The doctrine holds that Hades has two \"compartments\", one an unnamed place of torment, the other named Abraham's Bosom. speaks of a chasm fixed between the two which cannot be crossed. Those in the unnamed \"compartment\" have no hope, and will ultimately be consigned to hell. Those in Abraham's bosom are those of whom it is written of Jesus, \"When He ascended on high, He led captive a host of captives...\" (Eph. 4:8, quoting Psa. 68:18). These individuals, the captives, now reside with God in Heaven. Both \"Compartments\" still exist, but Abraham's Bosom is now empty, while the other chamber is not, according to this doctrine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mormons teach that \"all who have died without a knowledge of [the] gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God.\" Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadelphians, and others have taught that the dead are unconscious (or even nonexistent), awaiting their destiny on Judgment Day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Zoroastrian concept of \"hamistagan\" is similar to limbo. Hamistagan is a neutral state in which a soul that was neither good nor evil awaits Judgment Day.", "qas": [{"question": "what concept is similar to limbo ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In Islam, which denies the existence of original sin in totality, the concept of Limbo exists as \"Barzakh\", the state that exists after death, prior to the day of resurrection. During this period sinners are punished and the adequately purified rest in comfort. Children however are exempt from this stage, as they are regarded as innocent and are automatically classed as Muslims (despite religious upbringing). After death they go directly to Heaven, where they are cared for by Abraham.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Classical Greek Mythology, the section of Hades known as the Fields of Asphodel were a realm much resembling Limbo, to which the vast majority of people who were held to have deserved neither the Elysian Fields (Heaven) nor Tartarus (Hell) were consigned for eternity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nNotes", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lethe", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In Greek mythology, Lethe (Greek: , \"L\u1e17th\u0113\"; , ) was one of the five rivers of the underworld of Hades. Also known as the \"Ameles potamos\" (river of unmindfulness), the Lethe flowed around the cave of Hypnos and through the Underworld, where all those who drank from it experienced complete forgetfulness. Lethe was also the name of the Greek spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion, with whom the river was often identified.", "qas": [{"question": "who was one of the five rivers of the underworld of hades ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "who was the greek spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 0, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In Classical Greek, the word lethe (\u03bb\u03ae\u03b8\u03b7) literally means \"oblivion\", \"forgetfulness\", or \"concealment\". It is related to the Greek word for \"truth\", \"aletheia\" (\u1f00\u03bb\u03ae\u03b8\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1), which through the privative alpha literally means \"un-forgetfulness\" or \"un-concealment\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lethe, the river of forgetfulness, was one of the five rivers of the Greek underworld, the other four being Styx, Acheron (the river of sorrow), Cocytus (the river of lamentation) and Phlegethon (the river of fire). According to Statius, it bordered Elysium, the final resting place of the virtuous. Ovid wrote that the river flowed through the cave of Hypnos, god of sleep, where its murmuring would induce drowsiness.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the river of sorrow ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The shades of the dead were required to drink the waters of the Lethe in order to forget their earthly life. In the \"Aeneid\", Virgil (VI.703-751) writes that it is only when the dead have had their memories erased by the Lethe that they may be reincarnated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lethe was also the name of the personification of forgetfulness and oblivion, with whom the river was often associated. Hesiod's \"Theogony\" identifies her as the daughter of Eris (\"strife\"), and the sister of Ponos (\"Hardship\"), Limos (\"Starvation\"), Algea (\"Pains\"), Hysminai (\"Battles\"), Makhai (\"Wars\"), Phonoi (\"Murders\"), Androktasiai (\"Manslaughters\"), Neikea (\"Quarrels\"), Pseudea (\"Lies\"), Logoi (\"Stories\"), Amphillogiai (\"Disputes\"), Dysnomia (\"Anarchy\"), Ate (\"Ruin\"), and Horkos (\"Oath\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some ancient Greeks believed that souls were made to drink from the river before being reincarnated, so they would not remember their past lives. The Myth of Er in Book X of Plato's \"Republic\" tells of the dead arriving at a barren waste called the \"plain of Lethe\", through which the river \"Ameles\" (\"careless\") runs. \"Of this they were all obliged to drink a certain quantity,\" Plato wrote, \"and those who were not saved by wisdom drank more than was necessary; and each one as he drank forgot all things.\" A few mystery religions taught the existence of another river, the Mnemosyne; those who drank from the Mnemosyne would remember everything and attain omniscience. Initiates were taught that they would receive a choice of rivers to drink from after death, and to drink from Mnemosyne instead of Lethe.", "qas": [{"question": "what ancient civilization did some ancient greeks believe they would drink from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "These two rivers are attested in several verse inscriptions on gold plates dating to the 4th century BC and onward, found at Thurii in Southern Italy and elsewhere throughout the Greek world. There were rivers of Lethe and Mnemosyne at the oracular shrine of Trophonius in Boeotia, from which worshippers would drink before making oracular consultations with the god.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More recently, Martin Heidegger used \"l\u0113th\u0113\" to symbolize the \"concealment of Being\" or \"forgetting of Being\" that he saw as a major problem of modern philosophy. Examples are found in his books on Nietzsche (Vol 1, p.\u00a0194) and on Parmenides.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many ancient Greek poems mention or describe Lethe. The river is also referenced in more recent novels and poetry. Simonides of Ceos, an ancient Greek lyrical poet, references Lethe in the sixty-seventh fragment of one of his poems. Publius Ovidius Naso, known as Ovid, in his description of the Underworld in his \"Metamorphoses,\" includes a description of Lethe as a stream that puts people to sleep. Aeneas, the protagonist of Virgil's epic Latin poem, \"Aeneid\", travels to Lethe to meet the ghost of his father in Book VI of the poem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"\"The souls that throng the flood \"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Are those to whom, by fate, are other bodies ow'd:\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"In Lethe's lake they long oblivion taste,\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Of future life secure, forgetful of the past.\"\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Virgil also writes about Lethe in his didactic hexameter poem, the \"Georgics\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the \"Purgatorio\", the second \"cantica\" of Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\", the Lethe is located in the Earthly Paradise atop the Mountain of Purgatory. Dante, held in the arms of Matilda, is immersed in the Lethe so that he may wipe out all memory of sin (\"Purg\". XXXI). After being washed in the Lethe, penitents are washed in the Eunoe, a river of Dante's own invention. The Lethe is also mentioned in the \"Inferno\", the first part of the \"Comedy\", as flowing down to Hell from Purgatory to be frozen in the ice around Satan, \"the last lost vestiges of the sins of the saved\" (\"Inf.\" XXXIV.130).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his first speech in \"Paradise Lost\", Satan describes how \"The associates and copartners of our loss, Lie thus astonished on \"the oblivious pool\"\", referencing Lethe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amongst authors in Antiquity, the tiny Lima river between Norte Region, Portugal and Galicia, Spain was said to have the same properties of memory loss as the legendary Lethe River, being mistaken for it. In 138 BCE, the Roman general Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus sought to dispose of the myth, as it impeded his military campaigns in the area. He was said to have crossed the Lima and then called his soldiers from the other side, one by one, by name. The soldiers, astonished that their general remembered their names, crossed the river as well without fear. This act proved that the Lima was not as dangerous as the local myths described.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In C\u00e1diz, Spain, the river Guadalete was originally named \"Lethe\" by local Greek and Phoenician colonists who, about to go to war, solved instead their differences by diplomacy and named the river Lethe to forever forget their former differences. When the Arabs conquered the region much later, their name for the river became Guadalete (\"River Lethe\" in Arabic).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Alaska, a river which runs through the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is called the River Lethe. It is located within the Katmai National Park and Preserve in southwest Alaska.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Laurence Sterne", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Laurence Sterne (24 November 1713 \u2013 18 March 1768) was an Irish-born English language novelist and an Anglican clergyman. He wrote the novels \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\" and \"A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy\", and also published many sermons, wrote memoirs, and was involved in local politics. Sterne died in London after years of fighting tuberculosis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sterne was born in Clonmel, County Tipperary. His father, Roger Sterne, was an ensign in a British regiment recently returned from Dunkirk, which was disbanded on the day of Sterne's birth. Within six months the family had returned to Yorkshire, and in July 1715 they moved back to Ireland, having \"decamped with Bag & Baggage for Dublin\", in Sterne's words.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first decade of Sterne's life was spent moving from place to place as his father was reassigned throughout Ireland. During this period Sterne never lived in one place for more than a year. In addition to Clonmel and Dublin, his family also lived in, among other places, Wicklow Town, Annamoe (County Wicklow), Drogheda (County Louth), Castlepollard (County Westmeath), and Carrickfergus (County Antrim). In 1724, his father took Sterne to Roger's wealthy brother, Richard, so that Sterne could attend Hipperholme Grammar School near Halifax; Sterne never saw his father again as Roger was ordered to Jamaica where he died of a fever in 1731. Sterne was admitted to a sizarship at Jesus College, Cambridge, in July 1733 at the age of 20. His great-grandfather Richard Sterne had been the Master of the college as well as the Archbishop of York. Sterne graduated with a degree of Bachelor of Arts in January 1737; and returned in the summer of 1740 to be awarded his Master of Arts degree.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first year of sterne's life ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sterne was ordained as a deacon in March 1737 and as a priest in August 1738. His religion is said to have been the \"centrist Anglicanism of his time\", known as 'latitudinarianism.\" Shortly thereafter Sterne was awarded the vicarship living of Sutton-on-the-Forest in Yorkshire. Sterne married Elizabeth Lumley in 1741. Both were ill with consumption. In 1743, he was presented to the neighbouring living of Stillington by Rev. Richard Levett, Prebendary of Stillington, who was patron of the living. Subsequently Sterne did duty both there and at Sutton. He was also a prebendary of York Minster. Sterne's life at this time was closely tied with his uncle, Dr Jaques Sterne, the Archdeacon of Cleveland and Precentor of York Minster. Sterne's uncle was an ardent Whig, and urged Sterne to begin a career of political journalism which resulted in some scandal for Sterne and, eventually, a terminal falling-out between the two men.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jaques Sterne was a powerful clergyman but a mean-tempered man and a rabid politician. In 1741\u201342 Sterne wrote political articles supporting the administration of Sir Robert Walpole for a newspaper founded by his uncle but soon withdrew from politics in disgust. His uncle became his arch-enemy, thwarting his advancement whenever possible.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sterne lived in Sutton for twenty years, during which time he kept up an intimacy which had begun at Cambridge with John Hall-Stevenson, a witty and accomplished \"bon vivant\", owner of Skelton Hall in the Cleveland district of Yorkshire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1759, to support his dean in a church squabble, Sterne wrote \"A Political Romance\" (later called \"The History of a Good Warm Watch-Coat\"), a Swiftian satire of dignitaries of the spiritual courts. At the demands of embarrassed churchmen, the book was burnt. Thus, Sterne lost his chances for clerical advancement but discovered his real talents; until the completion of this first work, \"he hardly knew that he could write at all, much less with humour so as to make his reader laugh\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Having discovered his talent, at the age of 46, he turned over his parishes to a curate, and dedicated himself to writing for the rest of his life. It was while living in the countryside, having failed in his attempts to supplement his income as a farmer and struggling with tuberculosis, that Sterne began work on his best known novel, \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\", the first volumes of which were published in 1759. Sterne was at work on his celebrated comic novel during the year that his mother died, his wife was seriously ill, and his daughter was also taken ill with a fever. He wrote as fast as he possibly could, composing the first 18 chapters between January and March 1759.", "qas": [{"question": "when did he write the first 12 chapters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 7, 3)"}]}, {"context": "An initial, sharply satiric version was rejected by Robert Dodsley, the London printer, just when Sterne's personal life was upset. His mother and uncle both died. His wife had a nervous breakdown and threatened suicide. Sterne continued his comic novel, but every sentence, he said, was \"written under the greatest heaviness of heart\". In this mood, he softened the satire and recounted details of Tristram's opinions, eccentric family and ill-fated childhood with a sympathetic humour, sometimes hilarious, sometimes sweetly melancholic\u2014a comedy skirting tragedy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The publication of \"Tristram Shandy\" made Sterne famous in London and on the continent. He was delighted by the attention, famously saying \"I wrote not [to] be \"fed\" but to be \"famous.\"\" He spent part of each year in London, being f\u00eated as new volumes appeared. Even after the publication of volumes three and four of \"Tristram Shandy\", his love of attention (especially as related to financial success) remained undiminished. In one letter, he wrote \"One half of the town abuse my book as bitterly, as the other half cry it up to the skies\u2014the best is, they abuse it and buy it, and at such a rate, that we are going on with a second edition, as fast as possible.\" Indeed, Baron Fauconberg rewarded Sterne by appointing him as the perpetual curate of Coxwold, North Yorkshire.", "qas": [{"question": "who made the publication of `` tristram shandy '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sterne continued to struggle with his illness, and departed England for France in 1762 in an effort to find a climate that would alleviate his suffering. Sterne was lucky to attach himself to a diplomatic party bound for Turin, as England and France were still adversaries in the Seven Years' War. Sterne was gratified by his reception in France, where reports of the genius of \"Tristram Shandy\" had made him a celebrity. Aspects of this trip to France were incorporated into Sterne's second novel, \"A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the second book that was incorporated into sterne's second novel ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 10, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Early in 1767 Sterne met Eliza Draper, the wife of an official of the East India Company, then staying on her own in London. He was quickly captivated by Eliza\u2019s charm, vivacity and intelligence, and she did little to discourage the attentions of such a celebrated man. They met frequently, exchanged miniature portraits, and Sterne\u2019s admiration seems to have turned into an obsession which he took no trouble to conceal. To his great distress Eliza had to return to India three months after their first meeting, and he died from consumption a year later without seeing her again. At the beginning of 1768, Sterne brought out his \"Sentimental Journey\" which contains some extravagant references to her, and the relationship, though platonic, aroused considerable interest. He also wrote his \"Journal to Eliza\" part of which he sent to her, and the rest of which came to light when it was presented to the British Museum in 1894. After Sterne\u2019s death Eliza allowed ten of his letters to be published under the title \"Letters from Yorick to Eliza\" and succeeded in suppressing her letters to him, though some blatant forgeries were produced, probably by William Combe, in a volume entitled \"Eliza's Letters to Yorick\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Less than a month after \"Sentimental Journey\" was published, early in 1768, Sterne's strength failed him, and he died in his lodgings at 41 Old Bond Street on 18 March, at the age of 54. He was buried in the churchyard of St George's, Hanover Square.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It was widely rumoured that Sterne's body was stolen shortly after it was interred and sold to anatomists at Cambridge University. Circumstantially, it was said that his body was recognised by Charles Collignon who knew him and discreetly reinterred back in St George's, in an unknown plot. A year later a group of Freemasons erected a memorial stone with a rhyming epitaph near to his original burial place. A second stone was erected in 1893, correcting some factual errors on the memorial stone. When the churchyard of St. George's was redeveloped in 1969, amongst 11,500 skulls disinterred, several were identified with drastic cuts from anatomising or a post-mortem examination. One was identified to be of a size that matched a bust of Sterne made by Nollekens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The skull was held up to be his, albeit with \"a certain area of doubt\". Along with nearby skeletal bones, these remains were transferred to Coxwold churchyard in 1969 by the Laurence Sterne Trust.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The story of the reinterment of Sterne's skull in Coxwold is alluded to in Malcolm Bradbury's novel \"To The Hermitage\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sterne's early works were letters; he had two ordinary sermons published (in 1747 and 1750), and tried his hand at satire. He was involved in, and wrote about, local politics in 1742. His major publication prior to \"Tristram Shandy\" was the satire \"A Political Romance\" (1759), aimed at conflicts of interest within York Minster. A posthumously published piece on the art of preaching, \"A Fragment in the Manner of Rabelais\", appears to have been written in 1759. Rabelais was by far Sterne's favourite author, and in his correspondence he made clear that he considered himself as Rabelais' successor in humour writing, distancing himself from Jonathan Swift:", "qas": []}, {"context": "I ... deny I have gone as far as Swift: he keeps a due distance from Rabelais; I keep a due distance from him.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sterne's novel \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\" sold widely in England and throughout Europe. Translations of the work began to appear in all the major European languages almost upon its publication, and Sterne influenced European writers as diverse as Denis Diderot and the German Romanticists. His work had also noticeable influence over Brazilian author Machado de Assis, who made use of the digressive technique in the novel \"The Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas\". \"Tristram Shandy\", in which Sterne manipulates narrative time and voice, parodies accepted narrative form, and includes a healthy dose of bawdy humour, was largely dismissed in England as being too corrupt. Samuel Johnson's verdict in 1776 was that \"Nothing odd will do long. \"Tristram Shandy\" did not last.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what did ''tristram shandy mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 18, 5)"}, {"question": "who wrote `` the life and opinions of tristram shandy '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "This is strikingly different from the views of European critics of the day, who praised Sterne and \"Tristram Shandy\" as innovative and superior. Voltaire called it \"clearly superior to Rabelais\", and later Goethe praised Sterne as \"the most beautiful spirit that ever lived\". Both during his life and for a long time after, efforts were made by many to reclaim Sterne as an arch-sentimentalist; parts of \"Tristram Shandy\", such as the tale of Le Fever, were excerpted and published separately to wide acclaim from the moralists of the day. The success of the novel and its serialised nature also allowed many imitators to publish pamphlets concerning the Shandean characters and other Shandean-related material even while the novel was yet unfinished.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the book that allowed pamphlets to publish pamphlets descriptions ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 19, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The title page to Vols. 1 and 2 is, for the most part, typical for an English novel of its time. It is distinguished only by a short Greek epigraph, which in English reads: \"Not things, but opinions about things, trouble men.\" Before the novel properly begins, Sterne also offers a highly complimentary dedication to \"Mr. Pitt\" (i.e., Lord William Pitt, 1708\u201378). He urges Pitt to accept the book as a humble token of the author's admiration, in the hope that its amusing contents will provide relief from the cares of statecraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The novel itself starts with the narration, by Tristram, of his own conception. It proceeds by fits and starts, but mostly by what Sterne calls \"progressive digressions\" so that we do not reach Tristram's birth before the third volume. The novel is rich in characters and humour, and the influences of Rabelais and Miguel de Cervantes are present throughout. The novel ends after 9 volumes, published over a decade, but without anything that might be considered a traditional conclusion. Sterne inserts sermons, essays and legal documents into the pages of his novel; and he explores the limits of typography and print design by including marbled pages and an entirely black page within the narrative. Many of the innovations that Sterne introduced, adaptations in form that were an exploration of what constitutes the novel, were highly influential to Modernist writers like James Joyce and Virginia Woolf, and more contemporary writers such as Thomas Pynchon and David Foster Wallace. Italo Calvino referred to \"Tristram Shandy\" as the \"undoubted progenitor of all avant-garde novels of our century\". The Russian Formalist writer Viktor Shklovsky regarded \"Tristram Shandy\" as the archetypal, quintessential novel, of which all other novels are mere subsets: \"\"Tristram Shandy\" is the most typical novel of world literature.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote the novel itself ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 21, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the most common novel of world literature ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 21, 7)"}]}, {"context": "However, the leading critical opinions of \"Tristram Shandy\" tend to be markedly polarised in their evaluations of its significance. Since the 1950s, following the lead of DW Jefferson, there are those who argue that, whatever its legacy of influence may be, \"Tristram Shandy\" in its original context actually represents a resurgence of a much older, Renaissance tradition of \"Learned Wit\" \u2013 owing a debt to such influences as the Scriblerian approach.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy\" is a less influential book, although it was better received by English critics of the day. The book has many stylistic parallels with \"Tristram Shandy\", and indeed, the narrator is one of the minor characters from the earlier novel. Although the story is more straightforward, \"A Sentimental Journey\" can be understood to be part of the same artistic project to which \"Tristram Shandy\" belongs.", "qas": [{"question": "what can be considered to be part of the same artistic project ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 23, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Two volumes of Sterne's \"Sermons\" were published during his lifetime; more copies of his \"Sermons\" were sold in his lifetime than copies of \"Tristram Shandy\", and for a while he was better known in some circles as a preacher than as a novelist. The sermons, though, are conventional in both style and substance. Several volumes of letters were published after his death, as was \"Journal to Eliza\", a more sentimental than humorous love letter to a woman Sterne was courting during the final years of his life. Compared to many eighteenth-century authors, Sterne's body of work is quite small.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1766, at the height of the debate about slavery, the composer and former slave Ignatius Sancho wrote to Sterne encouraging him to use his pen to lobby for the abolition of the slave trade.\nThat subject, handled in your striking manner, would ease the yoke (perhaps) of many\u2014but if only one\u2014Gracious God!\u2014what a feast to a benevolent heart!\nIn July 1766 Sterne received Sancho's letter shortly after he had finished writing a conversation between his fictional characters Corporal Trim and his brother Tom in \"Tristram Shandy\", wherein Tom described the oppression of a black servant in a sausage shop in Lisbon which he had visited. Sterne's widely publicised response to Sancho's letter became an integral part of 18th-century abolitionist literature:\nThere is a strange coincidence, Sancho, in the little events (as well as in the great ones) of this world: for I had been writing a tender tale of the sorrows of a friendless poor negro-girl, and my eyes had scarce done smarting with it, when your letter of recommendation in behalf of so many of her brethren and sisters, came to me\u2014but why her brethren?\u2014or your\u2019s, Sancho! any more than mine? It is by the finest tints, and most insensible gradations, that nature descends from the fairest face about St. James\u2019s, to the sootiest complexion in Africa: at which tint of these, is it, that the ties of blood are to cease? and how many shades must we descend lower still in the scale, \u2019ere mercy is to vanish with them?\u2014but \u2019tis no uncommon thing, my good Sancho, for one half of the world to use the other half of it like brutes, & then endeavor to make \u2019em so.|Laurence Sterne, 27 July 1766\nHis works, first collected in 1779, were edited, with newly discovered letters, by JP Browne (London, 1873). A less complete edition was edited by G Saintsbury (London, 1894). The Florida Edition of Sterne's works is currently the leading scholarly edition \u2013 although the final volume (Sterne's letters) has yet to be published.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Linear A", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Linear A is a writing system used by the Minoans (Cretans) from 2500 to 1450 BC. Along with Cretan hieroglyphic, it is one of two undeciphered writing systems used by ancient Minoan and peripheral peoples. Linear A was the primary script used in palace and religious writings of the Minoan civilization. It was discovered by archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans. It is related to the Linear B script, which succeeded the Linear A and was used by the Mycenaean civilization.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the script that used the linear b script ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 0, 4)"}, {"question": "who used a writing system ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the 1950s, Linear B was largely deciphered and found to encode an early form of Greek. Although the two systems share many symbols, this did not lead to a subsequent decipherment of Linear A. Using the values associated with Linear B in Linear A mainly produces unintelligible words. If Linear A uses the same or similar syllabic values as Linear B, then its associated language, dubbed \"Minoan\", appears unrelated to any known language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many scholars who study Linear A believe it was used primarily for accounting purposes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Linear A has hundreds of signs, believed to represent syllabic, ideographic, and semantic values in a manner similar to Linear B. While many of those assumed to be syllabic signs are similar to ones in Linear B, approximately 80% of Linear A's logograms are unique; the difference in sound values between Linear A and Linear B signs ranges from 9% to 13%. It primarily appears in the left-to-right direction, but occasionally appears as a right-to-left or boustrophedon script.", "qas": [{"question": "how many signs are there in linear ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "An interesting feature is that of how numbers are recorded in the script. The highest number that has been recorded is 3000, but there are special symbols to indicate fractions and weights.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Linear A has been unearthed chiefly on Crete, but also at other sites in Greece, as well as Turkey and Israel. The extant corpus, comprising some 1,427 specimens totalling 7,362 to 7,396 signs, if scaled to standard type, would fit easily on two sheets of paper.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Ilse Schoep, the main discoveries of Linear A tablets have been at three sites on Crete:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Discoveries have been made at the following locations on Crete:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until 1973, only one Linear A tablet was known to have been found outside Crete (on Kea). Since then, other locations have yielded inscriptions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Margalit Finkelberg, most\u2014if not all\u2014inscriptions found outside Crete were made locally. This is indicated by such factors as the composition of the material on which the inscriptions were made. Also, close analysis of the inscriptions found outside Crete indicates the use of a script that is somewhere in between Linear A and Linear B, combining elements from both.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Linear A became eminent during the Middle Minoan Period, specifically from 1625\u20131450 BC. It was a contemporary and possible child of Cretan hieroglyphs and the ancestor of Linear B. The sequence and the geographical spread of Cretan hieroglyphs, Linear A and Linear B, the three overlapping, but distinct writing systems on Bronze Age Crete and the Greek mainland can be summarized as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Archaeologist Arthur Evans named the script \"Linear\" because its characters consisted simply of lines inscribed in clay, in contrast to the more pictographic characters in Cretan hieroglyphs that were used during the same period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several tablets inscribed in signs similar to Linear A were found in the Troad in northwestern Anatolia. While their status is disputed, they may be imports, as there is no evidence of Minoan presence in the Troad. Classification of these signs as a unique Trojan script (proposed by contemporary Russian linguist Nikolai Kazansky) is not accepted by other linguists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is difficult to evaluate a given analysis of Linear A as there is little point of reference for reading its inscriptions. The simplest approach to decipherment may be to presume that the values of Linear A match more or less the values given to the deciphered Linear B script, used for Mycenaean Greek.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1957, Bulgarian scholar Vladimir I. Georgiev published his \"Le d\u00e9chiffrement des inscriptions cr\u00e9toises en lin\u00e9aire A\" (\"The decipherment of Cretan inscriptions in Linear A\") stating that Linear A contains Greek linguistic elements. Georgiev then published another work in 1963, titled \"Les deux langues des inscriptions cr\u00e9toises en lin\u00e9aire A\" (\"The two languages of Cretan inscriptions in Linear A\"), suggesting that the language of the Hagia Triada tablets was Greek but that the rest of the Linear A corpus was in Hittite-Luwian. In December 1963, Gregory Nagy of Harvard University developed a list of Linear A and Linear B terms based on the assumption \"that signs of identical or similar shape in the two scripts will represent similar or identical phonetic values\"; Nagy concluded that the language of Linear A bears \"Greek-like\" and Indo-European elements.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the late 1950s, some scholars have suggested that the Linear A language could be an Anatolian language.\nPalmer (1958) put forward a theory, based on Linear B phonetic values, suggesting that Linear A language could be related closely to Luwian. The theory, however, failed to gain universal support for the following reasons:", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are recent works focused on the Luwian connection, not in terms of the Minoan language being Anatolian, but rather in terms of possible borrowings from Luwian, including the origin of the writing system itself.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In an article from 2001, Professor of Classics (Emerita) at Tel Aviv University, Margalit Finkelberg, demonstrated a \"high degree of correspondence between the phonological and morphological system of Minoan and that of Lycian\" and proposed that \"the language of Linear A is either the direct ancestor of Lycian or a closely related idiom.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2001, the journal \"Ugarit-Forschungen\" published the article \"The First Inscription in Punic \u2014 Vowel Differences in Linear A and B\" by Jan Best, claiming to demonstrate how and why Linear A notates an archaic form of Phoenician. This was a continuation of attempts by Cyrus Gordon in finding connections between Minoan and West Semitic languages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another recent interpretation, based on the frequencies of the syllabic signs and on complete palaeographic comparative studies, suggests that the Minoan Linear A language belongs to the Indo-Iranian family of Indo-European languages. Studies by Hubert La Marle include a presentation of the morphology of the language, avoid the complete identification of phonetic values between Linear A and B, and also avoid comparing Linear A with Cretan Hieroglyphs. La Marle uses the frequency counts to identify the type of syllables written in Linear A, and takes into account the problem of loanwords in the vocabulary. However, the La Marle interpretation of Linear A has been rejected by John Younger of Kansas University showing that La Marle has invented erroneous and arbitrary new transcriptions based on resemblances with many different script systems at will (as Phoenician, Hieroglyphic Egyptian, Hieroglyphic Hittite, Ethiopian, Cypro-Minoan, etc.), ignoring established evidence and internal analysis, while for some words he proposes religious meanings inventing names of gods and rites. La Marle rebutted in \"An answer to John G. Younger's remarks on Linear A\" in 2010.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Italian scholar Giulio M. Facchetti attempted to link Linear A to the Tyrrhenian language family comprising Etruscan, Rhaetic, and Lemnian. This family is reasoned to be a pre-Indo-European Mediterranean substratum of the 2nd millennium BC, sometimes referred to as Pre-Greek. Facchetti proposed some possible similarities between the Etruscan language and ancient Lemnian, and other Aegean languages like Minoan. Michael Ventris who, along with John Chadwick, successfully deciphered Linear B, also believed in a link between Minoan and Etruscan. The same perspective is supported by S. Yatsemirsky in Russia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Gareth Alun Owens, Linear A represents the Minoan language, which Owens classifies as a distinct branch of Indo-European potentially related to Greek, Sanskrit, Hittite, Latin, etc. At \"The Cretan Literature Centre\", Owens stated:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning our research with inscriptions in Linear A carved on offering tables found in the many peak sanctuaries on the mountains of Crete, we recognise a clear relationship between Linear A and Sanskrit, the ancient language of India. There is also a connection to Hittite and Armenian. This relationship allows us to place the Minoan language among the so-called Indo-European languages, a vast family that includes modern Greek and the Latin of Ancient Rome. The Minoan and Greek languages are considered to be different branches of Indo-European. The Minoans probably moved from Anatolia to the island of Crete about 10,000 years ago. There were similar population movements to Greece. The relative isolation of the population which settled in Crete resulted in the development of its own language, Minoan, which is considered different to Mycenaean. In the Minoan language (Linear A), there are no purely Greek words, as is the case in Mycenaean Linear B; it contains only words also found in Greek, Sanskrit and Latin, i.e. sharing the same Indo-European origin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2016, Peter van Soesbergen published a two-part series \"Hurrians and Hurrian in Minoan Crete\" alleging that most of the Linear A inscriptions could be understood as a dialect of Hurrian. Among the equations he makes are Linear A \"uminasi enasi\" with Hurrian \"umminna\u0161i enna\u0161i\" \"of the lands of the gods\"; Linear A \"ataijowaja\" with the absolutive of Hurrian \"attaiwwa\u0161uu\u0161\" \"our father\"; Linear A \"potokuro,\" seeming to mean \"total,\" with Hurrian \"puttukuru,\" \"value again\"; Linear A \"sukiriteia\" with a nickname for Hurrian \"\u0160ukri-te\u0161up\" \"blessed Teshub\"; \"api\" on an entrance to a tomb with Hurrian \"abi\" \"pit (especially for communicating with the netherworld)\"; \"turusa\" with Hurrian \"turu\" \"man\"; and \"dupure\" with \"tuppule\u0161\" \"may (he) be strong.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some researchers suggest that a few words or word elements may be recognized, without (yet) enabling any conclusion about relationship with other languages. In general, they use analogy with Linear B in order to propose phonetic values of the syllabic sounds. John Younger, in particular, thinks that place names usually appear in certain positions in the texts, and notes that the proposed phonetic values often correspond to known place names as given in Linear B texts (and sometimes to modern Greek names). For example, he proposes that three syllables, read as \"KE-NI-SO\", might be the indigenous form of Knossos. Likewise, in Linear A, \"MA+RU\" is suggested to mean \"wool\", and to correspond both to a Linear B pictogram with this meaning, and to the classical Greek word \u03bc\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03cc\u03c2 with the same meaning (in that case a loan word from Minoan).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Linear A alphabet (U+10600\u2013U+1077F) was added to the Unicode Standard in June 2014 with the release of version 7.0.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "LucasArts", "paragraphs": [{"context": "LucasArts Entertainment Company, LLC is an American video game publisher and licensor. Until 2013, it was also a video game developer. LucasArts is best known for its graphic adventure games, as well as games based on the \"Star Wars\" and \"Indiana Jones\" franchises. Its headquarters are in San Francisco, California.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It was founded in May 1982 by George Lucas as Lucasfilm Games, the video game development group of his film company, Lucasfilm. Lucas initially served as the company's chairman. During a 1990 reorganization of Lucas companies, the Lucasfilm Games division was renamed LucasArts.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the video game development group founded ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 1, 0)"}, {"question": "when was the lucasfilm games division renamed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 1, 2)"}]}, {"context": "LucasArts was acquired by The Walt Disney Company through the acquisition of its parent company Lucasfilm in 2012. On April 3, 2013, Disney halted all internal development at LucasArts and laid off most of its staff. However, LucasArts remained open so that it could retain its function as a licensor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Development of games based on the \"Star Wars\" license will be carried out by Electronic Arts, through an exclusive license, for the core gaming market. Disney Interactive Studios retained the ability to develop, and LucasArts retained the ability to license the franchise for the casual gaming market. Development of video games based upon other Lucasfilm properties will now be assumed by Disney Interactive Studios or licensed to third parties.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the purpose of the `` star wars '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1979, George Lucas wanted to explore other areas of entertainment, and created the Lucasfilm Computer Division in 1979, which included a department for computer games (the Games Group) and another for graphics. The graphics department was spun off into its own corporation in 1982, ultimately becoming Pixar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lucasfilm Games Group originally cooperated with Atari, which helped fund the video game group's founding, to produce video games. Though the group had spun out of Lucasfilm, the video game development license for Lucasfilm's \"Star Wars\" were held by Atari at the time, forcing the group to start with original concepts; Ron Gilbert, one of the group's first employees, believed that if the Lucasfilm Games Group had the rights for \"Star Wars\" from the start, they would have never branched into any new IP.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the group that was created with atari ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 5, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the first employees that had the rights for `` star wars '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 5, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The first products from the Games Group were unique action games like \"Ballblazer\" in 1984, and \"Rescue on Fractalus!\". Beta versions of both games were leaked to pirate bulletin boards exactly one week after Atari had received unprotected copies for a marketing review, and were in wide circulation months before the original release date. In 1984, they were released for the Atari 5200 under the Lucasfilm Games label. Versions for home computers were not released until 1985, by publisher Epyx. Lucasfilm's next two games were \"Koronis Rift\" and \"The Eidolon\". Their first games were only developed by Lucasfilm, and a publisher would distribute the games. Atari published their games for Atari systems, Activision and Epyx would do their computer publishing. \"Maniac Mansion\" was the first game to be published and developed by Lucasfilm Games.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first game to be published ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 6, 7)"}, {"question": "what were the first products from the game group ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The early charter of Lucasfilm Games was to make experimental, innovative, and technologically advanced video games. \"Habitat\", an early online role-playing game and one of the first to support a graphical front-end, was one such title. It was only released as a beta test in 1986 by Quantum Link, an online service for the Commodore 64. Quantum Link could not provide the bandwidth at the time to support the game, so the full Habitat was never released outside of the beta test. However, Lucasfilm Games recouped the cost of development by releasing a sized down version called \"Club Caribe\" in 1988. Lucasfilm later licensed the software to Fujitsu, who released it in Japan as \"Fujitsu Habitat\" in 1990. Fujitsu later licensed Habitat for worldwide distribution, and released an updated version called \"WorldsAway\" in 1995. The latest iteration of Habitat is still called \"WorldsAway\", which can be found at MetroWorlds.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first charter of lucasfilm games ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Initially, the Games Group worked from Lucas' Skywalker Ranch near Nicasio, California. In 1990, in a reorganization of the Lucas companies, the Games Division of Lucasfilm became part of the newly created LucasArts Entertainment Company, together with Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound. Later ILM and Skywalker Sound were consolidated in Lucas Digital Ltd. and LucasArts became the official name of the former Games Division. During this, the division had moved out of Skywalker Ranch to nearby offices in San Rafael, California.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the same year, LucasArts started to publish \"The Adventurer\", their own gaming magazine where one could read about their upcoming games and interviews with the developers. The final issue was published in 1996.", "qas": [{"question": "when did lucasarts publish their own gaming magazine ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"iMUSE\" (\"Interactive MUsic Streaming Engine\") is an interactive music system used in a number of LucasArts video games. It synchronizes music with the visual action in the game, and transitions from one musical theme to another. iMUSE was developed in the early 1990s by composers Michael Land and Peter McConnell while working at LucasArts. The iMUSE system is patented by LucasArts, and was added to the SCUMM game engine in 1991. The first game to use iMUSE was \"\" and it has been used in all LucasArts adventure games since. It has also been used for some non-adventure LucasArts titles, including \"\" (DOS version), \"\" (DOS version), and \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first adventure game developed by Lucasfilm Games was \"\" in 1986, based on the Lucasfilm movie of the same name. The 1987 title \"Maniac Mansion\" introduced SCUMM, the scripting language behind most of the company's later adventure offerings. The adventures released in the following years, such as \"Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders\" in 1988, \"\" in 1989, and the 1990 titles \"Loom\" and \"The Secret of Monkey Island\" helped Lucasfilm Games build a reputation as one of the leading developers in the genre. The original five adventure games created with SCUMM were released in a compilation titled \"LucasArts Classic Adventures\" in 1992.", "qas": [{"question": "who developed the first game game ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "LucasArts was often referred to as one of the two big names in the field, competing with Sierra On-line as a developer of high quality adventures. The first half of the 1990s was the heyday for the company's adventure fame, with classic titles such as \"\" in 1991, \"Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis\" in 1992, \"\" and \"\" in 1993, and the 1995 titles \"Full Throttle\" and \"The Dig\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the latter half of the decade, the popularity of adventure games faded and the costs associated with game development increased as high-resolution art and CD quality audio became standard fare. The PC market wanted titles that would show off expensive new graphics cards to best effect, a change replicated in the home console market as the 3D capabilities of the PlayStation, Sega Saturn and Nintendo 64 dictated the nature of the majority of games produced for those platforms. The adventure genre failed to find popularity with the masses of new gamers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite their declining popularity, LucasArts still continued to release adventure titles. In 1997, \"The Curse of Monkey Island\", the last LucasArts adventure game to retain traditional two-dimensional graphics and point-and-click interface, was released. This was followed by \"Grim Fandango\" in 1998, LucasArts' first attempt to convert a 2D adventure to a 3D environment. The highly stylised visuals, superb voice acting and sophisticated writing earned Grim Fandango many plaudits, including GameSpot's Game of the Year award. \"Escape from Monkey Island\" (2000), the fourth installment in the \"Monkey Island\" series, featured the same control scheme as Grim Fandango, and was generally well received. It is the last original adventure game the company has released.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the last series of the first great game ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 14, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Two sequels to existing franchises, \"Full Throttle: Hell on Wheels\" and \"\", were announced to be in development but these projects were cancelled, in 2003 and 2004 respectively, before the games were finished. When the rights to the Sam & Max franchise expired in 2005, the creator of Sam & Max, Steve Purcell, regained ownership. He then licensed Sam & Max to Telltale Games to be developed into an episodic game. Telltale Games is made up primarily of former LucasArts employees who had worked on the Sam & Max sequel and were let go after the project was canceled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "LucasArts halted adventure game development for the next five years, focusing instead on their \"Star Wars\" games. They remained silent and did not re-release their old games on digital distribution platforms, as other studios were doing at the time. However, in 2002, the company pledged that at least fifty percent of its releases would have nothing to do with \"Star Wars\". It was not until 2009 that they returned to the genre. On June 1, 2009, LucasArts announced both \"The Secret of Monkey Island Special Edition\", a high definition remake of the original game with updated graphics, music and voice work, and \"Tales of Monkey Island\", a new episodic installment in the \"Monkey Island\" series that was developed by Telltale Games.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the focus of lucasarts ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Then, on July 6, 2009, they announced that they would be re-releasing a number of their classic games, including \"Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis\" and \"LOOM\", on Steam. The re-releases were, for the first time, native versions built for Microsoft Windows. This was the first time in many years that the studio had offered any support for its classic adventure titles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second game in the Monkey Island series also received a high definition remake, entitled \"\" in 2010. Both Monkey Island special edition games were released in a compilation, \"Monkey Island Special Edition Collection\", exclusively in Europe in 2011.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The release of the unofficial SCUMM virtual machine, ScummVM, has led to something of a resurgence for LucasArts adventure games among present-day gamers. Using ScummVM, legacy adventure titles can easily be run on modern computers and even more unusual platforms such as video game consoles, mobile phones and PDAs.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Lucasfilm Games developed a series of military vehicle simulation games, the first of which were the naval simulations \"PHM Pegasus\" in 1986 and \"Strike Fleet\" in 1987. These two titles were published by Electronic Arts for a variety of computer platforms, including PC, Commodore 64 and Apple II.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1988, \"Battlehawks 1942\" launched a trilogy of World War II air combat simulations, giving the player a chance to fly as an American or Japanese pilot in the Pacific Theater. Battlehawks 1942 was followed by \"\" in 1989, recreating the battle between the Luftwaffe and RAF for Britain's air supremacy. The trilogy ended with \"Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe\" in 1991, in which the player could choose to fly on either the American or German side. The trilogy was lauded for its historical accuracy and detailed supplementary material\u2014Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, for instance, was accompanied by a 224-page historical manual. The World War II trilogy was released with cover art by illustrator Marc Ericksen, in a compilation titled \"Air Combat Classics\" in 1994.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The World War II trilogy was created by a team led by Lawrence Holland, a game designer who later founded Totally Games. Totally Games would continue to develop games almost exclusively to LucasArts for a decade, with the most noted outcome of the symbiosis being . They were also responsible for LucasArts' 2003 return to the aerial battles of World War II with \"Secret Weapons Over Normandy\", a title released on PlayStation 2, Xbox and PC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1996, LucasArts released \"Afterlife\", a sim game in which the player builds their own Heaven and Hell, with several jokes and puns (such as a prison in Hell called San Quentin Tarantino).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even though LucasArts had created games based on other Lucasfilm properties before (\"Labyrinth\", \"Indiana Jones\"), they did not use the \"Star Wars\" license until the early 1990s: \"Star Wars\" games began appearing in the 1980s, but were developed by other companies for LucasArts because the license for the games had been sold before LucasArts was formed. The first in-house development was the space combat simulator \"\", developed by Larry Holland's independent team, which went on to spawn a .", "qas": [{"question": "when did `` star wars '' begin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The CD-ROM-only \"Star Wars\" game \"\" became one of the biggest successes of the company and was considered a killer app for CD-ROM drives in the early 1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the unprecedented success of id Software's \"Doom\", the PC gaming market shifted towards production of three-dimensional first person shooters. LucasArts contributed to this trend with the 1995 release of \"\", a first person shooter that successfully transplanted the Doom formula to a Star Wars setting. The Dark Forces Strategy guide claims that development was well underway before Doom was released and that the game was pushed back once Doom hit shelves so that it could be polished. The game was well received and spawned a new franchise: the \"Jedi Knight\" games. This began with the sequel to \"Dark Forces\", \"\" released in 1997; this game reflected the changing face of PC gaming, being one of the first games to appreciably benefit when used in conjunction with a dedicated 3D graphics card like 3dfx's Voodoo range. The game received an expansion pack, \"Mysteries of the Sith\", in 1998 and a full sequel in 2002 with \"\". 2003's \"\" can be seen as a spin-off from the series, but was less well received by reviewers, who complained that the franchise was becoming formulaic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Apart from \"Star Wars\"-themed 3D shooters, LucasArts also created the western-themed game \"Outlaws\" in 1997 and \"Armed and Dangerous\" (in collaboration with Planet Moon Studios) in 2003.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the quantity of Star Wars games increased, many critics felt the quality began to drop; this was especially noted with the titles released since the cinematic release of \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2000 Simon Jeffery became the Lucasarts President. He was a president of Lucasarts until 2003 and some successful Star Wars games released during his management like Star Wars Jedi Knight 2: Jedi Outcast, Star Wars Rogue Squadron 2, Knights of the Old Republic, Star Wars Jedi Academy and Star Wars Galaxies. Development of some other successful Star Wars Games began during his management, like \"Star Wars Republic Commando\" and \"Star Wars Battlefront\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was ` star wars ' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 28, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 2002, LucasArts recognized that the over-reliance on Star Wars was reducing the quality of its output, and announced that future releases would be at least 50% non-Star Wars-related. However, many of the original titles were either unsuccessful or even cancelled before release, and since then LucasArts again had mainly Star Wars titles in production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also in 2002, LucasArts released a compilation CD filled with music from their past games. The album is titled \"The Best of LucasArts Original Soundtracks\" and features music from the \"Monkey Island\" series, \"Grim Fandango\", \"Outlaws\", and \"The Dig\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "2003 saw the fruitful collaboration of LucasArts and BioWare on the well reviewed role-playing game, \"\". Combining modern 3D graphics with high-quality storytelling and a sophisticated role-playing game system, this game reinvigorated the Star Wars franchise. Its 2004 sequel \"\" continued in the same vein, but LucasArts was criticized for forcing the developer Obsidian Entertainment to release the sequel unfinished, resulting in a significant amount of cut content, a disappointing ending and numerous bugs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2003 LucasArts and the Star Wars franchise also branched out in a new direction\u2014the world of the MMORPG, with the creation of \"Star Wars Galaxies\". After a successful launch, the first expansion, Jump to Lightspeed, was released in 2004. The new expansion featured the addition of real-time space combat. This was continued in \"Rage of the Wookiees\", an additional expansion which added an additional planet for users to explore. Also, a new expansion, \"Trials of Obi-Wan\" was released on November 1, 2005 consisting of several new missions focusing on the Episode 3 planet, Mustafar. While \"Star Wars Galaxies\" still retains a devoted following, it has also alienated many players. \"Star Wars Galaxies\" has chosen to ignore the timeline established in the original films, during which the game is set, and has allowed players to play as Jedi characters. The game has also undergone several major redesigns, which have been received with mixed reactions by players.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In April 2004, Jim Ward, VP of marketing, online and global distributions at Lucasfilm, was appointed president of LucasArts. Ward performed a top-to-bottom audit of LucasArts infrastructure, describing the company's state as \"quite a mess.\" In 2003, LucasArts had reportedly grossed just over $100 million according to NPD, primarily from its \"Star Wars\" titles\u2014significantly less than the grosses from the year's top single titles such as \"\". Ward produced a five-year investment plan to refit the company. Previous \"Star Wars\" games had been produced by external developers such as Raven Software, Bioware and Obsidian; Ward now prioritized making LucasArts' internal game development work effectively and adapt to the evolving games industry. \"\", \"\", and \"\" survived cuts that closed down other in-development games and reduced staff from about 450 to 190 employees.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jim Ward also canceled Star Wars Rogue Squadron Trilogy which was 50 percent completed and it was going to be released on Original Xbox in 2004.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Factor 5 was going to develop a Rogue Squadron game titled Rogue Squadron: X-Wing vs Tie Fighter for the Xbox 360 but it was canceled by Lucasarts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After Factor 5's Exclusivity with Sony ended they decided to release Rogue Squadron Trilogy for the Wii, but it was eventually cancelled as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2004, LucasArts released \"\", based on the same formula as the popular \"Battlefield\" series of games. It ended up becoming the best-selling \"Star Wars\" game of all time to that point, aided by a marketing tie-in with the original trilogy DVD release. Its sequel, \"\", was released November 1, 2005 and features new locales such as Episode III planets Mustafar, Mygeeto, etc., in addition to space combat, playable Jedi, and new special units like Bothan spies and Imperial officers. In this same year, the second \"Knights of the Old Republic\" game was in production. LucasArts told Obsidian Entertainment that the project needed to be finished by that year's holiday season. Obsidian was forced to cut huge amounts of content from the game, resulting in a rushed, unfinished KotOR II.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In March 2005, LucasArts published \"\", the first game in the popular Lego video game franchise by Traveller's Tales. It was based on the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy. In May 2005, LucasArts released \"\", a third person action game based on the film. Also in 2005, LucasArts released \"\", and one of their few non-\"Star Wars\" games, \"\", developed by Pandemic Studios.", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote `` the first game in the popular lego video game ? ''", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 38, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the wars wars ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 38, 3)"}]}, {"context": "On February 16, 2006, LucasArts released \"\", a real-time strategy game developed by Petroglyph. September 12, 2006 saw the release of \"\", the sequel to the popular \"Lego Star Wars: The Video Game\". \"Lego Star Wars II\", once again developed by Traveller's Tales and published by LucasArts, follows the same basic format as the first game, but, as the name indicates, covers the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A video game titled \"Traxion\" was announced. \"Traxion\" was a rhythm game which was under development for the PlayStation Portable by British developer Kuju Entertainment, scheduled to be released in Q4 2006 by LucasArts, but was instead cancelled in January 2007. The game was to feature a number of minigames, and would support imported songs from the player's own mp3 library as well as the game's bundled collection.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the video game called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 40, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the library that would support imported from the player's ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 40, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In May 2007, LucasArts announced \"Fracture\" and stated that \"new intellectual properties serve a vital role to the growth of LucasArts\". \"\" was labelled the number one new IP in 2005 and Thrillville the number one new children's IP in 2006. Fracture was released on October 7, 2008 to average reviews. \"\" was released on January 11, 2005 to critical and commercial success which led to a sequel, \"\". \"Thrillville\" was released on November 21, 2006, and \"\" was released on October 16, 2007.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 16, 2008, \"\" was released to mixed reviews, though it quickly became the fastest selling \"Star Wars\" game of all time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rapid scaling down of internal projects at LucasArts was also reflected in its handling of games developed by external developers. During the tenure of John Ward, Free Radical was contracted to produce \"Battlefront 3\" and had been in production for 2 years. Free Radical co-founder Steve Ellis described how working with LucasArts evolved from being \"the best relationship we'd ever had with a publisher\" to withholding money for 6 months and abusing the independent developer's position to withhold the full project cancellation fee\u2014this was a major event which contributed towards Free Radical entering administration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jim Ward left the company early February 2008, for personal reasons. He was replaced by Howard Roffman as interim president. Darrell Rodriguez, who came from Electronic Arts, took Roffman's place in April 2008. About a month prior to release of \"\" LucasArts scaled down the internal development studio. The aforementioned game received a mediocre score from some media outlets such as IGN, GameSpot and GameTrailers. After release, minor adjustment in staffing resulted in even more layoffs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The successor to \"Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords\", in the form of the MMORPG \"\", was announced on October 21, 2008, at an invitation-only press event. developed by BioWare. It was released in December 2011.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also published \"\" in 2009 for all current systems. The game is a tie-in to \"\" television series and was released on October 6, 2009, receiving generally negative reviews.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During television network G4's coverage of the 2006 E3 Convention, a LucasArts executive was asked about the return of popular franchises such as \"Monkey Island\". The executive responded that the company was currently focusing on new franchises, and that LucasArts may return to the \"classic franchises\" in 2015, though it was unclear as to whether the date was put forwards as an actual projection, or hyperbole. This turned out to be hyperbole, as LucasArts and Telltale Games announced new adventure games in a joint press release in 2009. The games announced were \"Tales of Monkey Island\", which was to be developed by Telltale, and a LucasArts-developed enhanced remake of the 1990 title \"The Secret of Monkey Island\", with the intent of bringing the old game to a new audience. According to LucasArts, this announcement was \"just the start of LucasArts\u2019 new mission to revitalize its deep portfolio of beloved gaming franchises\". Following the success of this, LucasArts released the sequel, \"\" in the summer of 2010.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The company began experiencing turnovers in layoffs in 2010. Darrell Rodriguez left in May after just two years on the job. A Lucasfilm board of Directors and a games industry veteran, Jerry Bowerman, filled in during the transition. Rodriguez was ultimately replaced in June by Paul Meegan, formerly of Gears of War developer Epic Games.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In July 2010, Haden Blackman, who served as creative director on the original \"Star Wars: The Force Unleashed\", LucasArts' most successful internally produced title of recent years, and the sequel, unexpectedly left. However, the company scored a surprise coup in August 2010 when Clint Hocking, a high-profile game director from Ubisoft, announced that he would be joining LucasArts. His tenure at LucasArts was short lived however, as Clint Hocking left LucasArts in June 2012 before the game he was working on was released. In September 2010, a third of the employees at LucasArts were fired.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In March 2011, LucasArts published a sequel to the popular Lego Star Wars series, \"\", based on the , once again developed by Traveller's Tales. Sony Online Entertainment announced in June 2011 that Star Wars Galaxies would be shutting down at the end of 2011. Its services were terminated December 15, 2011.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another canceled title of Lucasarts was a Darth Maul game which was going to be developed by the same company which made the Wii version of The Force Unleashed 2.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On April 26, 2011, LucasArts announced that it had acquired a license from Epic Games to develop a number of future titles using the Unreal Engine 3 for a number of platforms. \"Star Wars 1313\", a proposed action-adventure about a bounty hunter navigating Coruscant's subterranean level 1313 underworld, was confirmed to use the Unreal Engine 3. However, the game was cancelled as a result of the closure of the development arm of LucasArts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In April 2012, LucasArts published \"Kinect Star Wars\", developed by Terminal Reality, for the Xbox 360. It was poorly reviewed by critics, receiving an aggregated score of 53.32% on GameRankings and 55/100 on Metacritic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In August 2012, Paul Meegan, who replaced Rodriguez as president in 2010, also left his position at LucasArts after just two years on the job. Kevin Parker and Gio Corsi were named to co-lead the studio until the studio would choose a permanent president, with the former as interim head of business operations and the latter as interim head of studio production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The last game released through LucasArts as a subsidiary of an independent Lucasfilm was \"Angry Birds Star Wars\", a game that gave the \"Angry Birds\" characters costumes and abilities based on the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy. It was released on November 8, 2012, before the Disney acquisition of Lucasfilm was finalized. The game was developed and published by Rovio Entertainment, and licensed by LucasArts.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the independent lucasfilm ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 55, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On October 30, 2012, LucasArts was acquired by The Walt Disney Company through the acquisition of its parent company Lucasfilm in a deal for $4.05 billion. A Disney representative stated that its intent at the time was for all employees at Lucasfilm and its subsidiaries to remain at their present positions. A LucasArts representative said that \"for the time being, all projects are business as usual\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "On December 4, 2012, the acquisition of Lucasfilm was approved by the Federal Trade Commission, allowing the deal to be finalized without dealing with antitrust problems. On December 21, 2012, the deal was completed, and Lucasfilm and all of its subsidiaries became wholly owned by Disney.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Information that surfaced in March 2013 suggested that \"Star Wars\" games already in development, such as \"Star Wars 1313\" and \"First Assault\", may have been put on hold in order to put more focus on \"\". At the time, LucasArts also had three untitled games in development: an open-world RPG, an FPS, and an aerial combat game. According to a job listing posted via the Lucasfilm website, LucasArts was also planning on creating a new online service which they claimed would \"revolutionize the industry.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what did `` star wars '' do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 58, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On April 3, 2013, Lucasfilm confirmed that LucasArts would cease to operate as a video game developer. Future video games based on its properties will either be developed by Disney Interactive Studios or licensed to third-party developers. As a result, all of its future internal projects were cancelled, and most of its staff were laid off from the company. However, LucasArts remained open with a skeleton staff of fewer than ten employees so it could retain its function as a video game licensor. Disney indicated that the new business model would \"[minimize] the company's risk while achieving a broad portfolio of quality \"Star Wars\" games.\" Around 150 staff members lost their jobs as a result of the closure. The layoffs at LucasArts also resulted in layoffs at fellow visual effects subsidiary Industrial Light & Magic; as many of LucasArts' employees also worked for ILM, the company was left overstaffed.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the video game that lucasarts lucasarts ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 59, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On May 6, 2013, it was revealed that Electronic Arts would develop \"Star Wars\" games, through an exclusive multi-year license, for the core gaming market. But the agreement allowed for the casual gaming market of \"mobile, social, tablet and online game categories\", Disney Interactive Studios to further develop for the franchise, and LucasArts to further license the franchise. On July 15, 2013, a sequel to \"Angry Birds Star Wars\" based on the \"Star Wars\" prequel trilogy, titled \"Angry Birds Star Wars II\", was announced. It was the first game released through LucasArts under Disney ownership when it launched for mobile platforms on September 18, 2013.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the revealed that show that electronic arts would develop `` star wars '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 60, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On October 4, 2013, Disney Interactive announced \"\", a \"Star Wars\" game for mobile devices based on Tiny Tower. It was developed by Disney Mobile and NimbleBit, and was published by LucasArts for mobile devices on November 8, 2013. On December 17, 2013, Disney Interactive announced \"\", a \"Star Wars\" space combat simulation game developed by Area 52 games in conjunction with Disney Mobile and LucasArts. A closed beta period began in North America on January 14, 2014.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the channel that was released on october 4, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 61, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first \"Star Wars\" game announced under Electronic Arts' exclusive license was \"Star Wars Battlefront\", a reboot of the , developed by DICE. The game was released in the third quarter of 2015. The second game by Electronic Arts under their Star Wars license was a free to play mobile game titled \"\". It was announced at the 2015 E3 Expo, where it was announced as a collectible card game RPG. The game received a soft launch in Australia during October 2015, and was formally released on November 24, 2015.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first star wars called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 62, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At the 2014 Electronic Entertainment Expo, Sony Computer Entertainment announced \"Grim Fandango Remastered\", developed by Double Fine Productions as a console exclusive for PlayStation platforms. It was released in 2015 for PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Microsoft Windows, OS X, Linux, Android, and iOS. During Sony's new PlayStation Experience convention in 2014, another remaster by Double Fine, \"Day of the Tentacle Remastered\", was announced. It was released in March 2016 for PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Microsoft Windows, OS X, and Linux. At the 2015 PlayStation Experience, another remastered game by Double Fine was announced, \"Full Throttle Remastered\". It was released in April 2017 for PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Microsoft Windows, OSX, and Linux.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ex-LucasArts developers have founded numerous San Francisco game development studios such as Double Fine Productions (2000), Telltale Games (2004), MunkyFun (2008), Dynamighty (2011), SoMa Play (2013), and Fifth Journey (2015) playing a significant role in the continued development of computer games in the Bay area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The original Lucasfilm Games logo was based upon the existing Lucasfilm movie logo. There were a number of variations on it.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the original name of the original lucasfilm games ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 65, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The long-lived LucasArts logo, affectionately known as the \"Gold Guy\", was introduced in 1990 and first used within \"Monkey Island 2: LeChuck\u2019s Revenge\" (the first game shipped under the LucasArts name). The logo consisted of a crude gold-colored figure resembling a petroglyph, standing on a purple letter \"L\" inscribed with the company name. The figure had its hands up in the air, as if a sun were rising from behind him. It was also said to resemble an eye, with the rays of the sun as eyelashes. The logo was revised in late 2005, losing the letter \"L\" pedestal and introducing a more rounded version of the gold-colored figure. In the games, the figure sometimes does an action like throw a lightsaber or cast Force Lightning.\nIn 1998, LucasArts approached Finnish game developer Remedy Entertainment, citing that their logo was copied from the top portion of the LucasArts logo, and threatened legal action. Remedy was by that time already in the process of redesigning their logo, so they complied by taking their old logo offline from their website, and introducing their new logo a little later.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lafcadio Hearn", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Patrick Lafcadio Hearn (; ; 27 June 1850 \u2013 26 September 1904), known also by the Japanese name , was a writer, known best for his books about Japan, especially his collections of Japanese legends and ghost stories, such as \"\". In the United States, Hearn is also known for his writings about the city of New Orleans based on his ten-year stay in that city.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the city of new orleans known for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Hearn was born in and named after the island of Lefkada, one of the Greek Ionian Islands, on 27 June 1850. He was the son of Surgeon-Major Charles Bush Hearn (of County Offaly, Ireland) and Rosa Antoniou Kassimatis, a Greek woman of noble Kytheran lineage through her father, Anthony Kassimatis. His father was stationed in Lefkada during the British occupation of the islands, where he was the highest-ranking surgeon in his regiment. Lafcadio was baptized Patricios Lefcadios Hearn (\u03a0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03ba\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u039b\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03ac\u03b4\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u03a7\u03b5\u03c1\u03bd) in the Greek Orthodox Church, but he seems to have been called \"Patrick Lefcadio Kassimati Charles Hearn\" in English. Hearn's parents were married in a Greek Orthodox ceremony on 25 November 1849, several months after his mother had given birth to the couple's first child, Hearn's older brother, George Robert Hearn, on 24 July 1849. George Hearn died on 17 August 1850, two months after Lafcadio's birth.", "qas": [{"question": "when did george hearn die ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 1, 5)"}, {"question": "when was hearn born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A complex series of conflicts and events led to Lafcadio Hearn being moved from Greece to Ireland, where he was abandoned first by his mother (leaving him in the care of her husband's aunt), then his father, and finally by his father's aunt, who had been appointed his official guardian.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1850 Hearn's father was promoted to Staff Surgeon Second Class and was reassigned from Lefkada to the British West Indies. Since his family did not approve of the marriage, and worried that his relationship might harm his career prospects, Charles Hearn did not inform his superiors of his son or pregnant wife and left his family behind. In 1852, he arranged to send his son and wife to live with his family in Dublin, Ireland, where they received a cool reception. Charles Hearn's Protestant mother, Elizabeth Holmes Hearn, had difficulty accepting Rosa Hearn's Catholicism and lack of education (she was illiterate and spoke no English). Rosa found it difficult to adapt to a foreign culture and the Protestantism of her husband's family, and was eventually taken under the wing of Elizabeth's sister, Sarah Holmes Brenane, a widow who had converted to Catholicism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite Sarah Brenane's efforts, Rosa suffered from homesickness. When her husband returned to Ireland on medical leave in 1853, it became clear that the couple had become estranged. Charles Hearn was assigned to the Crimean Peninsula, again leaving his pregnant wife and child in Ireland. When he came back in 1856, severely wounded and traumatized, Rosa had returned to her home island of Cerigo in Greece, where she gave birth to their third son, Daniel James Hearn. Lafcadio had been left in the care of Sarah Brenane.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Charles Hearn petitioned to have the marriage with Rosa annulled, on the basis of her lack of signature on the marriage contract, which made it invalid under English law. After being informed of the annulment, Rosa almost immediately married Giovanni Cavallini, a Greek citizen of Italian ancestry who was later appointed by the British as governor of Cerigotto. Cavallini required as a condition of the marriage that Rosa give up custody of both Lafcadio and James. As a result, James was sent to his father in Dublin and Lafcadio remained in the care of Sarah Brenane (Brenane had disinherited Charles Hearn because of the annulment). Neither Lafcadio nor James saw their mother again, who had four children with her second husband. Rosa was eventually committed to the National Mental Asylum on Corfu, where she died in 1882.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Charles Hearn, who had left Lafcadio in the care of Sarah Brenane for the past 4 years, now appointed her as Lafcadio's permanent guardian. He married his childhood sweetheart, Alicia Goslin, in July 1857, and left with his new wife for a posting in Secunderabad, where they had three daughters prior to Alicia's death in 1861. Lafcadio never saw his father again: Charles Hearn died of malaria in the Gulf of Suez in 1866.", "qas": [{"question": "who died of malaria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 6, 2)"}, {"question": "who was the permanent administrator of charles hearn ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1857, at age seven and despite the fact that both his parents were still alive, Hearn became the permanent ward of his great aunt, Sarah Brenane. She divided her residency between Dublin in the winter months, her husband's estate at Tramore, County Waterford on the southern Irish coast, and a house at Bangor, North Wales. Brenane also engaged a tutor during the school year to provide basic instruction and the rudiments of Catholic dogma. Hearn began exploring Brenane's library and read extensively in Greek literature, especially myths.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1861, Hearn's aunt, aware that Hearn was turning away from Catholicism, and at the urging of Henry Hearn Molyneux, a relative of her late husband and a distant cousin of Hearn, enrolled him at the Institution Eccl\u00e9siastique, a Catholic church school in Yvetot, France. Hearn's experiences at the school confirmed his lifelong conviction that Catholic education consisted of \"conventional dreariness and ugliness and dirty austerities and long faces and Jesuitry and infamous distortion of children's brains.\" Hearn became fluent in French and would later translate into English the works of Guy de Maupassant, who coincidentally attended the school shortly after Hearn's departure.", "qas": [{"question": "where was henry hearn born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "when did hearn become fluent in french ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 1863, again at the suggestion of Molyneux, Hearn was enrolled at St. Cuthbert's College, Ushaw, a Catholic seminary at what is now the University of Durham. In this environment, Hearn adopted the nickname \"Paddy\" to try to fit in better, and was the top student in English composition for three years. At age 16, while at Ushaw, Hearn injured his left eye in a schoolyard mishap. The eye became infected and, despite consultations with specialists in Dublin and London, and a year spent out of school convalescing, went blind. Hearn also suffered from severe myopia, so his injury left him permanently with poor vision, requiring him to carry a magnifying glass for close work and a pocket telescope to see anything beyond a short distance (Hearn avoided eyeglasses, believing they would gradually weaken his vision further). The iris was permanently discolored, and left Hearn self-conscious about his appearance for the rest of his life, causing him to cover his left eye while conversing and always posing for the camera in profile so that the left eye was not visible.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1867, Henry Molyneux, who had become Sarah Brenane's financial manager, went bankrupt, along with Brenane. There was no money for tuition, and Hearn was sent to London's East End to live with Brenane's former maid. She and her husband had little time or money for Hearn, who wandered the streets, spent time in workhouses, and generally lived an aimless, rootless existence. His main intellectual activities consisted of visits to libraries and the British Museum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 1869, Henry Molyneux had recovered some financial stability and Brenane, now 75, was infirm. Resolving to end his expenditures on the 19-year-old Hearn, he purchased a one-way ticket to New York and instructed Hearn to find his way to Cincinnati, to locate Molyneux's sister and her husband, Thomas Cullinan, and to obtain their assistance in making a living. Upon meeting Hearn in Cincinnati, the family had little assistance to offer: Cullinan gave him $5 and wished him luck in seeking his fortune. As Hearn would later write, \"I was dropped moneyless on the pavement of an American city to begin life.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a time, he was impoverished, living in stables or store rooms in exchange for menial labor. He eventually befriended the English printer and communalist Henry Watkin, who employed him in his printing business, helped find him various odd jobs, lent him books from his library, including utopianists Fourier, Dixon and Noyes, and gave Hearn a nickname which stuck with him for the rest of his life, The Raven, from the Poe poem. Hearn also frequented the Cincinnati Public Library, which at that time had an estimated 50,000 volumes. In the spring of 1871 a letter from Henry Molyneux informed him of Sarah Brenane's death and Molyneux's appointment as sole executor. Despite Brenane having named him as the beneficiary of an annuity when she became his guardian, Hearn received nothing from the estate and never heard from Molyneux again.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the strength of his talent as a writer, Hearn obtained a job as a reporter for the \"Cincinnati Daily Enquirer\", working for the newspaper from 1872 to 1875. Writing with creative freedom in one of Cincinnati's largest circulating newspapers, he became known for his lurid accounts of local murders, developing a reputation as the paper's premier sensational journalist, as well as the author of sensitive accounts of some of the disadvantaged people of Cincinnati. \"The Library of America\" selected one of these murder accounts, \"Gibbeted,\" for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of \"American True Crime\", published in 2008. After one of his murder stories, the Tanyard Murder, had run for several months in 1874, Hearn established his reputation as Cincinnati's most audacious journalist, and the \"Enquirer\" raised his salary from $10 to $25 per week.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1874, Hearn and the young Henry Farny, later a renowned painter of the American West, wrote, illustrated, and published an 8-page weekly journal of art, literature and satire entitled \"Ye Giglampz.\" The Cincinnati Public Library reprinted a facsimile of all nine issues in 1983. The work was considered by a twentieth century critic to be \"Perhaps the most fascinating sustained project he undertook as an editor.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 14 June 1874, Hearn, aged 23, married Alethea (\"Mattie\") Foley, a 20-year-old African American woman, an action in violation of Ohio's anti-miscegenation law at that time. In August 1875, in response to complaints from local clergyman about his anti-religious views and pressure from local politicians embarrassed by some of his satirical writing in \"Ye Giglampz,\" the \"Enquirer\" fired him, citing as its reason his illegal marriage. He went to work for the rival newspaper \"The Cincinnati Commercial.\" The \"Enquirer\" offered to re-hire him after his stories began appearing in the \"Commercial\" and its circulation began increasing, but Hearn, incensed at the paper's behavior, refused. Hearn and Foley separated, but attempted reconciliation several times before divorcing in 1877. Foley remarried in 1880.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While working for the \"Commercial\" Hearn agreed to be carried to the top of Cincinnati's tallest building on the back of a famous steeplejack, Joseph Roderiguez Weston, and wrote a half-terrified, half-comic account of the experience. It was also during this time that Hearn wrote a series of accounts of the Bucktown and Levee neighborhoods of Cincinnati, \"...one of the few depictions we have of black life in a border city during the post-Civil War period.\" He also wrote about local black song lyrics from the era, including a song titled \"Shiloh\" that was dedicated to a Bucktown resident named \"Limber Jim.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the autumn of 1877, recently divorced from Mattie Foley and restless, Hearn had begun neglecting his newspaper work in favor of translating into English works of the French author Gautier. He had also grown increasingly disenchanted with Cincinnati, writing to Henry Watkin, \"It is time for a fellow to get out of Cincinnati when they begin to call it the Paris of America.\" With the support of Watkin and \"Cincinnati Commercial\" publisher Murat Halstead, Hearn left Cincinnati for New Orleans, where he initially wrote dispatches on the \"Gateway to the Tropics\" for the \"Commercial\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearn lived in New Orleans for nearly a decade, writing first for the newspaper \"Daily City Item\" beginning in June 1878, and later for the \"Times Democrat\". Since the \"Item\" was a 4-page publication, Hearn's editorial work changed the character of the newspaper dramatically. He began at the \"Item\" as a news editor, expanding to include book reviews of Bret Harte and \u00c9mile Zola, summaries of pieces in national magazines such as \"Harper's\", and editorial pieces introducing Buddhism and Sanskrit writings. As editor, Hearn created and published nearly two hundred woodcuts of daily life and people in New Orleans, making the \"Item\" the first Southern newspaper to introduce cartoons and giving the paper an immediate boost in circulation. Hearn gave up carving the woodcuts after six months when he found the strain was too great for his eye.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the end of 1881, Hearn took an editorial position with the New Orleans \"Times Democrat\" and was employed translating items from French and Spanish newspapers as well as writing editorials and cultural reviews on topics of his choice. He also continued his work translating French authors into English: G\u00e9rard de Nerval, Anatole France, and most notably Pierre Loti, an author who influenced Hearn's own writing style. Milton Bronner, who edited Hearn's letters to Henry Watkin, wrote: \"[T]he Hearn of New Orleans was the father of the Hearn of the West Indies and of Japan,\" and this view was endorsed by Norman Foerster. During his tenure at the \"Times Democrat\", Hearn also developed a friendship with editor Page Baker, who went on to champion Hearn's literary career; their correspondence is archived at the Loyola University New Orleans Special Collections & Archives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The vast number of his writings about New Orleans and its environs, many of which have not been collected, include the city's Creole population and distinctive cuisine, the French Opera, and Louisiana Voodoo. Hearn wrote enthusiastically of New Orleans, but also wrote of the city's decay, \"a dead bride crowned with orange flowers\".", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote the city's decay ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 20, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Hearn's writings for national publications, such as \"Harper's Weekly\" and \"Scribner's Magazine\", helped create the popular reputation of New Orleans as a place with a distinct culture more akin to that of Europe and the Caribbean than to the rest of North America. Hearn's best-known Louisiana works include:", "qas": [{"question": "hearn's is known as what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 21, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Hearn also published in \"Harper's Weekly\" the first known written article (1883) about Filipinos in the United States, the Manilamen or Tagalogs, one of whose villages he had visited at Saint Malo, southeast of Lake Borgne in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the time he lived there, Hearn was little known, and even now he is little known for his writing about New Orleans, except by local cultural devotees. However, more books have been written about him than any former resident of New Orleans except Louis Armstrong.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearn's writings for the New Orleans newspapers included impressionistic descriptions of places and characters and many editorials denouncing political corruption, street crime, violence, intolerance, and the failures of public health and hygiene officials. Despite the fact that he is credited with \"inventing\" New Orleans as an exotic and mysterious place, his obituaries of the vodou leaders Marie Laveau and Doctor John Montenet are matter-of-fact and debunking. Selections of Hearn's New Orleans writings have been collected and published in several works, starting with \"Creole Sketches\" in 1924, and more recently in \"Inventing New Orleans: Writings of Lafcadio Hearn.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the original name of the new orleans writings ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 24, 2)"}]}, {"context": "\"Harper's\" sent Hearn to the West Indies as a correspondent in 1887. He spent two years in Martinique and in addition to his writings for the magazine, produced two books: \"Two Years in the French West Indies\" and \"Youma, The Story of a West-Indian Slave\", both published in 1890.", "qas": [{"question": "who sent to the west indies as a correspondent in the west indies ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1890, Hearn went to Japan with a commission as a newspaper correspondent, which was quickly terminated. It was in Japan, however, that he found a home and his greatest inspiration. Through the goodwill of Basil Hall Chamberlain, Hearn gained a teaching position during the summer of 1890 at the Shimane Prefectural Common Middle School and Normal School in Matsue, a town in western Japan on the coast of the Sea of Japan. The Lafcadio Hearn Memorial Museum and his old residence are still two of Matsue's most popular tourist attractions. During his fifteen-month stay in Matsue, Hearn married Koizumi Setsu, the daughter of a local samurai family, with whom he had four children. He became a naturalized Japanese, assuming the name Koizumi Yakumo, in 1896 after accepting a teaching position in Tokyo. After having been Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and, later on, Spencerian, he became Buddhist.", "qas": [{"question": "who was a newspaper correspondent of japan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During late 1891, Hearn obtained another teaching position in Kumamoto, Ky\u016bsh\u016b, at the Fifth Higher Middle School, where he spent the next three years and completed his book \"Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan\" (1894). In October 1894, he secured a journalism job with the English-language newspaper \"Kobe Chronicle\", and in 1896, with some assistance from Chamberlain, he began teaching English literature at Tokyo Imperial University, a job he had until 1903. In 1904, he was a professor at Waseda University.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While in Japan he encountered the art of ju-jutsu which made a deep impression upon him:", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 26 September 1904, he died of heart failure at the age of 54 years. His grave is at the Z\u014dshigaya Cemetery in Toshima, Tokyo.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late 19th century, Japan was still largely unknown and exotic to Westerners. However, with the introduction of Japanese aesthetics, particularly at the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1900, Japanese styles became fashionable in Western countries. Consequently, Hearn became known to the world by his writings concerning Japan. In later years, some critics would accuse Hearn of exoticizing Japan, but because he offered the West some of its first descriptions of pre-industrial and Meiji Era Japan, his work is generally regarded as having historical value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Admirers of Hearn's work have included Ben Hecht, John Erskine, and Malcolm Cowley.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Japanese director Masaki Kobayashi adapted four Hearn tales into his 1964 film, \"Kwaidan\". Some of his stories have been adapted by Ping Chong into his puppet theatre, including the 1999 \"Kwaidan\" and the 2002 \"OBON: Tales of Moonlight and Rain\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Yone Noguchi is quoted as saying about Hearn, \"His Greek temperament and French culture became frost-bitten as a flower in the North.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is also a cultural center named after Hearn at the University of Durham.", "qas": [{"question": "where is there a cultural center named after ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hearn was a major translator of the short stories of Guy de Maupassant.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first museum in Europe for Lafcadio Hearn was inaugurated in Lefkada, Greece, his birthplace, on 4 July 2014, as Lefcadio Hearn Historical Center. It contains early editions, rare books and Japanese collectibles. The visitors, through photos, texts and exhibits, can wander in the significant events of Lafcadio Hearn's life, but also in the civilizations of Europe, America and Japan of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries through his lectures, writings and tales. The municipalities of Kumamoto, Matsue, Shinjuku, Yaizu, Toyama University, the Koizumi family and other people from Japan and Greece contributed to the establishment of Lefcadio Hearn Historical Center.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Source:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Learning theory (education)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Learning theories describe how students absorb, process, and retain knowledge during learning. Cognitive, emotional, and environmental influences, as well as prior experience, all play a part in how understanding, or a world view, is acquired or changed and knowledge and skills retained.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Behaviorists look at learning as an aspect of conditioning and advocate a system of rewards and targets in education. Educators who embrace cognitive theory believe that the definition of learning as a change in behaviour is too narrow, and study the learner rather than their environment\u2014and in particular the complexities of human memory. Those who advocate constructivism believe that a learner's ability to learn relies largely on what they already know and understand, and the acquisition of knowledge should be an individually tailored process of construction. Transformative learning theory focuses on the often-necessary change required in a learner's preconceptions and world view. Geographical learning theory focuses on the ways that contexts and environments shape the learning process.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Outside the realm of educational psychology, techniques to directly observe the functioning of the brain during the learning process, such as event-related potential and functional magnetic resonance imaging, are used in educational neuroscience. The theory of multiple intelligences, where learning is seen as the interaction between dozens of different functional areas in the brain each with their own individual strengths and weaknesses in any particular human learner, has also been proposed, but empirical research has found the theory to be unsupported by evidence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Plato (428 BC\u2013347 BC) proposed the question: How does an individual learn something new when the topic is brand new to that person? This question may seem trivial; however, think of a human like a computer. The question would then become: How does a computer take in any factual information without previous programming? Plato answered his own question by stating that knowledge is present at birth and all information learned by a person is merely a recollection of something the soul has already learned previously, which is called the Theory of Recollection or Platonic epistemology. This answer could be further justified by a paradox: If a person knows something, they don't need to question it, and if a person does not know something, they don't know to question it. Plato says that if one did not previously know something, then they cannot learn it. He describes learning as a passive process, where information and knowledge are ironed into the soul over time. However, Plato's theory elicits even more questions about knowledge: If we can only learn something when we already had the knowledge impressed onto our souls, then how did our souls gain that knowledge in the first place? Plato's theory can seem convoluted; however, his classical theory can still help us understand knowledge today.", "qas": []}, {"context": "John Locke (1632\u20131704) offered an answer to Plato's question as well. John Locke offered the \"blank slate\" theory where humans are born into the world with no innate knowledge. He recognized that something had to be present, however. This something, to John Locke, seemed to be \"mental powers\". Locke viewed these powers as a biological ability the baby is born with, similar to how a baby knows how to biologically function when born. So as soon as the baby enters the world, it immediately has experiences with its surroundings and all of those experiences are being transcribed to the baby's \"slate\". All of the experiences then eventually culminate into complex and abstract ideas. This theory can still help teachers understand their students' learning today.", "qas": [{"question": "who offered an answer to plato's point ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The term \"behaviorism\" was coined by John Watson (1878\u20131959). Watson believed the behaviorist view is a purely objective experimental branch of natural science with a goal to predict and control behavior. In an article in the \"Psychological Review\", he stated that, \"Its theoretical goal is the prediction and control of behavior. Introspection forms no essential part of its methods, nor is the scientific value of its data dependent upon the readiness with which they lend themselves to interpretation in terms of consciousness.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who coined the term `` positivism '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Methodological behaviorism is based on the theory of only explaining public events, or observable behavior. B.F. Skinner introduced another type of behaviorism called radical behaviorism, or the conceptual analysis of behavior, which is based on the theory of also explaining private events; particularly, thinking and feelings. Radical behaviorism forms the conceptual piece of behavior analysis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In behavior analysis, learning is the acquisition of a new behavior through conditioning and social learning.", "qas": [{"question": "what is adolescence ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There are three types of conditioning and learning:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ivan Pavlov discovered classical conditioning. He observed that if dogs come to associate the delivery of food with a white lab coat or the ringing of a bell, they produce saliva, even when there is no sight or smell of food. Classical conditioning considers this form of learning the same, whether in dogs or in humans. Operant conditioning reinforces this behavior with a reward or a punishment. A reward increases the likelihood of the behavior recurring, a punishment decreases its likelihood. Social learning theory observes behavior and is followed with modeling.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These three learning theories form the basis of applied behavior analysis, the application of behavior analysis, which uses analyzed antecedents, functional analysis, replacement behavior strategies, and often data collection and reinforcement to change behavior. The old practice was called behavior modification, which only used \"assumed\" antecedents and consequences to change behavior without acknowledging the conceptual analysis; analyzing the function of behavior and teaching of new behaviors that would serve the same function was never relevant in behavior modification.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Behaviorists view the learning process as a change in behavior, and arrange the environment to elicit desired responses through such devices as behavioral objectives, Competency-based learning, and skill development and training. Educational approaches such as Early Intensive Behavioral Intervention, curriculum-based measurement, and direct instruction have emerged from this model.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Transfer of learning is the idea that what one learns in school somehow carries over to situations different from that particular time and that particular setting. Transfer was amongst the first phenomena tested in educational psychology. Edward Lee Thorndike was a pioneer in transfer research. He found that though transfer is extremely important for learning, it is a rarely occurring phenomenon. In fact, he held an experiment where he had the subjects estimate the size of a specific shape and then he would switch the shape. He found that the prior information did not help the subjects; instead it impeded their learning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One explanation of why transfer does not occur often involves surface structure and deep structure. The surface structure is the way a problem is framed. The deep structure is the steps for the solution. For example, when a math story problem changes contexts from asking how much it costs to reseed a lawn to how much it costs to varnish a table, they have different surface structures, but the steps for getting the answers are the same. However, many people are more influenced by the surface structure. In reality, the surface structure is unimportant. Nonetheless, people are concerned with it because they believe that it provides background knowledge on how to do the problem. Consequently, this interferes with their understanding of the deep structure of the problem. Even if somebody tries to concentrate on the deep structure, transfer still may be unsuccessful because the deep structure is not usually obvious. Therefore, surface structure gets in the way of people's ability to see the deep structure of the problem and transfer the knowledge they have learned to come up with a solution to a new problem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Current learning pedagogies focus on conveying rote knowledge, independent of the context that gives it meaning. Because of this, students often struggle to transfer this stand-alone information into other aspects of their education. Students need much more than abstract concepts and self-contained knowledge; they need to be exposed to learning that is practiced in the context of authentic activity and culture. Critics of situated cognition, however, would argue that by discrediting stand-alone information, the transfer of knowledge across contextual boundaries becomes impossible. There must be a balance between situating knowledge while also grasping the deep structure of material, or the understanding of how one arrives to know such information.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some theorists argue that transfer does not even occur at all. They believe that students transform what they have learned into the new context. They say that transfer is too much of a passive notion. They believe students, instead, transform their knowledge in an active way. Students don't simply carry over knowledge from the classroom, but they construct the knowledge in a way that they can understand it themselves.The learner changes the information they have learned to make it best adapt to the changing contexts that they use the knowledge in. This transformation process can occur when a learner feels motivated to use the knowledge\u2014however, if the student does not find the transformation necessary, it is less likely that the knowledge will ever transform", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many different conditions that influence transfer of learning in the classroom. These conditions include features of the task, features of the learner, features of the organization and social context of the activity. The features of the task include practicing through simulations, problem-based learning, and knowledge and skills for implementing new plans. The features of learners include their ability to reflect on past experiences, their ability to participate in group discussions, practice skills, and participate in written discussions. All the unique features contribute to a student's ability to use transfer of learning. There are structural techniques that can aid learning transfer in the classroom. These structural strategies include hugging and bridging.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hugging uses the technique of simulating an activity to encourage reflexive learning. An example of the hugging strategy is when a student practices teaching a lesson or when a student role plays with another student. These examples encourage critical thinking that engages the student and helps them understand what they are learning\u2014one of the goals of transfer of learning and desirable difficulties.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bridging is when instruction encourages thinking abstractly by helping to identify connections between ideas and to analyze those connections. An example is when a teacher lets the student analyze their past test results and the way they got those results. This includes amount of study time and study strategies. Looking at their past study strategies can help them come up with strategies to improve performance. These are some of the ideas important to successful to hugging and bridging practices.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many benefits of transfer of learning in the classroom. One of the main benefits is the ability to quickly learn a new task. This has many real-life applications such as language and speech processing. Transfer of learning is also very useful in teaching students to use higher cognitive thinking by applying their background knowledge to new situations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cognitive theories grew out of Gestalt psychology. Gestalt psychology was developed in Germany in the early 1900s by Wolfgang Kohler and was brought to America in the 1920s. The German word \"Gestalt\" is roughly equivalent to the English \"configuration\" or \"organization\" and emphasizes the whole of human experience. Over the years, the Gestalt psychologists provided demonstrations and described principles to explain the way we organize our sensations into perceptions. Max Wertheimer, one of the founding fathers of Gestalt Theory, observed that sometimes we interpret motion when there is no motion at all. For example: a powered sign used at a convenience store to indicate that the store is open or closed might be seen as a sign with \"flashing lights\". However, the lights are not actually flashing. The lights have been programmed to blink rapidly at their own individual pace. Perceived as a whole, the sign flashes. Perceived individually, the lights turn off and on at designated times. Another example of this would be a brick house: As a whole, it is viewed as a standing structure. However, it is actually composed of many smaller parts, which are individual bricks. People tend to see things from a holistic point of view rather than breaking it down into sub units.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Gestalt theory, psychologists say that instead of obtaining knowledge from what's in front of us, we often learn by making sense of the relationship between what's new and old. Because we have a unique perspective of the world, humans have the ability to generate their own learning experiences and interpret information that may or may not be the same for someone else.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gestalt psychologists criticize behaviorists for being too dependent on overt behavior to explain learning. They propose looking at the patterns rather than isolated events. Gestalt views of learning have been incorporated into what have come to be labeled \"cognitive theories\". Two key assumptions underlie this cognitive approach: that the memory system is an active organized processor of information and that prior knowledge plays an important role in learning. Gestalt theorists believe that for learning to occur, prior knowledge must exist on the topic. When the learner applies their prior knowledge to the advanced topic, the learner can understand the meaning in the advanced topic, and learning can occur Cognitive theories look beyond behavior to consider how human memory works to promote learning, and an understanding of short term memory and long term memory is important to educators influenced by cognitive theory. They view learning as an internal mental process (including insight, information processing, memory and perception) where the educator focuses on building intelligence and cognitive development. The individual learner is more important than the environment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Once memory theories like the Atkinson-Shiffrin memory model and Baddeley's working memory model were established as a theoretical framework in cognitive psychology, new cognitive frameworks of learning began to emerge during the 1970s, 80s, and 90s. Today, researchers are concentrating on topics like cognitive load and information processing theory. These theories of learning play a role in influencing instructional design. Cognitive theory is used to explain such topics as social role acquisition, intelligence and memory as related to age.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late twentieth century, situated cognition emerged as a theory that recognized current learning as primarily the transfer of decontextualized and formal knowledge. Bredo (1994) depicts situated cognition as \"shifting the focus from individual in environment to individual and environment\". In other words, individual cognition should be considered as intimately related with the context of social interactions and culturally constructed meaning. Learning through this perspective, in which known and doing become inseparable, becomes both applicable and whole.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much of the education students receive is limited to the culture of schools, without consideration for authentic cultures outside of education. Curricula framed by situated cognition can bring knowledge to life by embedding the learned material within the culture students are familiar with. For example, formal and abstract syntax of math problems can be transformed by placing a traditional math problem within a practical story problem. This presents an opportunity to meet that appropriate balance between situated and transferable knowledge. Lampert (1987) successfully did this by having students explore mathematical concepts that are continuous with their background knowledge. She does so by using money, which all students are familiar with, and then develops the lesson to include more complex stories that allow for students to see various solutions as well as create their own. In this way, knowledge becomes active, evolving as students participate and negotiate their way through new situations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Founded by Jean Piaget, constructivism emphasizes the importance of the active involvement of learners in constructing knowledge for themselves. Students are thought to use background knowledge and concepts to assist them in their acquisition of novel information. On approaching such new information, the learner faces a loss of equilibrium with their previous understanding, and this demands a change in cognitive structure. This change effectively combines previous and novel information to form an improved cognitive schema. Constructivism can be both subjectively and contextually based. Under the theory of radical constructivism, coined by Ernst von Glasersfeld, understanding relies on one's subjective interpretation of experience as opposed to objective \"reality\". Similarly, William Cobern's idea of contextual constructivism encompasses the effects of culture and society on experience.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Constructivism asks why students do not learn deeply by listening to a teacher, or reading from a textbook. To design effective teaching environments, it believes one needs a good understanding of what children already know when they come into the classroom. The curriculum should be designed in a way that builds on the pupil's background knowledge and is allowed to develop with them. Begin with complex problems and teach basic skills while solving these problems. The learning theories of John Dewey, Maria Montessori, and David A. Kolb serve as the foundation of the application of constructivist learning theory in the classroom. Constructivism has many varieties such as active learning, discovery learning, and knowledge building, but all versions promote a student's free exploration within a given framework or structure. The teacher acts as a facilitator who encourages students to discover principles for themselves and to construct knowledge by working answering open-ended questions and solving real-world problems. To do this, a teacher should encourage curiosity and discussion among his/her students as well as promoting their autonomy. In scientific areas in the classroom, constructivist teachers provide raw data and physical materials for the students to work with and analyze.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Transformative learning theory seeks to explain how humans revise and reinterpret meaning. Transformative learning is the cognitive process of effecting change in a frame of reference. A frame of reference defines our view of the world. The emotions are often involved. Adults have a tendency to reject any ideas that do not correspond to their particular values, associations and concepts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Our frames of reference are composed of two dimensions: habits of mind and points of view. Habits of mind, such as ethnocentrism, are harder to change than points of view. Habits of mind influence our point of view and the resulting thoughts or feelings associated with them, but points of view may change over time as a result of influences such as reflection, appropriation and feedback. Transformative learning takes place by discussing with others the \"reasons presented in support of competing interpretations, by critically examining evidence, arguments, and alternative points of view\". When circumstances permit, transformative learners move toward a frame of reference that is more inclusive, discriminating, self-reflective, and integrative of experience.", "qas": []}, {"context": "American Universities such as Harvard, Johns Hopkins, and University of Southern California began offering majors and degrees dedicated to educational neuroscience or neuroeducation in the first decade of the twenty-first century. Such studies seek to link an understanding of brain processes with classroom instruction and experiences. Neuroeducation analyzes biological changes in the brain from processing new information. It looks at what environmental, emotional, and social situations best help the brain store and retain new information via the linking of neurons\u2014and best keep the dendrites from being reabsorbed, losing the information. The 1990s were designated \"The Decade of the Brain\", and advances took place in neuroscience at an especially rapid pace. The three dominant methods for measuring brain activities are event-related potential, functional magnetic resonance imaging and magnetoencephalography (MEG).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The integration and application to education of what we know about the brain was strengthened in 2000 when the American Federation of Teachers stated: \"It is vital that we identify what science tells us about how people learn in order to improve the education curriculum.\" What is exciting about this new field in education is that modern brain imaging techniques now make it possible, in some sense, to watch the brain as it learns, and the question then arises: can the results of neuro-scientific studies of brains as they are learning usefully inform practice in this area? The neuroscience field is young. Researchers expected that new technologies and ways of observing will produce new scientific evidence that helps refine the paradigms of what students need and how they learn best. In particular, it may bring more informed strategies for teaching students with learning disabilities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All individuals have the ability to develop mental discipline and the skill of mindfulness, the two go hand in hand. Mental discipline is huge in shaping what people do, say, think and feel. It's critical in terms of the processing of information and involves the ability to recognize and respond appropriately to new things and information people come across, or have recently been taught. Mindfulness is important to the process of learning in many aspects. Being mindful means to be present with and engaged in whatever you are doing at a specific moment in time. Being mindful can aid in helping us to more critically think, feel and understand the new information we are in the process of absorbing. \nThe formal discipline approach seeks to develop causation between the advancement of the mind by exercising it through exposure to abstract school subjects such as science, language and mathematics. With student's repetitive exposure to these particular subjects, some scholars feel that the acquisition of knowledge pertaining to science, language and math is of \"secondary importance\", and believe that the strengthening and further development of the mind that this curriculum provides holds far greater significance to the progressing learner in the long haul. D.C. Phillips and Jonas F. Soltis provide some skepticism to this notion. Their skepticism stems largely in part from feeling that the relationship between formal discipline and the overall advancement of the mind is not as strong as some would say. They illustrate their skepticism by opining that it is foolish to blindly assume that people are better off in life, or at performing certain tasks, because of taking particular, yet unrelated courses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The existence of multiple intelligences is proposed by psychologist Howard Gardner, who suggests that different kinds of intelligence exists in human beings. It is a theory that has been fashionable in continuous professional development (CPD) training courses for teachers. However, the theory of multiple intelligences is often cited as an example of pseudoscience because it lacks empirical evidence or falsifiability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multimedia learning refers to the use of visual and auditory teaching materials that may include video, computer and other information technology. Multimedia learning theory focuses on the principles that determine the effective use of multimedia in learning, with emphasis on using both the visual and auditory channels for information processing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The auditory channel deals with information that is heard, and the visual channel processes information that is seen. The visual channel holds less information than the auditory channel. If both the visual and auditory channels are presented with information, more knowledge is retained. However, if too much information is delivered it is inadequately processed, and long term memory is not acquired. Multimedia learning seeks to give instructors the ability to stimulate both the visual and auditory channels of the learner, resulting in better progress.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many educators and researchers believe that information technology could bring innovation on traditional educational instructions. Teachers and technologists are searching for new and innovative ways to design learner-centered learning environments effectively, trying to engage learners more in the learning process. Claims have been made that online games have the potential to teach, train and educate and they are effective means for learning skills and attitudes that are not so easy to learn by rote memorization.\nThere has been a lot of research done in identifying the learning effectiveness in game based learning. Learner characteristics and cognitive learning outcomes have been identified as the key factors in research on the implementation of games in educational settings. In the process of learning a language through an online game, there is a strong relationship between the learner's prior knowledge of that language and their cognitive learning outcomes. For the people with prior knowledge of the language, the learning effectiveness of the games is much more than those with none or less knowledge of the language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other learning theories have also been developed for more specific purposes. For example, andragogy is the art and science to help adults learn. Connectivism is a recent theory of networked learning, which focuses on learning as making connections. The Learning as a Network (LaaN) theory builds upon connectivism, complexity theory, and double-loop learning. It starts from the learner and views learning as the continuous creation of a personal knowledge network (PKN).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Learning style theories propose that individuals learn in different ways, that there are distinct learning styles and that knowledge of a learner's preferred learning style leads to faster and more satisfactory improvement. However, the current research has not been able to find solid scientific evidence to support the main premises of learning styles theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In theories that make use of cognitive restructuring, an informal curriculum promotes the use of prior knowledge to help students gain a broad understanding of concepts. New knowledge cannot be told to students, it believes, but rather the students' current knowledge must be challenged. In this way, students adjust their ideas to more closely resemble actual theories or concepts. By using this method students gain the broad understanding they're taught and later are more willing to learn and keep the specifics of the concept or theory. This theory further aligns with the idea that teaching the concepts and the language of a subject should be split into multiple steps.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other informal learning theories look at the sources of motivation for learning. Intrinsic motivation may create a more self-regulated learner, yet schools undermine intrinsic motivation. Critics argue that the average student learning in isolation performs significantly less well than those learning with collaboration and mediation. Students learn through talk, discussion, and argumentation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Theodora Polito, \"every well-constructed theory of education [has] at [its] center a philosophical anthropology,\" which is \"a philosophical reflection on some basic problems of mankind.\" Philosophical anthropology is an exploration of human nature and humanity. Aristotle, an early influence on the field, deemed human nature to be \"rational animality,\" wherein humans are closely related to other animals but still set apart by their ability to form rational thought. Philosophical anthropology expanded upon these ideas by clarifying that rationality is, \"determined by the biological and social conditions in which the lives of human beings are embedded.\" Fully developed learning theories address some of the \"basic problems of mankind\" by examining these biological and social conditions to understand and manipulate the rationality of humanity in the context of learning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Philosophical anthropology is evident in behaviorism, which requires an understanding of humanity and human nature in order to assert that the similarities between humans and other animals are critical and influential to the process of learning. Situated cognition focuses on how humans interact with each other and their environments, which would be considered the \"social conditions\" explored within the field of philosophical anthropology. Transformative learning theories operate with the assumption that humans are rational creatures capable of examining and redefining perspectives, something that is heavily considered within philosophical anthropology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An awareness and understanding of philosophical anthropology contributes to a greater comprehension and practice of any learning theory. In some cases, philosophy can be used to further explore and define uncertain terms within the field of education. Philosophy can also be a vehicle to explore the purpose of education, which can greatly influence an educational theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Critics of learning theories that seek to displace traditional educational practices claim that there is no need for such theories; that the attempt to comprehend the process of learning through the construction of theories creates problems and inhibits personal freedom.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "45. Teaching for Transfer of Learning. Thomas, Ruth; National Center for Research in Vocational Education, Berkeley, CA.. 93 NCRVE, December 1992.", "qas": []}, {"context": "46. Perkins, D. (1992). Transfer of Learning. International Encyclopedia of Education, 2. Retrieved March 23, 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Long-term memory", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Long-term memory (LTM) is the stage of the Atkinson\u2013Shiffrin memory model where informative knowledge is held indefinitely. It is defined in contrast to short-term and working memory, which persist for only about 18 to 30 seconds. Long-term memory is commonly labelled as explicit memory (declarative), as well as episodic memory, semantic memory, autobiographical memory, and implicit memory (procedural memory).", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Miller, whose paper in 1956 popularized the theory of the \"magic number seven\", short-term memory is limited to a certain number of chunks of information, while long-term memory has a limitless store.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the dual store memory model proposed by Richard C. Atkinson and Richard Shiffrin in 1968, memories can reside in the short-term \"buffer\" for a limited time while they are simultaneously strengthening their associations in long-term memory. When items are first presented, they enter short-term memory, but due to its limited space, as new items enter, older ones are pushed out. However, each time an item in short-term memory is rehearsed, it is strengthened in long-term memory. Similarly, the longer an item stays in short-term memory, the stronger its association becomes in long-term memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1974 Baddeley and Hitch proposed an alternative theory of short-term memory: Baddeley's model of working memory. According to this theory, short-term memory is divided into different slave systems for different types of input items, and there is an executive control supervising what items enter and exit those systems. The slave systems include the phonological loop, the visuo-spatial sketchpad, and the episodic buffer (later added by Baddeley).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Long-term memory encodes information semantically for storage, as researched by Baddeley. In vision, the information needs to enter working memory before it can be stored into long-term memory. This is evidenced by the fact that the speed with which information is stored into long-term memory is determined by the amount of information that can be fit, at each step, into visual working memory. In other words, the larger the capacity of working memory for certain stimuli, the faster will these materials be learned.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Synaptic Consolidation is the process by which items are transferred from short-term to long-term memory. Within the first minutes or hours after acquisition, the engram (memory trace) is encoded within synapses, becoming resistant (though not immune) to interference from outside sources.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the process called that is transferred from short-term memory ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As long-term memory is subject to fading in the natural forgetting process, maintenance rehearsal (several recalls/retrievals of memory) may be needed to preserve long term memories. Individual retrievals can take place in increasing intervals in accordance with the principle of spaced repetition. This can happen quite naturally through reflection or deliberate recall (also known as recapitulation), often dependent on the perceived importance of the material. Using testing methods as a form of recall can lead to the testing effect, which aids long term memory through information retrieval and feedback.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some theories consider sleep to be an important factor in establishing well-organized long-term memories. \"(See also sleep and learning.)\" Sleep plays a key function in the consolidation of new memories.", "qas": [{"question": "what do some theories consider sleep to be an important factor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 7, 0)"}, {"question": "what does sleep play a key function in ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 7, 2)"}]}, {"context": "According to Tarnow's theory, long-term memories are stored in dream format (reminiscent of the Penfield & Rasmussen\u2019s findings that electrical excitations of the cortex give rise to experiences similar to dreams). During waking life an executive function interprets long-term memory consistent with reality checking . It is further proposed in the theory that the information stored in memory, no matter how it was learned, can affect performance on a particular task without the subject being aware that this memory is being used. Newly acquired declarative memory traces are believed to be reactivated during NonREM sleep to promote their hippocampo-neocortical transfer for long-term storage. Specifically new declarative memories are better remembered if recall follows Stage II non-rapid eye movement sleep. The reactivation of memories during sleep can lead to lasting synaptic changes within certain neural networks. It is the high spindle activity, low oscillation activity, and delta wave activity during NREM sleep that helps to contribute to declarative memory consolidation. In learning before sleep spindles are redistributed to neuronally active upstates within slow oscillations. Sleep spindles are thought to induce synaptic changes and thereby contribute to memory consolidation during sleep. Here, we examined the role of sleep in the object-place recognition task, a task closely comparable to tasks typically applied for testing human declarative memory: It is a one-trial task, hippocampus-dependent, not stressful and can be repeated within the same animal. Sleep deprivation reduces vigilance or arousal levels, affecting the efficiency of certain cognitive functions such as learning and memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The theory that sleep benefits memory retention is not a new idea. It has been around since Ebbinghaus's experiment on forgetting in 1885. More recently studies have been done by Payne and colleagues and Holtz and colleagues. In Payne and colleague's experiment participants were randomly selected and split into two groups. Both groups were given semantically related or unrelated word pairs, but one group was given the information at 9am and the other group received theirs at 9pm. Participants were then tested on the word pairs at one of three intervals 30 minutes, 12 hours, or 24 hours later. It was found that participants who had a period of sleep between the learning and testing sessions did better on the memory tests. This information is similar to other results found by previous experiments by Jenkins and Dallenbach (1924). It has also been found that many domains of declarative memory are affected by sleep such as emotional memory, semantic memory, and direct encoding.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the theory that sleep benefit memory skills ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Holtz found that not only does sleep affect consolidation of declarative memories, but also procedural memories. In this experiment fifty adolescent participants were taught either word pairs (which represents declarative memory) and a finger tapping task (procedural memory) at one of two different times of day. What they found was that the procedural finger tapping task was best encoded and remembered directly before sleep, but the declarative word pairs task was better remembered and encoded if learned at 3 in the afternoon.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the memory that can cause memory ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The brain does not store memories in one unified structure, as might be seen in a computer's hard disk drive. Instead, different types of memory are stored in different regions of the brain. Long-term memory is typically divided up into two major headings: explicit memory and implicit memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Explicit memory (declarative memory) refers to all memories that are consciously available. These are encoded by the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex, but consolidated and stored elsewhere. The precise location of storage is unknown, but the temporal cortex has been proposed as a likely candidate. Research by Meulemans and Van der Linden (2003) found that amnesiac patients with damage to the medial temporal lobe performed more poorly on explicit learning tests than did healthy controls. However, these same amnesiac patients performed at the same rate as healthy controls on implicit learning tests. This implies that the medial temporal lobe is heavily involved in explicit learning, but not in implicit learning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Declarative memory has three major subdivisions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Episodic memory refers to memory for specific events in time, as well as supporting their formation and retrieval. Some examples of episodic memory would be remembering someone's name and what happened at your last interaction with each other. Experiments conducted by Spaniol and colleagues indicated that older adults have worse episodic memories than younger adults because episodic memory requires context dependent memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Semantic memory refers to knowledge about factual information, such as the meaning of words. Semantic memory is independent information such as information remembered for a test. In contrast with episodic memory, older adults and younger adults do not show much of a difference in semantic memory, presumably because semantic memory does not depend on context memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Autobiographical memory refers to knowledge about events and personal experiences from an individual's own life. Though similar to episodic memory, it differs in that it contains only those experiences which directly pertain to the individual, from across their lifespan. Conway and Pleydell-Pearce (2000) argue that this is one component of the self-memory system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Implicit memory (procedural memory) refers to the use of objects or movements of the body, such as how exactly to use a pencil, drive a car, or ride a bicycle. This type of memory is encoded and it is presumed stored by the striatum and other parts of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia is believed to mediate procedural memory and other brain structures and is largely independent of the hippocampus. Research by Manelis, Hanson, and Hanson (2011) found that the reactivation of the parietal and occipital regions was associated with implicit memory. Procedural memory is considered non-declarative memory or unconscious memory which includes priming and non-associative learning.\nThe first part of nondeclarative memory (implicit memory) involves priming. Priming occurs when you do something faster after you have already done that activity, such as writing or using a fork.\nOther categories of memory may also be relevant to the discussion of long-term memory. For example:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Emotional memory, the memory for events that evoke a particularly strong emotion, is a domain that can involve both declarative and procedural memory processes. Emotional memories are consciously available, but elicit a powerful, unconscious physiological reaction. Research indicates that the amygdala is extremely active during emotional situations, and acts with the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in the encoding and consolidation of emotional events.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Working memory is not part of long-term memory, but is important for long-term memory to function. Working memory holds and manipulates information for a short period of time, before it is either forgotten or encoded into long-term memory. Then, in order to remember something from long-term memory, it must be brought back into working memory. If working memory is overloaded it can affect the encoding of long-term memory. If one has a good working memory they may have a better long-term memory encoding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Minor everyday slips and lapses of memory are fairly commonplace, and may increase naturally with age, when ill, or when under stress. Some women may experience more memory lapses following the onset of the menopause.\nIn general, more serious problems with memory occur due to traumatic brain injury or neurodegenerative disease.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The majority of findings about memory have been the result of studies that lesioned specific brain regions in rats or primates, but some of the most important work has been the result of accidental or inadvertent brain trauma. The most famous case in recent memory studies is the case study of HM, who had parts of his hippocampus, parahippocampal cortices, and surrounding tissue removed in an attempt to cure his epilepsy. His subsequent total anterograde amnesia and partial retrograde amnesia provided the first evidence for the localization of memory function, and further clarified the differences between declarative and procedural memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many neurodegenerative diseases can cause memory loss. Some of the most prevalent (and, as a consequence, most intensely researched) include Alzheimer's disease, dementia, Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and schizophrenia. None act specifically on memory; instead, memory loss is often a casualty of generalized neuronal deterioration. Currently, these illnesses are irreversible, but research into stem cells, psychopharmacology, and genetic engineering holds much promise.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Those with Alzheimer's disease generally display symptoms such as getting momentarily lost on familiar routes, placing possessions in inappropriate locations and distortions of existing memories or completely forgetting memories. Researchers have often used the Deese\u2013Roediger\u2013McDermott paradigm (DRM) to study the effects of Alzheimer's disease on memory. The DRM paradigm presents a list of words such as doze, pillow, bed, dream, nap, etc., with a theme word that is not presented. In this case the theme word would have been sleep. Alzheimer's disease patients are more likely to recall the theme word as being part of the original list than healthy adults. There is a possible link between longer encoding time and increased false memory in LTM. The patients end up relying on the gist of information instead of the specific words themselves. Alzheimer's leads to an uncontrolled inflammatory response brought on by extensive amyloid deposition in the brain, which leads to cell death in the brain. This gets worse over time and eventually leads to cognitive decline, after the loss of memory. Pioglitazone may improve cognitive impairments, including memory loss and may help protect long-term and visiospatial memory from neurodegenerative disease.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Parkinson's disease patients have problems with cognitive performance; these issues resemble what is seen in frontal lobe patients and can often lead to dementia. It is thought that Parkinson's disease is caused by degradation of the dopaminergic mesocorticolimbic projection originating from the ventral tegmental area. It has also been indicated that the hippocampus plays an important role in episodic and spatial (parts of LTM) memory and Parkinson's disease patients have abnormal hippocampuses resulting in abnormal functioning of LTM. L-dopa injections are often used to try to relieve Parkinson's disease symptoms as well as behavioral therapy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Schizophrenia patients have trouble with attention and executive functions which in turn affects long-term memory consolidation and retrieval. They cannot encode or retrieve temporal information properly, which causes them to select inappropriate social behaviors. They cannot effectively use the information they possess. The prefrontal cortex, where schizophrenia patients have structural abnormalities, is involved with the temporal lobe and also affects the hippocampus, which causes their difficulty in encoding and retrieving temporal information (including long-term memory).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Long-term memory, unlike short-term memory, is dependent upon the synthesis of new proteins. This occurs within the cellular body, and concerns the particular transmitters, receptors, and new synapse pathways that reinforce the communicative strength between neurons. The production of new proteins devoted to synapse reinforcement is triggered after the release of certain signaling substances (such as calcium within hippocampal neurons) in the cell. In the case of hippocampal cells, this release is dependent upon the expulsion of magnesium (a binding molecule) that is expelled after significant and repetitive synaptic signaling. The temporary expulsion of magnesium frees NMDA receptors to release calcium in the cell, a signal that leads to gene transcription and the construction of reinforcing proteins. For more information, see long-term potentiation (LTP).", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the newly synthesized proteins in LTP is also critical for maintaining long-term memory. This protein is an autonomously active form of the enzyme protein kinase C (PKC), known as PKM\u03b6. PKM\u03b6 maintains the activity-dependent enhancement of synaptic strength and inhibiting PKM\u03b6 erases established long-term memories, without affecting short-term memory or, once the inhibitor is eliminated, the ability to encode and store new long-term memories is restored.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also, BDNF is important for the persistence of long-term memories.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The long-term stabilization of synaptic changes is also determined by a parallel increase of pre- and postsynaptic structures such as axonal bouton, dendritic spine and postsynaptic density.\nOn the molecular level, an increase of the postsynaptic scaffolding proteins PSD-95 and Homer1c has been shown to correlate with the stabilization of synaptic enlargement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is a transcription factor which is believed to be important in consolidating short-term to long-term memories, and which is believed to be downregulated in Alzheimer's disease.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A couple of studies have had results that contradict the dual-store memory model. Studies showed that in spite of using distractors, there was still both a recency effect for a list of items and a contiguity effect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another study revealed that how long an item spends in short-term memory is not the key determinant in its strength in long-term memory. Instead, whether the participant actively tries to remember the item while elaborating on its meaning determines the strength of its store in long-term memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An alternative theory is that there is only one memory store with associations among items and their contexts. In this model, the context serves as a cue for retrieval, and the recency effect is greatly caused by the factor of context. Immediate and delayed free-recall will have the same recency effect because the relative similarity of the contexts still exist. Also, the contiguity effect still occurs because contiguity also exists between similar contexts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Latin declension", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Latin declension is the set of patterns according to which Latin words are declined, or have their endings altered to show grammatical case and gender. Nouns, pronouns, and adjectives are declined (verbs are conjugated), and a given pattern is called a declension. There are five declensions, which are numbered and grouped by ending and grammatical gender. For simple declension paradigms, visit the Wiktionary appendices:\nfirst declension, second declension, third declension, fourth declension, fifth declension. Each noun follows one of the five declensions, but some irregular nouns have exceptions.", "qas": [{"question": "how many declensions are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 0, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Adjectives are of two kinds: those like 'good' belong to the first and second declensions, using first-declension endings for the feminine, and second-declension for masculine and neuter. Other adjectives such as belong to the third declension. There are no fourth- or fifth-declension adjectives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pronouns are also of two kinds, the personal pronouns such as 'I' and 'you ()', which have their own irregular declension, and the third-person pronouns such as 'this' and 'that' which can generally be used either as pronouns or adjectivally. These latter decline in a similar way to the first and second noun declensions, but there are differences; for example the genitive singular ends in \"-\u012bus\" or \"-ius\" instead of \"-\u012b\" or \"-ae\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The cardinal numbers 'one', 'two', and 'three' also have their own declensions (\"\u016bnus\" has genitive \"-\u012bus\" like a pronoun), and there are also numeral adjectives such as 'a pair, two each', which decline like ordinary adjectives.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another word for `` -\u012bus '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A complete Latin noun declension consists of up to seven grammatical cases: nominative, vocative, accusative, genitive, dative, ablative and locative. However, the locative is limited to few nouns: generally names of cities, small islands and a few other words.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The case names are often abbreviated to the first three letters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Latin cases have usually been given in the order \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013(\u2013) in Britain and many Commonwealth countries since the publication of Benjamin Hall Kennedy's \"Latin Primer\" (1866). This order reflects the tendencies of different cases to share similar endings (see below). For a discussion of other sequences taught elsewhere, see below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, some didactic approaches or schools teach it in the order \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013 or \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013, the order also used before the Latin Primer by Benjamin Hall Kennedy. This order is used in \"The School and University Eton Latin Grammar\" (1861), with the ablative case always cited last, and a similar one is used in grammars of Ancient Greek (except without the ablative case, which does not occur in Greek), and has been retained by some modern didactic approaches to allow comparison of Latin and Greek.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It generally marks the sentence subject, or its attributes.\nHowever, there are other uses within the nominative case:\nOn this sentence, there is a denomination clause (\"R\u014dma\"), and a subject predicative clause (\"caput\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is used to address someone or something in direct speech. In English, this function is expressed by intonation or punctuation: \"\"Mary\", are you going to the store?\" or \"Mary!\" In most declensions, the vocative singular form is identical to the nominative singular form; for example, to say \"sailor!\" the noun has the vocative form \"nauta\". There are a few exceptions. For the masculine singular second declension nouns, \"-us\" and \"-ius\" become \"-e\" and \"-\u012b\", respectively. For example, becomes \"Brute\" (English \"Brutus!\"). Similarly, becomes \"Vergil\u012b\" (English \"Virgil!\"). However, nouns may preserve as \"-us\" and \"-ius\" in presence of imperative verbs (\"Ven\u012b huc, Brutus\"; or \"D\u012bc n\u014db\u012bs fabulam, Virgilius\") Finally, in Greek masculine first declension names becomes \"Aen\u0113\u0101\" (English \"Aeneas!\"). In the plural the vocative is always identical to the nominative. In this article, it is assumed the nominative and vocative cases always merge, unless if mentioned on the paradigm tables.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It generally marks the direct object of a transitive verb, that is, the object produced on the verb action.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, the accusative case may also have other functions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "It generally marks the noun name complement. In most of cases, there is a relation in which the noun is the possessor and the genitive case is the possessed object. The use of the genitive case can be divided between the adjectival and adverbial uses.\nUtica fuit\" :\"The first capital of the Province of Africa was Utica\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIt generally marks indirect object.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn Latin, the abltive case is the most flexible of all cases. It could said in resume that is is a complement of circustances, either of place, time, etc. Several uses of the ablative case can be translated as adverbs: \"cum celeritate\" (\"quickly\", literally \"with speed\"). The ablative case merges three Proto-indoeuropean cases: the separative case, the instrumental case and the locative case.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n\"Mark annoyed with his foot to Cornelia, who wanted to sleep\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIt expresses the place where an action is performed. In early Latin the locative case had extensive use, but in Classical Latin the locative case was very rarely used, applying only to the names of cities and small islands and to a few other isolated words. For this purpose, the Romans considered all the islands they would know (in most of cases, European islands) to be small except for Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Crete, Cyprus, Britain and Ireland; in general, small island cities like Ithaca and Th\u0113ra would be the only ones using the locative case. Much of the case's function had been absorbed into the ablative. In the first and second declension singular, the locative is identical to the genitive singular, and in the third declension singular it is identical to the dative singular. For plural nouns of all declensions, the locative is also identical to the ablative. The few fourth- and fifth-declension place names would also use the ablative form for the locative case. However, a few nouns use the locative instead of a preposition: \u2192 \"bell\u012b\" 'at war'; \u2192 \"dom\u012b\" 'at home'; \u2192 \"r\u016br\u012b\" 'in the country'; \u2192 \"hum\u012b\" 'on the ground'; \u2192 \"m\u012blitiae\" 'in military service, in the field'; \u2192 \"foc\u012b\" 'at the hearth', 'at the center of the community'. In archaic times, the locative singular of third declension nouns was interchangeable between the ablative and dative but, in the Augustan period, the use of the dative became fixed. The locative cannot express being located at multiple locations; plural forms only exist because certain proper names such as Ath\u0113nae happen to be plural (pluralia tantum). \"[He/She/It] is at home\" can be expressed by \"Est dom\u012b\" using the locative, but \"They are at their (individual and separate) homes\" cannot be expressed by the locative (\"Sunt in domibus su\u012b\"). Adjenctives do not have the locative form case.\nSyncretism, where one form in a paradigm shares the ending of another form in the paradigm, is common in Latin. The following are the most notable patterns of syncretism:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Old Latin had essentially two patterns of endings. One pattern was shared by the first and second declensions, which derived from the Proto-Indo-European thematic declension. The other pattern was used by the third, fourth and fifth declensions, and derived from the athematic PIE declension.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are two principal parts for Latin nouns: the nominative singular and the genitive singular. Each declension can be unequivocally identified by the ending of the genitive singular (-\"ae\", -\"i\", -\"is\", -\"\u016bs\", -\"ei\"). The stem of the noun can be identified by the form of the genitive singular as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are five declensions for Latin nouns:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nouns of this declension usually end in \"-a\" in the nominative singular and are mostly feminine, e.g. ('road') and ('water'). There is a small class of masculine exceptions generally referring to occupations, e.g. ('poet'), ('farmer') and ('sailor').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is \"a\". The nominative singular form consists of the stem and the ending \"-a\", and the genitive singular form is the stem plus \"-ae\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The locative endings for the first declension are \"-ae\" (singular) and \"-\u012bs\" (plural), similar to the genitive singular and ablative plural, as in ' 'in war' and ' 'at Athens'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first declension also includes three types of Greek loanwords, derived from Ancient Greek's Alpha Declension. They are declined irregularly in the singular, but sometimes treated as native Latin nouns, e.g. nominative ('athlete') instead of the original \"athl\u0113t\u0113s. Archaic (Homeric) first declension Greek nouns and adjectives had been formed in exactly the same way as in Latin: \"nephel\u0113ger\u00e9ta Zeus\" ('Zeus the cloud-gatherer') had in classical Greek become \"nephel\u0113ger\u00e9t\u0113s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For full paradigm tables and more detailed information, see the Wiktionary appendix First declension.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second declension is a large group of nouns consisting of mostly masculine nouns like ('horse') and ('boy') and neuter nouns like ('fort'). There are several small groups of feminine exceptions, including names of gemstones, plants, trees, and some towns and cities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the nominative singular, most masculine nouns consist of the stem and the ending \"-us\", although some end in \"-er\", which is not necessarily attached to the complete stem. Neuter nouns generally have a nominative singular consisting of the stem and the ending \"-um\". However, every second-declension noun has the ending \"-\u012b\" attached as a suffix to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is \"o\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The locative endings for the second declension are \"-\u012b\" (singular) and \"-\u012bs\" (plural); \"at Corinth\", \"at Milan\", and \"at Philippi\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nouns ending in \"-ius\" and \"-ium\" have a genitive singular in \"-\u012b\" in earlier Latin, which was regularized to \"-i\u012b\" in the later language. Masculine nouns in \"-ius\" have a vocative singular in \"-\u012b\" at all stages. These forms in \"-\u012b\" are stressed on the same syllable as the nominative singular, sometimes in violation of the usual Latin stress rule. For example, the genitive and vocative singular \"Vergil\u012b\" (from ) is pronounced \"Verg\u00edl\u012b\", with stress on the penult, even though it is short.. In Old Latin, however, the vocative was declined regularly, using \"-ie\" instead, e.g. \"f\u012blie\" \"[Oh] son\", archaic vocative of \"f\u012blius\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is no contraction of \"-i\u012b(s)\" in plural forms and in the locative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the older language, nouns ending with \"-vus\", \"-quus\" and \"-vum\" take \"o\" rather than \"u\" in the nominative and accusative singular. For example, ('slave') could be \"servos\", accusative \"servom\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some masculine nouns of the second declension end in \"-er\" or \"-ir\" in the nominative singular. For such nouns, the genitive singular must be learned to see if the \"e\" is dropped. For example, ('father-in-law') keeps its \"e\". However, the noun ('teacher') drops its \"e\" in the genitive singular. Nouns with \"-ir\" in the nominative singular, such as , never drop the \"i\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The declension of second-declension \"-r\" nouns is identical to that of the regular second declension, being the vocative suffix \"-e\" optional.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For declension tables of second-declension nouns, see the .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second declension contains two types of masculine Greek nouns and one form of neuter Greek noun. These nouns are irregular only in the singular, as are their first-declension counterparts. Greek nouns in the second declension are derived from the Omicron declension.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some Greek nouns may also be declined as normal Latin nouns. For example, can appear as \"the\u0101trum\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The inflection of ('god') is irregular. The vocative singular of \"deus\" is not attested in Classical Latin. In Ecclesiastical Latin the vocative of \"Deus\" ('God') is \"Deus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In poetry, \"-um\" may substitute \"-\u014drum\" as the genitive plural ending.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Latin word \"v\u012brus\" (the \"\u012b\" indicates a long \"i\") means \"1. slimy liquid, slime; 2. poison, venom\", denoting the venom of a snake. This Latin word is probably related to the Greek (\"ios\") meaning \"venom\" or \"rust\" and the Sanskrit word \"\" meaning \"toxic, poison\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since \"v\u012brus\" in antiquity denoted something uncountable, it was a mass noun. Mass nouns pluralize only under special circumstances, hence the non-existence of plural forms in the texts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is no known plural for this word in Classical Latin. It is unclear how a plural might have been formed under Latin grammar in ancient times if the word had acquired a meaning requiring a plural form. In Latin, \"v\u012brus\" is generally regarded as a neuter of the second declension, but neuter second declension nouns ending in \"-us\" (rather than \"-um\") are rare enough that inferring rules is difficult. (One of the rare attested plurals, \"pelage\" as a plural of \"pelagus\", is borrowed from Greek, so does not give guidance for \"virus\".) Plural neuter nouns of other declensions always end in \"-a\" (in the nominative, accusative and vocative).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Neo-Latin, a plural form is necessary in order to express the modern concept of \u2018viruses\u2019, which lead to the following declension:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If \"v\u012brus\" were a masculine second declension term like \"alumnus\", it would be correct to use \"v\u012br\u012b\" as its plural. However, it is neuter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There does exist a Latin word \"vir\u012b\", meaning \"men\" (the plural of \"vir\", a second declension masculine noun), but it has a short \"i\" in the first syllable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The form \"v\u012bri\u012b\" is impossible as a plural of ', since we only find the ending \"-i\u012b\" in the plural form of masculine and feminine words ending in \"-ius\". For instance, \"radius\" is pluralized by removing \"-us\", to isolate the stem \"radi-\", and then adding the plural suffix \"-\u012b\". Thus the \"-i\u012b\" ending of the resulting word ' is not a suffix: it is simply the consequence of adding the actual suffix \"\u012b\" to a stem that has an \"i\" as its last letter. \"V\u012bri\u012b\" would be the plural form of the putative, nonexistent word \"v\u012brius\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third declension is the largest group of nouns. The nominative singular of these nouns may end in \"-a\",\"-e\", \"-\u012b\", \"-\u014d\", \"-y\", \"-c\", \"-l\", \"-n\", \"-r\", \"-s\", \"-t\", or \"-x\". This group of nouns includes masculine, neuter, and feminine nouns. Examples are ('river'), ('flower'), and ('peace'). Each noun has the ending \"-is\" as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. Masculine, feminine and neuter nouns each have their own special nominative singular endings. For instance, many masculine nouns end in \"-or\" (, 'love'). Many feminine nouns end in \"-\u012bx\" (, 'phoenix'), and many neuter nouns end in \"-us\" with an \"r\" stem in the oblique cases ( 'burden'; 'time').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The locative endings for the third declension are \"-\u012b\" or \"-e\" (singular) and \"-ibus\" (plural), as in 'in the country' and 'at Tralles'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third declension also has a set of nouns that are declined differently. They are called \"i\"-stems. \"i\"-stems are broken into two subcategories: pure and mixed. Pure \"i\"-stems are indicated by the parisyllabic rule or special neuter endings. Mixed \"i\"-stems are indicated by the double consonant rule.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pure \"i\"-stems may exhibit peculiar endings in both singular and plural. Mixed \"i\"-stems employ normal (consonant) 3rd declension endings in the singular but \"i\"-stem endings in the plural.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rules for determining \"i\"-stems from non-\"i\"-stems and mixed \"i\"-stems should be thought of more as guidelines than rules: even among the Romans themselves, the categorization of a third-declension word as an \"i\"-stem or non-\"i\"-stem was quite fluid. The result is that many words that \"should\" be \"i\"-stems according to the parisyllabic and consonant stem rules actually are not, such as ('dog') or ('youth'). By the parisyllabic rule, \"canis\" should be a masculine \"i\"-stem and thus differ from the non-\"i\"-stems by having an extra \"-i-\" in the plural genitive form: *\"canium\". In reality, the plural genitive of \"canis\" is \"canum\", the form of a non-\"i\"-stem. This fluidity even in Roman times results in much more uncertainty in Medieval Latin, as scholars were trying to imitate what was fluid to begin with.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the third declension, there are four irregular nouns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fourth declension is a group of nouns consisting of mostly masculine words such as ('wave') and ('port') with a few feminine exceptions, including ('hand'). The fourth declension also includes several neuter nouns including ('knee'). Each noun has the ending \"-\u016bs\" as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is \"u\", but the declension is otherwise very similar to the third-declension \"i\" stems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the dative and ablative plural, \"-ibus\" is sometimes replaced with \"-ubus\". This is so for only a few nouns, such as , ('limbs').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The locative endings for the fourth declension are \"-\u012b\" (singular), and probably \"-\u016b\" (singular) as well; \"at [the] senate\", \"at home\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fifth declension is a small group of nouns consisting of mostly feminine nouns like ('affair, matter, thing') and \"di\u0113s, di\u0113\u012b\" ('day'; but in names of days). Each noun has either the ending \"-\u0113\u012b\" or \"-e\u012b\" as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nouns ending in \"-i\u0113s\" have long \"\u0113\u012b\" in the dative and genitive, while nouns ending in a consonant + \"-\u0113s\" have short \"e\u012b\" in these cases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The locative ending of the fifth declension was \"-\u0113\" (singular only), identical to the ablative singular, as in ('today').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first and second persons are irregular, and both pronouns are indeclinable for gender; and the third person reflexive pronoun s\u0113, su\u012b always refers back to the subject, regardless of whether the subject is singular or plural.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The genitive forms , , , , are used as complements in certain grammatical constructions, whereas , are used with a partitive meaning ('[one] of us', '[one] of you'). To express possession, the possessive pronouns (essentially adjectives) , , , are used, declined in the first and second declensions to agree in number and case with the thing possessed, e.g. \"pater meus\" 'my father', \"m\u0101ter mea\" 'my mother'. The vocative singular masculine of \"meus\" is \"m\u012b\": \"m\u012b Attice\" 'my dear Atticus'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The possessive adjective \"vester\" has an archaic variant, \"voster\"; similar to \"noster\".\nUsually, to show the ablative of accompaniment, would be added to the ablative form. However, with personal pronouns (first and second person), the reflexive and the interrogative, \"-cum\" is added onto the end of the ablative form. That is: 'with me', 'with us', 'with you', , and (sometimes ).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pronouns have also an emphatic form bi using the suffix \"-met\" (, /, , ), used in all cases, except by the genitive plural forms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In accusative case, the forms \"m\u0113m\u0113\" and \"t\u0113t\u0113\" exist as emphatic, but they are not widely used.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When 'his' or 'her' refers to someone else, not the subject, the genitive pronoun \"eius\" (as well as \"e\u014drum\" and \"e\u0101rum\") 'of him' is used instead of \"suus\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "When one sentence is embedded inside another with a different subject, \"s\u0113\" and \"suus\" can refer to either subject:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the third-person pronoun 'he', see below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Relative, demonstrative and indefinite pronouns are generally declined like first and second declension adjectives, with the following differences:", "qas": []}, {"context": "These differences characterize the pronominal declension, and a few special adjectives ( 'whole', 'alone', 'one', 'no', 'another', 'another [of two]', etc.) are also declined according to this pattern.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All demonstrative, relative, and indefinite pronouns in Latin can also be used adjectivally, with some small differences; for example in the interrogative pronoun, 'who?' and 'what?' are usually used for the pronominal form, and 'which?' for the adjectival form.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The weak demonstrative pronoun , , 'that' also serves as the third person pronoun 'he, she, it':", "qas": []}, {"context": "This pronoun is also often used adjectivally, e.g. \"is homo\" 'that man', \"ea pecunia\" 'that money'. It has no possessive adjective; the genitive is used instead: \"pater eius\" 'his/her father'; \"pater e\u014drum\" 'their father'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The pronoun or pronominal adjective means 'the same'. It is derived from \"is\" with the suffix \"-dem\". However, some forms have been assimilated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similar in declension is 'another'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The interrogative pronouns are used strictly for asking questions. They are distinct from the relative pronoun and the interrogative adjective (which is declined like the relative pronoun). Interrogative pronouns rarely occur in the plural. The plural interrogative pronouns are the same as the plural relative pronouns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Correlatives are the corresponding demonstrative, relative, interrogative, and indefinite forms of pronouns, pronominal adjectives, and adverbs. These are shown below:", "qas": []}, {"context": "First- and second-declension adjective are inflected in the masculine, the feminine and the neuter; the masculine form typically ends in \"-us\" (although some end in \"-er\", see below), the feminine form ends in \"-a\", and the neuter form ends in \"-um\". Therefore, some adjectives are given like .", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is important noticing that \"-ius\" ending adjectives use the vocative \"-ie\" (\"ebrie\", \"[Oh] drunk man\", vocative of \"ebrius\"), just as in Old Latin all \"-ius\" nouns did (\"f\u012blie\", \"[Oh] son\", archaic vocative of \"f\u012blius\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some first- and second-declension adjectives' masculine form end in \"-er\". As with second-declension \"-r\" nouns, some adjectives retain the \"e\" throughout inflection, and some omit it. omits its \"e\" while keeps it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nine first and second declension pronominal adjectives are irregular in the genitive and the dative in all genders. They can be remembered by using the mnemonic acronym \"\u016bnus nauta\". They are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Third-declension adjectives are normally declined like third-declension \"i\"-stem nouns, except for the fact they usually have \"-\u012b\" rather than \"-e\" in the ablative singular (unlike \"i\"-stem nouns, in which only pure i-stems have \"-\u012b\"). Some adjectives, however, like the one-ending ('old, aged'), have \"-e\" in the ablative singular, \"-um\" in the genitive plural, and \"-a\" in the nominative and accusative neuter plural.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These have a single nominative ending for all genders, although as usual the endings for the other cases vary. As with nouns, a genitive is given for the purpose of showing the inflection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Third-declension adjectives that have two endings have one form for the masculine and feminine, and a separate form for the neuter. The ending for the masculine and feminine is \"-is\", and the ending for the neuter is \"-e\". It is not necessary to give the genitive, as it is the same as the nominative masculine singular.\nThird-declension adjectives with three endings have three separate nominative forms for all three genders. Like third and second declension \"-r\" nouns, the masculine ends in \"-er\". The feminine ends in \"-ris\", and the neuter ends in \"-re\". The genitive is the same as the nominative feminine singular.\nAs in English, adjectives have superlative and comparative forms. For regular first and second declension and third declension adjectives with one or two endings, the comparative is formed by adding \"-ior\" for the masculine and feminine, and \"-ius\" for the neuter to the stem. The genitives for both are formed by adding \"-i\u014dris\". Therefore, they are declined in the third declension, but they are not declined as \"i\"-stems. Superlatives are formed by adding \"-issimus, -issima, -issimum\" to the stem and are thus declined like first and second declension adjectives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adjectives (in the first and second as well as third declensions) that have masculine nominative singular forms ending in \"-er\" are slightly different. As with normal adjectives, the comparative is formed by adding \"-ior\" to the stem, but for the superlative, \"-rimus\" is added to the nominative masculine singular.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some third declension adjectives with two endings in \"-lis\" in the masculine\u2013feminine nominative singular have irregular superlative forms. The following are the only adjectives that do.", "qas": []}, {"context": "First and second declension adjectives that end in \"-eus\" or \"-ius\" are unusual in that they do not form the comparative and superlative by taking endings at all. Instead, ('more') and ('most'), the comparative and superlative degrees of ('much, greatly'), respectively, are used.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many adjectives in \"-uus\", except those in \"-quus\" or \"-guus\", also follow this rule.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As in most languages, Latin has adjectives that have irregular comparatives and superlatives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several different kinds of numeral words in Latin: the two most common are cardinal numerals and ordinal numerals. There are also several more rare numerals, e.g., distributive numerals and adverbial numerals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All cardinal numerals are indeclinable, except ('one'), ('two'), ('three'), plural hundreds ('two hundred'), ('three hundred') etc., and ('thousand'), which have cases and genders like adjectives. is declined like a first- and second-declension pronoun with \"-\u012bus\" in the genitive, and \"-\u012b\" in the dative. is declined irregularly, is declined like a third-declension plural adjective, \"-cent\u012b\" ('hundred') numerals decline like first- and second-declension adjectives, and is invariable in the singular and declined like a third-declension \"i\"-stem neuter noun in the plural:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The existence of plural endings for \"\u016bnus\" might seem unnecessary; however, they are used with \"pluralia tantum\" nouns, e. g. \"\u016bna castra\" (one [military] camp), \"\u016bnae sc\u0101lae\" (one ladder).\nThe word ('both'), is declined like \"duo\" except that its \"o\" is long. Both declensions derive from the Indo-European dual number, otherwise defunct in Latin, rather than the plural.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The numeral ('one hundred') is indeclinable, but all the other hundred numerals are declinable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word \"m\u012blle\" 'thousand' is a singular indeclinable adjective. However, its plural, \"m\u012blia\", is a plural third-declension \"i\"-stem neuter noun. To write the phrase \"four thousand horses\" in Latin, the genitive is used: \"quattuor m\u012blia equ\u014drum\", literally, \"four thousands of horses\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rest of the numbers are indeclinable whether used as adjectives or as nouns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For further information on the different sets of Latin numerals, see Latin numerals (linguistics).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adverbs are not declined. However, adverbs must be formed if one wants to make an adjective into an adverb.", "qas": []}, {"context": "First and second declension adjectives' adverbs are formed by adding \"-\u0113\" onto their stems.\nTypically, third declension adjectives' adverbs are formed by adding \"-iter\" to the stem. However, most third declension adjectives with one ending simply add \"-er\" to the stem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adverbs' comparative forms are identical to the nominative neuter singular of the corresponding comparative adjective. Adverbs' superlative forms are simply formed by attaching the regular ending \"-\u0113\" to the corresponding superlative adjective. As with their corresponding adjectival forms, first and second declensions adjectives ending in \"-eus\" or \"-ius\" use and as opposed to distinct endings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As with adjectives, there are irregular adverbs with peculiar comparative and superlative forms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some nouns are only used in the singular (singulare tantum) such as:\nSome nouns are only used in the plural (plurale tantum) such as:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Indeclinable nouns are nouns which only have one form in all cases (of the singular).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Heterogeneous nouns are nouns which vary in respect to gender.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn modern textbooks of Latin, there is no single international standard for the sequence of cases.\nThis order reflects the syncretic trends of different cases to share similar endings. Usually the vocative and locative cases are omitted because they appear in the paradigm of only a few word classes and are dealt with separately. This makes the paradigm appear normally in the format \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013, which is also roughly the order of how frequently the cases appear in Latin text, meaning that the cases are introduced in teaching in this order. This paradigm has been the usual order in the United Kingdom and many Commonwealth countries since the publication of Benjamin Hall Kennedy's \"Latin Primer\" (1866). It is the only method nowadays used in Hungary and Finland. It is also usual in France, Spain, and Portugal.\nThis alternative sequence arose from Byzantine grammarians who were originally writing about Greek. It is standard in the United States, although modern texts increasingly move the vocative at the end to minimize disruption to the declensions in which it is identical to the nominative; some introductory texts such as \"Wheelock's Latin\" almost entirely ignore the vocative and locative except for a few brief notes, giving the format \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013(). This paradigm is also used in Poland, as it closely corresponds to the conventional case order in the Polish language, except for the latter's use of an instrumental case instead of an ablative. The same sequence is predominant in the Netherlands, although the modern Dutch language has largely lost its case system; instead, the rationale is that this general order is convenient for the consistent teaching of three different commonly studied declensional languages: Latin, Ancient Greek, and modern German. The order \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013()\u2013 is also used in Germany itself to echo the conventional order of German cases (\u2013\u2013\u2013), and also in Lithuania because the conventional order of Lithuanian noun cases is the same. The locative is dealt with separately as it is seldom used in Latin and might be considered to be on the verge of extinction in Classical Latin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The order \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013 is the standard order used in Greece (both for the teaching of Ancient and Modern Greek as well as Latin) and Italy (with the vocative case before the ablative). Here again, the locative is dealt with separately.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brazilian grammarian Napole\u00e3o Mendes used the unusual sequence \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013. The Latinum podcast uses \u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013\u2013, as this facilitates memorisation. Latinum deals with the locative separately.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Latin spelling and pronunciation", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Latin spelling, or Latin orthography, is the spelling of Latin words written in the scripts of all historical phases of Latin from Old Latin to the present. All scripts use the same alphabet, but conventional spellings may vary from phase to phase. The Roman alphabet, or Latin alphabet, was adapted from the Old Italic script to represent the phonemes of the Latin language. The Old Italic script had in turn been borrowed from the Greek alphabet, itself adapted from the Phoenician alphabet.\nThe Latin alphabet most resembles the Greek alphabet around 540 BC, as it appears on the black-figure pottery of the time.", "qas": [{"question": "latin and latin orthography is an example of what language ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the latin alphabet most similar to the greek alphabet ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 0, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Latin pronunciation continually evolved over the centuries, making it difficult for speakers in one era to know how Latin was spoken in prior eras. A given phoneme may be represented by different letters in different periods. This article deals primarily with modern scholarship's best reconstruction of Classical Latin's phonemes (phonology) and the pronunciation and spelling used by educated people in the late Republic. This article then touches upon later changes and other variants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The forms of the Latin alphabet used during the Classical period did not distinguish between upper case and lower case. Roman inscriptions typically use Roman square capitals, which resemble modern capitals, and handwritten text often uses old Roman cursive, which includes letterforms similar to modern lowercase.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the latin alphabet use during the classical period ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "This article uses small caps for Latin text, representing Roman square capitals, and long vowels are marked with acutes, representing apices. In the tables below, Latin letters and digraphs are paired with the phonemes they usually represent in the International Phonetic Alphabet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In ancient Latin spelling, individual letters mostly corresponded to individual phonemes, with three main exceptions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the tables below, Latin letters and digraphs are paired with the phonemes that they usually represent in the International Phonetic Alphabet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is a table of the consonant sounds of Classical Latin. Sounds in parentheses are allophones, sounds with an asterisk exist mainly in loanwords and sounds with a dagger (\u2020) are phonemes only in some analyses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latin has ten native vowels, spelled \"a\", \"e\", \"i\", \"o\", \"u\". In Classical Latin, each vowel had short and long versions: and . The long versions of the close and mid vowels \"e\", \"i\", \"o\", \"u\" had a different vowel quality from the short versions, so that long were similar to short . Some loanwords from Greek had the vowel \"y\", which was pronounced as by educated speakers but approximated with the native vowels \"u\" and \"i\" by less educated speakers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each vowel letter (with the possible exception of \"y\") represents at least two phonemes. \"a\" can represent either short or long , \"e\" represents either or , etc.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Short mid vowels () and close vowels () were pronounced with a different quality from their long counterparts, being also more open: , , and . This opening made the short vowels \"i u\" similar in quality to long \"\u00e9 \u00f3\" respectively. \"i \u00e9\" and \"u \u00f3\" were often written in place of each other in inscriptions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Short most likely had a more open allophone before and tended toward near-open .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Short and were probably pronounced closer when they occurred before another vowel. \"mea\" was written as \"mia\" in inscriptions. Short before another vowel is often written with \"i longa\", as in \"d\u012bes\", indicating that its quality was similar to that of long and is almost never confused with \"e\" in this position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"y\" was used in Greek loanwords with upsilon \u03a5. This letter represented the close front rounded vowel, both short and long: . Latin did not have this sound as a distinctive phoneme, and speakers tended to pronounce such loanwords with in Old Latin and in Classical and Late Latin if they were unable to produce .", "qas": []}, {"context": "An intermediate vowel sound (likely a close central vowel or possibly its rounded counterpart ), called \"sonus medius\", can be reconstructed for the classical period. Such a vowel is found in \"documentum\", \"optimus\", \"lacrima\" (also spelled \"docimentum\", \"optumus\", \"lacruma\") and other words. It developed out of a historical short , later fronted by vowel reduction. In the vicinity of labial consonants, this sound was not as fronted and may have retained some rounding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vowels followed by a nasal consonant were allophonically realised as long nasal vowels in two environments:\nThose long nasal vowels had the same quality as ordinary long vowels. In Vulgar Latin, the vowels lost their nasalisation, and they merged with the long vowels (which were themselves shortened by that time). This is shown by many forms in the Romance languages, such as Spanish \"costar\" from Vulgar Latin \"c\u014dst\u0101re\" (originally \"const\u0101re\") and Italian \"mese\" from Vulgar Latin \"m\u0113se\" (Classical Latin \"mensem\"). On the other hand, the short vowel and was restored in French \"enseigne\" and \"enfant\" from \"insignia\" and \"infantem\" (\"e\" is the normal development of Latin short \"i\"), likely by analogy with other forms beginning in the prefix \"in-\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "When a final \"-m\" occurred before a plosive or nasal in the next word, however, it was pronounced as a nasal at the place of articulation of the following consonant. For instance, \"tan d\u016brum\" was written for \"tam d\u016brum\" in inscriptions, and \"cum n\u014db\u012bs\" was a double entendre, possibly for \"cunn\u014d bis\" .", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"ae\", \"oe\", \"au\", \"ei\", \"eu\" could represent diphthongs: \"ae\" represented , \"oe\" represented , \"au\" represented , \"ei\" represented , and \"eu\" represented . \"ui\" sometimes represented the diphthong , as in \"cui\" and \"huic\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "If there is a tr\u00e9ma above the second vowel, both vowels are pronounced separately: \"a\u00eb\" , \"a\u00fc\" , \"e\u00fc\" and \"o\u00eb\" .", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Old Latin, \"ae\", \"oe\" were written as \"ai\", \"oi\" and probably pronounced as , with a fully closed second element, similar to the final syllable in French . In the late Old Latin period, the last element of the diphthongs was lowered to , so that the diphthongs were pronounced and in Classical Latin, similar to the diphthongs in English and . They were then monophthongized to and , starting in rural areas at the end of the Republican period. The process, however, does not seem to have been completed before the 3rd century AD in Vulgar Latin, and some scholars say that it may have been regular by the 5th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vowel and consonant length were more significant and more clearly defined in Latin than in modern English. Length is the duration of time that a particular sound is held before proceeding to the next sound in a word. Unfortunately, \"vowel length\" is a confusing term for English speakers, who, in their language, call \"long vowels\" what are usually diphthongs rather than monophthongs. (That is a relic of the Great Vowel Shift, during which vowels that had once been pronounced phonemically longer turned into diphthongs.) In the modern spelling of Latin, especially in dictionaries and academic work, macrons are frequently used to mark long vowels: , while the breve is sometimes used to indicate that a vowel is short: .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Long consonants were usually indicated through doubling, but ancient Latin orthography did not distinguish between the vocalic and consonantal uses of \"i\" and \"v\". Vowel length was indicated only intermittently in classical sources and even then through a variety of means. Later medieval and modern usage tended to omit vowel length altogether. A short-lived convention of spelling long vowels by doubling the vowel letter is associated with the poet Lucius Accius. Later spelling conventions marked long vowels with an apex (a diacritic similar to an acute accent) or, in the case of long i, by increasing the height of the letter (long i); in the second century AD, those were given apices as well. Distinctions of vowel length had become less important in later Latin and have ceased to be phonemic in the modern Romance languages, in which the previous long and short versions of the vowels have been either lost or replaced by other phonetic contrasts.\nA minimal set showing both long and short vowels and long and short consonants is \"\u0101nus\" ('buttocks'), \"annus\" ('year'), \"anus\" ('old woman').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The letters \"b\", \"d\", \"n\", \"f\", \"h\", \"m\", \"n\" are always pronounced as in English , , , , , respectively, and they do not usually cause any difficulties. The exceptions are mentioned below:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Old Latin, as in Proto-Italic, stress normally fell on the first syllable of a word. During this period, the word-initial stress triggered changes in the vowels of non-initial syllables, the effects of which are still visible in classical Latin. Compare for example:\nIn the earliest Latin writings, the original unreduced vowels are still visible. Study of this vowel reduction, as well as syncopation (dropping of short unaccented syllables) in Greek loan words, indicates that the stress remained word-initial until around the time of Plautus, the 3rd century BC. The placement of the stress then shifted to become the pattern found in classical Latin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Classical Latin, stress changed. It moved from the first syllable to one of the last three syllables, called the antepenult, the penult, and the ultima (short for \"antepaenultima\" 'before almost last', \"paenultima\" 'almost last', and \"ultima syllaba\" 'last syllable'). Its position is determined by the syllable weight of the penult. If the penult is heavy, it is accented; if the penult is light and there are more than two syllables, the antepenult is accented. In a few words originally accented on the penult, accent is on the ultima because the two last syllables have been contracted, or the last syllable has been lost.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To determine stress, syllable weight of the penult must be determined. To determine syllable weight, words must be broken up into syllables. In the following examples, syllable structure is represented using these symbols: C (a consonant), K (a stop), R (a liquid), and V (a short vowel), VV (a long vowel or diphthong).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Every short vowel, long vowel, or diphthong belongs to a single syllable. This vowel forms the syllable nucleus. Thus \"magistr\u0101rum\" has four syllables, one for every vowel (a i \u0101 u: V V VV V), \"aereus\" has three (ae e u: VV V V), \"tu\u014d\" has two (u \u014d: V VV), and \"cui\" has one (ui: VV).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A consonant before a vowel, or a consonant cluster at the beginning of a word, is placed in the same syllable as the following vowel. This consonant or consonant cluster forms the syllable onset.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After this, if there is an additional consonant inside the word, it is placed at the end of the syllable. This consonant is the syllable coda. Thus if a consonant cluster of two consonants occurs between vowels, they are broken up between syllables: one goes with the syllable before, the other with the syllable after.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are two exceptions. A consonant cluster of a stop \"p t c b d g\" followed by a liquid \"l r\" between vowels usually goes to the syllable after it, although it is also sometimes broken up like other consonant clusters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As shown in the examples above, Latin syllables have a variety of possible structures. Here are some of them. The first four examples are light syllables, and the last six are heavy. All syllables have at least one V (vowel). A syllable is heavy if it has another V or a VC after the first V. In the table below, the extra V or VC is bolded, indicating that it makes the syllable heavy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus, a syllable is heavy if it ends in a long vowel or diphthong, a short vowel and a consonant, a long vowel and a consonant, or a diphthong and a consonant. Syllables ending in a diphthong and consonant are rare in Classical Latin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The syllable onset has no relationship to syllable weight; both heavy and light syllables can have no onset or an onset of one, two, or three consonants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Latin a syllable that is heavy because it ends in a long vowel or diphthong is traditionally called \"syllaba n\u0101t\u016br\u0101 longa\" ('syllable long by nature'), and a syllable that is heavy because it ends in a consonant is called \"positi\u014dne longa\" ('long by position'). These terms are translations of Greek \"\u03c3\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03b1\u03b2\u1f74 \u03bc\u03b1\u03ba\u03c1\u03ac \u03c6\u03cd\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\" (\"syllab\u1e15 makr\u00e1 ph\u00fdsei\" = 'syllable long by nature') and \"\u03bc\u03b1\u03ba\u03c1\u1f70 \u03b8\u03ad\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\" (\"makr\u00e0 th\u00e9sei\" = 'long by proposition'), respectively; therefore \"positi\u014dne\" should not be mistaken for implying a syllable \"is long because of its position/place in a word\" but rather \"is treated as 'long' by convention\". This article uses the words \"heavy\" and \"light\" for syllables, and \"long\" and \"short\" for vowels since the two are not the same.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a word of three or more syllables, the weight of the penult determines where the accent is placed. If the penult is light, accent is placed on the antepenult; if it is heavy, accent is placed on the penult. Below, stress is marked by placing the stress mark before the stressed syllable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Iambic shortening or \"brevis brevians\" is vowel shortening that occurs in words of the type \"light\u2013heavy\", where the light syllable is stressed. By this sound change, words like \"eg\u014d\", \"mod\u014d\", \"ben\u0113\", \"am\u0101\" with long final vowel change to \"ego\", \"modo\", \"bene\", \"ama\" with short final vowel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where one word ended with a vowel (including a nasalized vowel, represented by a vowel plus \"m\") and the next word began with a vowel, the former vowel, at least in verse, was regularly elided; that is, it was omitted altogether, or possibly (in the case of and ) pronounced like the corresponding semivowel. When the second word was \"est\" or \"et\", a different form of elision sometimes occurred (prodelision): the vowel of the preceding word was retained, and the \"e\" was elided instead. Elision also occurred in Ancient Greek, but in that language, it is shown in writing by the vowel in question being replaced by an apostrophe, whereas in Latin elision is not indicated at all in the orthography, but can be deduced from the verse form. Only occasionally is it found in inscriptions, as in \"scriptust\" for \"scriptum est\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern usage, even for classical Latin texts, varies in respect of \"I\" and \"V\". During the Renaissance, the printing convention was to use \"I\" (upper case) and \"i\" (lower case) for both vocalic and consonantal , to use \"V\" in the upper case and in the lower case to use \"v\" at the start of words and \"u\" subsequently within the word regardless of whether and was represented.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many publishers (such as Oxford University Press) have adopted the convention of using \"I\" (upper case) and \"i\" (lower case) for both and , and \"V\" (upper case) and \"u\" (lower case) for both and .", "qas": []}, {"context": "An alternative approach, less common today, is to use \"i\" and \"u\" only for the vowels and \"j\" and \"v\" for the approximants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most modern editions, however, adopt an intermediate position, distinguishing between \"u\" and \"v\" but not between \"i\" and \"j\". Usually, the non-vocalic \"v\" after \"q\" or \"g\" is still printed as \"u\" rather than \"v\", probably because in this position it did not change from to in post-classical times.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Textbooks and dictionaries indicate the length of vowels by putting a macron or horizontal bar above the long vowel, but it is not generally done in regular texts. Occasionally, mainly in early printed texts up to the 18th century, one may see a circumflex used to indicate a long vowel where this makes a difference to the sense, for instance, \"Rom\u00e2\" ('from Rome' ablative) compared to \"Roma\" ('Rome' nominative). Sometimes, for instance in Roman Catholic service books, an acute accent over a vowel is used to indicate the stressed syllable. It would be redundant for one who knew the classical rules of accentuation and made the correct distinction between long and short vowels, but most Latin speakers since the 3rd century have not made any distinction between long and short vowels, but they have kept the accents in the same places; thus, the use of accent marks allows speakers to read a word aloud correctly even if they never heard it spoken aloud.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since around the beginning of the Renaissance period onwards, with the language being used as an international language among intellectuals, pronunciation of Latin in Europe came to be dominated by the phonology of local languages, resulting in a variety of different pronunciation systems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Latin words are used as loanwords in a modern language, there is ordinarily little or no attempt to pronounce them as the Romans did; in most cases, a pronunciation suiting the phonology of the receiving language is employed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latin words in common use in English are generally fully assimilated into the English sound system, with little to mark them as foreign, for example, \"cranium\", \"saliva\". Other words have a stronger Latin feel to them, usually because of spelling features such as the digraphs \"ae\" and \"oe\" (occasionally written as ligatures: \"\u00e6\" and \"\u0153\", respectively), which both denote in English. The digraph \"ae\" or ligature \"\u00e6\" in some words tend to be given an pronunciation, for example, \"curriculum vitae\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, using loan words in the context of the language borrowing them is a markedly different situation from the study of Latin itself. In this classroom setting, instructors and students attempt to recreate at least some sense of the original pronunciation. What is taught to native anglophones is suggested by the sounds of today's Romance languages, the direct descendants of Latin. Instructors who take this approach rationalize that Romance vowels probably come closer to the original pronunciation than those of any other modern language (see also the section below on \"Derivative languages\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, other languages\u2014including Romance family members\u2014all have their own interpretations of the Latin phonological system, applied both to loan words and formal study of Latin. But English, Romance, or other teachers do not always point out that the particular accent their students learn is not actually the way ancient Romans spoke.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of the central position of Rome within the Catholic Church, an Italian pronunciation of Latin became commonly accepted, but this was not the case until the latter part of the 19th century. This pronunciation corresponds to that of the Latin-derived words in Italian. Before then, the pronunciation of Latin in church was the same as the pronunciation as Latin in other fields and tended to reflect the sound values associated with the nationality of the speaker.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following are the main points that distinguish modern ecclesiastical pronunciation from Classical Latin pronunciation:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The letters \"b\", \"d\", \"n\", \"f\", \"m\", \"n\" are always pronounced as in English , , , , respectively, and they do not usually cause any difficulties. The exceptions are mentioned below:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn his \"Vox Latina: A guide to the Pronunciation of Classical Latin\", William Sidney Allen remarked that this pronunciation, used by the Catholic Church in Rome and elsewhere, and whose adoption Pope Pius X recommended in a 1912 letter to the Archbishop of Bourges, \"is probably less far removed from classical Latin than any other 'national' pronunciation\"; but, as can be seen from the table above, there are, nevertheless, very significant differences. The introduction to the \"Liber Usualis\" indicates that Ecclesiastical Latin pronunciation should be used at Church liturgies. The Pontifical Academy for Latin is the pontifical academy in the Vatican that is charged with the dissemination and education of Catholics in the Latin language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Outside of Austria and Germany, it is the most widely used standard in choral singing which, with a few exceptions like Stravinsky's \"Oedipus rex\", is concerned with liturgical texts. Anglican choirs adopted it when classicists abandoned traditional English pronunciation after World War II. The rise of historically informed performance and the availability of guides such as Copeman's \"Singing in Latin\" has led to the recent revival of regional pronunciations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because it gave rise to many modern languages, Latin did not strictly \"die\"; it merely evolved over the centuries in diverse ways. The local dialects of Vulgar Latin that emerged eventually became modern Italian, Spanish, French, Romanian, Portuguese, Catalan, Romansh, Dalmatian, Sardinian, and many others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Key features of Vulgar Latin and Romance languages include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe following examples are both in verse, which demonstrates several features more clearly than prose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Virgil's \"Aeneid\", Book 1, verses 1\u20134. Quantitative metre (dactylic hexameter). Translation: \"I sing of arms and the man, who, driven by fate, came first from the borders of Troy to Italy and the Lavinian shores; he [was] much afflicted both on lands and on the deep by the power of the gods, because of fierce Juno's vindictive wrath.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note the elisions in \"mult(um)\" and \"ill(e)\" in the third line. For a fuller discussion of the prosodic features of this passage, see Dactylic hexameter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some manuscripts have \"L\u0101v\u012bna\" rather than \"L\u0101v\u012bnia\" in the second line.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning of \"Pange Lingua Gloriosi Corporis Mysterium\" by Thomas Aquinas (13th century). Rhymed accentual metre. Translation: \"Extol, [my] tongue, the mystery of the glorious body and the precious blood, which the fruit of a noble womb, the king of nations, poured out as the price of the world.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "1. Traditional orthography as in Roman Catholic service books (stressed syllable marked with an acute accent on words of three syllables or more).", "qas": []}, {"context": "2. \"Italianate\" ecclesiastical pronunciation", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Latin conjugation", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Conjugation has two meanings. One meaning is the creation of derived forms of a verb from basic forms, or principal parts. It may be affected by person, number, gender, tense, mood, aspect, voice, or other language-specific factors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second meaning of the word conjugation is a group of verbs which all have the same pattern of inflections. Thus all those Latin verbs which have 1st singular -\u014d, 2nd singular -\u0101s, and infinitive -\u0101re are said to belong to the 1st conjugation, those with 1st singular -e\u014d, 2nd singular -\u0113s and infinitive -\u0113re belong to the 2nd conjugation, and so on. The number of conjugations of regular verbs is usually said to be four.", "qas": [{"question": "how many regular verbs are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 1, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The word \"conjugation\" comes from the Latin , a calque of the Greek syzygia, literally \"yoking together (horses into a team)\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "For simple verb paradigms, see the Wiktionary appendix pages for first conjugation, second conjugation, third conjugation, and fourth conjugation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ancient Romans themselves, beginning with Varro (1st century BC), originally divided their verbs into three conjugations (\"coniugationes verbis accidunt tres: prima, secunda, tertia\" \"there are three different conjugations for verbs: the first, second, and third\" (Donatus), 4th century A.D.), according to whether the ending of the 2nd person singular had an \"a\", an \"e\" or an \"i\" in it. However, others, such as Sacerdos (3rd century AD), Dositheus (4th century A.D.) and Priscian (c. 500 A.D.), recognised four different groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern grammarians generally recognise four conjugations, according to whether their active present infinitive has the ending -\u0101re, -\u0113re, -ere, or -\u012bre (or the passive equivalent of these), for example: (1) am\u014d, am\u0101re \"to love\", (2) vide\u014d, vid\u0113re \"to see\", (3) reg\u014d, regere \"to rule\" and (4) audi\u014d, aud\u012bre \"to hear\". There are also some verbs of mixed conjugation, having some endings like the 3rd and others like the 4th conjugation, for example, capi\u014d, capere \"to capture\" and orior, or\u012br\u012b \"to arise\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to regular verbs, which belong to one or other of the four conjugations, there are also a few irregular verbs, which have a different pattern of endings. The most important of these is the verb sum, esse \"to be\". There also exist deponent and semi-deponent Latin verbs (verbs with a passive form but active meaning), as well as defective verbs (verbs in which some of the tenses are missing).", "qas": [{"question": "how many vowel verbs are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 6, 0)"}, {"question": "what word describes deponent verbs ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 6, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The grouping in conjugations is based on the behaviour of the verb in the present system; the stems for other tenses cannot be inferred from the present stem, so several forms of the verb are necessary to be able to produce the full range of forms for any particular verb.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a dictionary, Latin verbs are therefore listed with four \"principal parts\" (or fewer for deponent and defective verbs) which allow the reader to deduce the other conjugated forms of the verbs. These are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The present infinitive active form tells you what conjugation the verb is in.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the verb of the verb sequence do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first conjugation is characterized by the vowel \"\u0101\" and can be recognized by the \"-\u0101re\" ending of the present active infinitive form. The principal parts usually adhere to one of the following patterns:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs in this conjugation all follow the pattern below, which is the passive of the first type above:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second conjugation is characterized by the vowel \"\u0113\", and can be recognized by the \"-e\u014d\" ending of the first person present indicative and the \"-\u0113re\" ending of the present active infinitive form. The principal parts usually adhere to one of the following patterns:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the second conjugation characterized by ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Deponent verbs in this conjugation are few. They mostly go like the passive of \"terre\u014d\", but \"fateor\" and \"confiteor\" have a perfect participle with \"ss\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third conjugation is characterized by a short thematic vowel, which alternates between \"e\", \"i\", and \"u\" in different environments. Verbs of this conjugation end in \"\u2013ere\" in the present active infinitive. There is no regular rule for constructing the perfect stem of third-conjugation verbs, but the following patterns are used:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs in the 3rd conjugation include the following:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Intermediate between the third and fourth conjugation are the third-conjugation verbs with suffix \"\u2013i\u014d\". These resemble the fourth conjugation in some forms. Some examples are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs in this group include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "They resemble the fourth conjugation in the following parts of the verb:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fourth conjugation is characterized by the vowel \"\u012b\" and can be recognized by the \"\u2013\u012bre\" ending of the present active infinitive. Principal parts of verbs in the fourth conjugation generally adhere to the following patterns:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs in the 4th conjugation include the following:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The verb \"orior, or\u012br\u012b, ortus sum\" (to arise) is also regarded as 4th conjugation, although some parts, such as the 3rd singular present tense \"oritur\" and imperfect subjunctive \"orerer\", have a short vowel like the 3rd conjugation. But its compound \"adorior\" (to rise up, attack) is entirely 4th conjugation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Personal endings are used in all tenses. The present, imperfect, future, pluperfect and future perfect use the same personal endings in the active voice. The perfect has its own endings. In the perfect, future perfect, and pluperfect passive, the tenses are formed from a perfect participle and the appropriate part of \"sum\", e.g. \"port\u0101tus sum\" 'I was carried'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third person plural alternative ending \"-\u0113re\" is common in poetry, but not often used in prose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 2nd person singular passive alternative ending \"-re\" can be used in the future and imperfect, but not usually in the present, where there might be confusion with the infinitive (\"port\u0101re\"). In early Latin \"-re\" was the most usual form.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The tenses of the present-tense system are the present, imperfect, and future tenses. As examples, the following verbs will be used here:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In all the conjugations except for the third conjugation, the \"'-re\" is removed from the second principal part (for example, \"port\u0101re\" without the suffix \"-re\" becomes \"port\u0101-\") to form the present stem, which is used for all of the tenses in the imperfective aspect. In the third conjugation, the \"-\u014d\" ending of the present indicative is dropped in order to form the present stem (for example, the present indicative form of \"petere\" is \"pet\u014d\", and without the \"-\u014d\" it is the present stem, \"pet\u2013\"). Occasionally, the terminating vowel of the stem is lengthened and/or shortened, and sometimes completely changed. This is often true both in the third conjugation and in the subjunctive mood of all conjugations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The present tense (Latin \"tempus praes\u0113ns\") is used to show an uncompleted action that happens in the current time. The present tense does not have a tense sign. Instead, the personal endings are added to the bare present stem. However, in this tense the thematic vowel, most notably the \"\u011b\" in the third conjugation, changes the most frequently.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A present tense like \"port\u014d\" can be translated as \"I carry,\" \"I do carry,\" or \"I am carrying\". In all but the third conjugation, the thematic vowel of the stem is used. In the third conjugation, the linking vowel varies between \"e\", \"i\" and \"u\". The first person singular of the indicative active present is the first principal part of the verb.\nThe passive voice \"portor\" can be translated as \"I am carried,\" or \"I am being carried\".\nThe present subjunctive \"portem\" can be translated as \"I may carry\", \"I would carry\", \"I should carry\", \"May I carry\", \"Let me carry\", or in subordinate clauses simply as \"I carry\". \"Port\u0113mus\" can be \"Let us carry\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The vowels of the verb endings in the present subjunctive differ from the indicative:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The passive subjunctive \"porter\" can be translated as \"I may be carried\", \"I would be carried\", \"I should be carried\", \"Let me be carried\", \"May I be carried\" or in subordinate clauses simply as \"I am carried\". \"Port\u0113mur\" can be \"Let us be carried\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The present imperative conveys commands, pleas and recommendations. \"Port\u0101\" can be translated as \"(You) Carry\" or simply, \"Carry\". The imperative present occurs only in the second person.\nThe imperative present of the passive voice is rarely used, except in the case of deponent verbs, whose passive forms carry active meaning. \"Port\u0101min\u012b\" can be translated as \"(You) Be carried\". The deponent \"sequimin\u012b\", on the other hand, means \"(You) Follow!\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The imperfect past (Latin \"tempus praeteritum imperfectum\") indicates a perpetual, but incomplete action in the past. It is recognized by the tense signs \"b\u0103\" and \"b\u0101\" in the indicative, and \"re\" and \"r\u0113\" in the subjunctive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The imperfect past indicative simply expresses an action in the past that was not completed. \"Port\u0101bam\" can be translated to mean, \"I was carrying,\" \"I carried,\" or \"I used to carry\".\nAs with the present tense, active personal endings are taken off, and passive personal endings are put in their place. \"Port\u0101bar\" can be translated as \"I was being carried,\" \"I kept being carried,\" or \"I used to be carried\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the subjunctive, the imperfect past is quite important, especially in subordinate clauses. Independently, it is largely translated conditionally. \"Port\u0101rem\" can mean, \"I should carry,\" or \"I would carry\".\nAs with the indicative subjunctive, active endings are removed, and passive endings are added. \"Port\u0101rer\" may be translated as \"I should be carried,\" or \"I would be carried.\"\nThe future tense (Latin \"tempus fut\u016brum simplex\") expresses an uncompleted action in the future. It is recognized by its tense signs \"b\u014d\", \"bi\", \"bu\", \"a\" and \"\u0113\" in the indicative and the vowel \"\u014d\" in the imperative mood.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The future tense always refers to an incomplete action. In addition, the future tense is stricter in usage temporally in Latin than it is in English. Standing alone, \"port\u0101b\u014d\" can mean, \"I shall carry,\" or \"I will carry.\"\nAs with all imperfective system tenses, active personal endings are removed, and passive personal endings are put on. \"Port\u0101bor\" translates as, \"I shall be carried.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The future imperative is used to instruct someone to do something at a later time, or if something else happens first (e.g. \"write (\"scr\u012bbit\u014d\") to me if anything happens\"). It can also be used in recipes. The 3rd person is mainly used in laws (e.g. \"censors shall hold (\"habent\u014d\") office for five years\"). A few verbs, such as \"mement\u014d\" \"remember\" and \"sc\u012bt\u014d\" \"know\", use this form as their only imperative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Port\u0101t\u014d\" can be translated as \"carry\" or \"you should carry\".\nThe ending \"-or\" marks the passive voice in the future imperative. \"Port\u0101tor\" translates as \"You shall be carried.\" The second person plural is exceptionally rare and only occurs in Plautus with select deponent verbs: \"arbitr\u0101min\u014d\", \"opper\u012bmin\u014d\", and not attested with any second conjugation verbs at all (Future passive imperative verbs would be possibly conjugated as \"port\u0101min\u014d\", \"terr\u0113min\u014d\", \"petimin\u014d\", \"capimin\u014d\", and \"aud\u012bmin\u014d\"; since they share similarities to the present passive imperative tense \"port\u0101min\u012b\", \"terr\u0113min\u012b\", \"petimin\u012b\", \"capimin\u012b\" and \"aud\u012bmin\u012b\"). \nThe tenses of the perfect past system, which are the perfect past, pluperfect past and future perfect past tenses, are used to express actions that have been, had been, or will have been completed. The verbs used for explanation are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "To find the stem for the three perfect tenses active in all of the conjugations, the \"-\u012b\" is removed from the 3rd principal part. For example, from \"port\u0101v\u012b\", \"port\u0101v-\" is formed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent and passive verbs, however, use the perfect past passive participle together with part of the verb \"esse\" \"to be\" to make the perfect tenses. The participle is formed by taking the 4th principal part and changing the ending to the appropriate gender and number, e.g. \"aud\u012btus est\" \"he was heard\", \"aud\u012bt\u012b sunt\" \"they were heard\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unlike the present-system tenses, inflection is the same in every conjugation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The perfect past (Latin \"tempus praeteritum perfectum\") refers to an action completed in the past. Tense signs are only used in this tense with the indicative. The tense signs of the subjunctive are \"eri\" and \"er\u012b\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The indicative past perfect expresses a finished action in the past. \"Port\u0101v\u012b\" is translated as \"I carried,\" \"I did carry,\" or \"I have carried.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the passive voice, the perfect past passive participle is used with the auxiliary verb \"esse\". It uses the present indicative form of \"esse\". \"Port\u0101tus sum\" translates as \"I was carried,\" or \"I have been carried.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note the participle changes from singular to plural when the subject changes respectively. The participle must also be declined for gender in the same way as an adjective.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like the imperfect past subjunctive, the perfect past subjunctive is largely used in subordinate clauses. Independently, it is usually translated as the potential subjunctive (\"quis crediderit?\" 'who would have believed it?/who would believe it?') With \"n\u0113\" it makes a negative command: \"n\u0113 timuer\u012btis\" \"do not fear\". In subordinate clauses such as indirect questions, \"port\u0101verim\" usually means \"I carried\" or \"I have carried\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The passive voice uses the perfect passive participle with the subjunctive present forms of \"esse\". \"Port\u0101tus sim\" means, \"I may have been carried.\"\nThe pluperfect past (Latin \"tempus praeteritum pl\u016bsquamperfectum\") expresses an action which was completed before another completed action. It is recognized by the tense signs \"era\" and \"er\u0101\" in the indicative and \"isse\" and \"iss\u0113\" in the subjunctive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As with English, in Latin, the pluperfect past indicative is used to assert an action that was completed before another (perfect). \"Port\u0101veram\" translates as \"I had carried.\"\nIn the passive voice, the perfect past passive participle is used with \"esse\" in the imperfect indicative. \"Port\u0101tus eram\" is translated as \"I had been carried.\"\nThe pluperfect past subjunctive is to the perfect past subjunctive as the imperfect past subjunctive is to the present subjunctive. Simply put, it is used with the perfect subjunctive in subordinate clauses. Like the imperfect past subjunctive, it is translated conditionally independently. \"Port\u0101vissem\" is translated as \"I should have carried,\" or \"I would have carried.\"\nAs always, the passive voice uses the perfect past passive participle. The imperfect subjunctive of \"esse\" is used here. \"Port\u0101tus essem\" may mean \"I should have been carried,\" or \"I could have been carried,\" in the conditional sense.\nProbably the least used of all the tenses, the future perfect past (Latin \"tempus fut\u016brum ex\u0101ctum\") conveys an action that will have been completed before another action. It is signified by the tense signs \"er\u014d\" and \"eri\". The future perfect is the only tense that occurs in a single mood.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As said, the future perfect past is used to mention an action that will have been completed in futurity before another action. It is often used with the future tense. In simple translation, \"port\u0101ver\u014d\" means, \"I will have carried,\" or \"I shall have carried.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Endings with short -i- (e.g. \"port\u0101veris, port\u0101verimus, port\u0101veritis\") are found in the 2nd singular and 1st and 2nd person plural in some authors, e.g. Terence, \"Eunuchus\" 592, but Cicero and Catullus preferred the form with long -i-, e.g. Catullus 5.10 (with Fordyce's note).", "qas": []}, {"context": "As with all perfective past aspect tenses, the perfect passive participle is used in the passive voice. However, the future perfect uses the future indicative of \"esse\" as the auxiliary verb. \"Port\u0101tus er\u014d\" is \"I will have been carried,\" or \"I shall have been carried.\"\nThe non-finite forms of verbs are participles, infinitives, supines, gerunds and gerundives. The verbs used are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are four participles: present active, perfect passive, future passive, and future active.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are six infinitives. They are in the present active, present passive, perfect active, perfect passive, future active and future passive.\nThe Future Passive Infinitive was actually not very commonly used (Wheelock's Latin mentions it exists but makes it a point to avoid using it in any practice examples). In practice, the Romans themselves often used an alternate expression, \"\"fore ut\"\" followed by a subjunctive clause.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The supine is the fourth principal part of the verb, as given in Latin dictionaries. It resembles a masculine noun of the fourth declension. Supines only occur in the accusative and ablative cases.\nThe gerund is formed similarly to the present active participle. However, the \"-ns\" becomes an \"-ndus\", and the preceding \"\u0101\" or \"\u0113\" is shortened. Gerunds are neuter nouns of the second declension, but the nominative case is not present. The gerund is a noun, meaning \"the act of doing (the verb)\", and forms a suppletive paradigm to the infinitive, which cannot be declined. For example, the genitive form \"portand\u012b\" can mean \"of carrying\", the dative form \"portand\u014d\" can mean \"to carrying\", the accusative form \"portandum\" can mean \"carrying\", and the ablative form \"portand\u014d\" can mean \"by carrying\", \"in respect to carrying\", etc.\nOne common use of the gerund is with the preposition \"ad\" to indicate purpose. For example, \"paratus ad oppugnandum\" could be translated as \"ready to attack\". However the gerund was avoided when an object was introduced, and a passive construction with the gerundive was preferred. For example, for \"ready to attack the enemy\" the construction \"paratus ad hostes oppugnandos\" is preferred over \"paratus ad hostes oppugnandum\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The gerundive has a form similar to that of the gerund, but it is a first and second declension adjective, and functions as a future passive participle (see above). It means \"(which is) to be ...ed\". Often, the gerundive is used with an implicit \"esse\", to show obligation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nFor some examples of uses of Latin gerundives, see the Gerundive article.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are two periphrastic conjugations. One is active, and the other is passive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first periphrastic conjugation uses the future participle. It is combined with the forms of \"esse\". It is translated as \"I am going to carry,\" \"I was going to carry\", etc.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second periphrastic conjugation uses the gerundive. It is combined with the forms of \"esse\" and expresses necessity. It is translated as \"I am to be carried,\" \"I was to be carried\", etc., or as \"I have to (must) be carried,\" \"I had to be carried,\" etc.\nThere are a few irregular verbs in Latin that are not grouped into a particular conjugation (such as \"esse\" and \"posse\"), or deviate slightly from a conjugation (such as \"ferre, \u012bre,\" and \"dare\"). It consists of the following list and their compounds (such as \"conferre\"). Many irregular verbs lack a fourth principal part.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Of these, \"esse\", \"ferre\", and \"fier\u012b\" are suppletive, that is, their deviating third and fourth principal parts reflect what was an entirely different verb historically (in Proto-Indo-European).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The various parts of these verbs go as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n\"Abe\u014d\" \"I go away\", \"ade\u014d\" \"I go up to\", \"rede\u014d\" \"I go back\" etc. have similar endings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs are verbs that are passive in form (that is, conjugated as though in the passive voice) but active in meaning. These verbs have only three principal parts, since the perfect of ordinary passives is formed periphrastically with the perfect participle, which is formed on the same stem as the supine. Some examples coming from all conjugations are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Deponent verbs use active conjugations for tenses that do not exist in the passive: the gerund, the supine, the present and future participles and the future infinitive. They cannot be used in the passive themselves (except the gerundive), and their analogues with \"active\" form do not in fact exist: one cannot directly translate \"The word is said\" with any form of \"loqu\u012b\", and there are no forms like \"loqu\u014d\", \"loquis\", \"loquit\", etc.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Semi-deponent verbs form their imperfective aspect tenses in the manner of ordinary active verbs; but their perfect tenses are built periphrastically like deponents and ordinary passives; thus, semi-deponent verbs have a perfect active participle instead of a perfect passive participle. An example:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unlike the proper passive of active verbs, which is always intransitive, some deponent verbs are transitive, which means that they can take an object. For example:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note: In the Romance languages, which lack deponent or passive verb forms, the Classical Latin deponent verbs either disappeared (being replaced with non-deponent verbs of a similar meaning) or changed to a non-deponent form. For example, in Spanish and Italian, \"m\u012br\u0101r\u012b\" changed to \"mirar(e)\" by changing all the verb forms to the previously nonexistent \"active form\", and \"aude\u014d\" changed to \"osar(e)\" by taking the participle \"ausus\" and making an \"-ar(e)\" verb out of it (note that \"au\" went to \"o\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Defective verbs are verbs that are conjugated in only some instances.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe following are conjugated irregularly:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Romance languages lost many of these verbs, but others (such as \"\u014dd\u012b\") survived but became regular fully conjugated verbs (in Italian, \"odiare\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Impersonal verbs are those lacking a person. In English impersonal verbs are usually used with the neuter pronoun \"it\" (as in \"It seems,\" or \"It storms\"). Latin uses the third person singular. These verbs lack a fourth principal part. A few examples are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third person forms of \"esse\" may also be seen as impersonal when seen from the perspective of English:", "qas": []}, {"context": "As stated, the future active participle is normally formed by removing the \"\u2013um\" from the supine, and adding a \"\u2013\u016brus.\" However, some deviations occur.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several verb forms may occur in alternative forms (in some authors these forms are fairly common, if not more common than the canonical ones):", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like in most Romance languages, syncopated forms and contractions are present in Latin. They may occur in the following instances:", "qas": []}, {"context": " \"Fut\u016brus esse\" is sometimes contracted as \"fore\" as seen in Caesar's \"De Bello Gallico\".\nThe archaic uncontracted form \"potesse\" occurs frequently in Lucretius.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louisa May Alcott", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Louisa May Alcott (; November 29, 1832March 6, 1888) was an American novelist and poet best known as the author of the novel \"Little Women\" (1868) and its sequels \"Little Men\" (1871) and \"Jo's Boys\" (1886). Raised in New England by her transcendentalist parents, Abigail May and Amos Bronson Alcott, she grew up among many of the well-known intellectuals of the day, such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry David Thoreau, and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alcott's family suffered from financial difficulties, and while she worked to help support the family from an early age, she also sought an outlet in writing. She began to receive critical success for her writing in the 1860s. Early in her career, she sometimes used the pen name A. M. Barnard, under which she wrote novels for young adults that focused on spies, revenge, and crossdressers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Published in 1868, \"Little Women\" is set in the Alcott family home, Orchard House, in Concord, Massachusetts, and is loosely based on Alcott's childhood experiences with her three sisters. The novel was very well received and is still a popular children's novel today, filmed several times.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist and remained unmarried throughout her life. She died from a stroke, two days after her father died, in Boston on March 6, 1888.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the occupation of alcott ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louisa May Alcott was born on November 29, 1832, in Germantown, which is now part of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on her father's 33rd birthday. She was the daughter of transcendentalist and educator Amos Bronson Alcott and social worker Abby May and the second of four daughters: Anna Bronson Alcott was the eldest; Elizabeth Sewall Alcott and Abigail May Alcott were the two youngest. The family moved to Boston in 1834, where Alcott's father established an experimental school and joined the Transcendental Club with Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Bronson Alcott's opinions on education and tough views on child-rearing shaped young Alcott's mind with a desire to achieve perfection, a goal of the transcendentalists. His attitudes towards Alcott's wild and independent behavior, and his inability to provide for his family, created conflict between Bronson Alcott and his wife and daughters.", "qas": [{"question": "when was peirce born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1840, after several setbacks with the school, the Alcott family moved to a cottage on of land, situated along the Sudbury River in Concord, Massachusetts. The three years they spent at the rented Hosmer Cottage were described as idyllic. By 1843, the Alcott family moved, along with six other members of the Consociate Family, to the Utopian Fruitlands community for a brief interval in 1843\u20131844. After the collapse of the Utopian Fruitlands, they moved on to rented rooms and finally, with Abigail May Alcott's inheritance and financial help from Emerson, they purchased a homestead in Concord. They moved into the home they named \"Hillside\" on April 1, 1845, but moved in 1852, selling to Nathaniel Hawthorne who renamed it The Wayside. Moving 22 times in 30 years, the Alcotts returned to Concord once again in 1857 and moved into Orchard House, a two-story clapboard farmhouse, in the spring of 1858.\nAlcott's early education included lessons from the naturalist Henry David Thoreau who inspired her to write \"Thoreau's Flute\" based on her time at Walden's Pond. Most of the education she received though, came from her father who was strict and believed in \"the sweetness of self-denial.\" She also received some instruction from writers and educators such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Margaret Fuller, and Julia Ward Howe, all of whom were family friends. She later described these early years in a newspaper sketch entitled \"Transcendental Wild Oats.\" The sketch was reprinted in the volume \"Silver Pitchers\" (1876), which relates the family's experiment in \"plain living and high thinking\" at Fruitlands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Poverty made it necessary for Alcott to go to work at an early age as a teacher, seamstress, governess, domestic helper, and writer. Her sisters also supported the family, working as seamstresses, while their mother took on social work among the Irish immigrants. Only the youngest, May, was able to attend public school. Due to all of these pressures, writing became a creative and emotional outlet for Alcott. Her first book was \"Flower Fables\" (1849), a selection of tales originally written for Ellen Emerson, daughter of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Alcott is quoted as saying \"I wish I was rich, I was good, and we were all a happy family this day\" and was driven in life not to be poor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1847, she and her family served as station masters on the Underground Railroad, when they housed a fugitive slave for one week and had discussions with Frederick Douglass. Alcott read and admired the \"Declaration of Sentiments\", published by the Seneca Falls Convention on women's rights, advocating for women's suffrage and became the first woman to register to vote in Concord, Massachusetts in a school board election. The 1850s were hard times for the Alcotts, and in 1854 Louisa found solace at the Boston Theatre where she wrote The Rival Prima Donnas, which she later burned due to a quarrel between the actresses on who would play what role. At one point in 1857, unable to find work and filled with such despair, Alcott contemplated suicide. During that year, she read Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of Charlotte Bront\u00eb and found many parallels to her own life. In 1858, her younger sister Elizabeth died, and her older sister Anna married a man named John Pratt. This felt, to Alcott, to be a breaking up of their sisterhood.", "qas": [{"question": "to whom did peirce think was a break up of their sisterhood ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 7, 6)"}]}, {"context": "As an adult, Alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist. In 1860, Alcott began writing for the \"Atlantic Monthly\". When the American Civil War broke out, she served as a nurse in the Union Hospital at Georgetown, DC, for six weeks in 1862\u20131863. She intended to serve three months as a nurse, but halfway through she contracted typhoid and became deathly ill, though she eventually recovered. Her letters homerevised and published in the Boston anti-slavery paper \"Commonwealth\" and collected as \"Hospital Sketches\" (1863, republished with additions in 1869)brought her first critical recognition for her observations and humor. She wrote about the mismanagement of hospitals and the indifference and callousness of some of the surgeons she encountered. Her main character, Tribulation Periwinkle, showed a passage from innocence to maturity and is a \"serious and eloquent witness\". Her novel \"Moods\" (1864), based on her own experience, was also promising.", "qas": [{"question": "what was an adult 's occupation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the mid-1860s, Alcott wrote passionate, fiery novels and sensational stories under the nom de plume A. M. Barnard. Among these are \"A Long Fatal Love Chase\" and \"Pauline's Passion and Punishment\". Her protagonists for these books are strong and smart. She also produced stories for children, and after they became popular, she did not go back to writing for adults. Other books she wrote are the novelette \"A Modern Mephistopheles\" (1875), which people thought Julian Hawthorne wrote, and the semi-autobiographical novel \"Work\" (1873).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alcott became even more successful with the first part of \"Little Women: or Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy\" (1868), a semi-autobiographical account of her childhood with her sisters in Concord, Massachusetts, published by the Roberts Brothers. Part two, or \"Part Second\", also known as \"Good Wives\" (1869), followed the March sisters into adulthood and marriage. \"Little Men\" (1871) detailed Jo's life at the Plumfield School that she founded with her husband Professor Bhaer at the conclusion of Part Two of \"Little Women\". \"Jo's Boys\" (1886) completed the \"March Family Saga\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Little Women\", Alcott based her heroine \"Jo\" on herself. But whereas Jo marries at the end of the story, Alcott remained single throughout her life. She explained her \"spinsterhood\" in an interview with Louise Chandler Moulton, \"I am more than half-persuaded that I am a man's soul put by some freak of nature into a woman's body ... because I have fallen in love with so many pretty girls and never once the least bit with any man.\" However, Alcott's romance while in Europe with the young Polish man Ladislas \"Laddie\" Wisniewski was detailed in her journals but then deleted by Alcott herself before her death. Alcott identified Laddie as the model for Laurie in \"Little Women\". Likewise, every character seems to be paralleled to some extent, from Beth's death mirroring Lizzie's to Jo's rivalry with the youngest, Amy, as Alcott felt a sort of rivalry for (Abigail) May, at times. Though Alcott never married, she did take in May's daughter, Louisa, after May's death in 1879 from childbed fever, caring for little \"Lulu\" until her death.", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote `` little woman '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"Little Women\" was well received, with critics and audiences finding it suitable for many age groups. A reviewer of \"Eclectic Magazine\" called it \"the very best of books to reach the hearts of the young of any age from six to sixty\". It was a fresh, natural representation of daily life. With the success of \"Little Women\", Alcott shied away from the attention and would sometimes act as a servant when fans would come to her house.\nAlong with Elizabeth Stoddard, Rebecca Harding Davis, Anne Moncure Crane, and others, Alcott was part of a group of female authors during the Gilded Age, who addressed women's issues in a modern and candid manner. Their works were, as one newspaper columnist of the period commented, \"among the decided 'signs of the times'\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "After her youngest sister May died in 1879, Louisa took over for the care of niece, Lulu, who was named after Louisa. Alcott suffered chronic health problems in her later years, including vertigo. She and her earliest biographers attributed her illness and death to mercury poisoning. During her American Civil War service, Alcott contracted typhoid fever and was treated with a compound containing mercury. Recent analysis of Alcott's illness, however, suggests that her chronic health problems may have been associated with an autoimmune disease, not mercury exposure. Moreover, a late portrait of Alcott shows a rash on her cheeks, which is a characteristic of lupus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alcott died of a stroke at age 55 in Boston, on March 6, 1888, two days after her father's death. Lulu, her niece was only 8 years old when Louisa died. Louisa's last known words were \"Is it not meningitis?\" She is buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord, near Emerson, Hawthorne, and Thoreau, on a hillside now known as \"Authors' Ridge\".", "qas": [{"question": "how old was peirce when she died ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louisa frequently wrote in her journals about going on runs up until she died. She challenged the social norms regarding gender by encouraging her young female readers to run as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Her Boston home is featured on the Boston Women's Heritage Trail. Her childhood home Orchard House is now a museum that pays homage to Louisa May Alcott and her family that focuses on education. In addition, Harriet Reisen wrote \"Louisa May Alcott: The Woman Behind \"Little Women\"\" which later became a film that was directed by Nancy Porter and aired on PBS television. In 1996 Alcott was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.", "qas": [{"question": "when was alcott inducted into the national women's hall of fame ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 16, 3)"}]}, {"context": "There is a Part Second of \"Little Women\", also known as \"Good Wives\", published in 1869; and afterward published together with \"Little Women\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sources\nArchival Materials", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "LALR parser", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In computer science, an LALR parser or Look-Ahead LR parser is a simplified version of a canonical LR parser, to parse (separate and analyze) a text according to a set of production rules specified by a formal grammar for a computer language. (\"LR\" means left-to-right, rightmost derivation.)", "qas": [{"question": "what is a unicode ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The LALR parser was invented by Frank DeRemer in his 1969 PhD dissertation, \"Practical Translators for LR(k) languages\", in his treatment of the practical difficulties at that time of implementing LR(1) parsers. He showed that the LALR parser has more language recognition power than the LR(0) parser, while requiring the same number of states as the LR(0) parser for a language that can be recognized by both parsers. This makes the LALR parser a memory-efficient alternative to the LR(1) parser for languages that are LALR. It was also proven that there exist LR(1) languages that are not LALR. Despite this weakness, the power of the LALR parser is sufficient for many mainstream computer languages, including Java, though the reference grammars for many languages fail to be LALR due to being ambiguous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The original dissertation gave no algorithm for constructing such a parser given a formal grammar. The first algorithms for LALR parser generation were published in 1973. In 1982, DeRemer and Tom Pennello published an algorithm that generated highly memory-efficient LALR parsers. LALR parsers can be automatically generated from a grammar by an LALR parser generator such as Yacc or GNU Bison. The automatically generated code may be augmented by hand-written code to augment the power of the resulting parser.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1965, Donald Knuth invented the LR parser (Left to Right, Rightmost derivation). The LR parser can recognize any deterministic context-free language in linear-bounded time. Rightmost derivation has very large memory requirements and implementing an LR parser was impractical due to the limited memory of computers at that time. To address this shortcoming, in 1969, Frank DeRemer proposed two simplified versions of the LR parser, namely the Look-Ahead LR (LALR) and the Simple LR parser that had much lower memory requirements at the cost of less language-recognition power, with the LALR parser being the most-powerful alternative. In 1977, memory optimizations for the LR parser were invented but still the LR parser was less memory-efficient than the simplified alternatives.", "qas": [{"question": "in 1977, memory , what was the lr parser ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 3, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In 1979, Frank DeRemer and Tom Pennello announced a series of optimizations for the LALR parser that would further improve its memory efficiency. Their work was published in 1982.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Generally, the LALR parser refers to the LALR(1) parser, just as the LR parser generally refers to the LR(1) parser. The \"(1)\" denotes one-token lookahead, to resolve differences between rule patterns during parsing. Similarly, there is an LALR(2) parser with two-token lookahead, and LALR(\"k\") parsers with \"k\"-token lookup, but these are rare in actual use. The LALR parser is based on the LR(0) parser, so it can also be denoted LALR(1)\u00a0=\u00a0LA(1)LR(0) (1 token of lookahead, LR(0)) or more generally LALR(\"k\")\u00a0=\u00a0LA(\"k\")LR(0) (k tokens of lookahead, LR(0)). There is in fact a two-parameter family of LA(\"k\")LR(\"j\") parsers for all combinations of \"j\" and \"k\", which can be derived from the LR(\"j\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"k\") parser, but these do not see practical use.", "qas": [{"question": "what refers to the lalr ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As with other types of LR parsers, an LALR parser is quite efficient at finding the single correct bottom-up parse in a single left-to-right scan over the input stream, because it does not need to use backtracking. Being a lookahead parser by definition, it always uses a lookahead, with being the most-common case.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The LALR(1) parser is less powerful than the LR(1) parser, and more powerful than the SLR(1) parser, though they all use the same production rules. The simplification that the LALR parser introduces consists in merging rules that have identical kernel item sets, because during the LR(0) state-construction process the lookaheads are not known. This reduces the power of the parser because not knowing the lookahead symbols can confuse the parser as to which grammar rule to pick next, resulting in reduce/reduce conflicts. All conflicts that arise in applying a LALR(1) parser to an unambiguous LR(1) grammar are reduce/reduce conflicts. The SLR(1) parser performs further merging, which introduces additional conflicts.", "qas": [{"question": "what is less powerful than the lr ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The standard example of an LR(1) grammar that cannot be parsed with the LALR(1) parser, exhibiting such a reduce/reduce conflict, is:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the standard example of an lr ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the LALR table construction, two states will be merged into one state and later the lookaheads will be found to be ambiguous. The one state with lookaheads is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "An LR(1) parser will create two different states (with non-conflicting lookaheads), neither of which is ambiguous. In an LALR parser this one state has conflicting actions (given lookahead c or d, reduce to E or F), a \"reduce/reduce conflict\"; the above grammar will be declared ambiguous by a LALR parser generator and conflicts will be reported.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To recover, this ambiguity is resolved by choosing E, because it occurs before F in the grammar. However, the resultant parser will not be able to recognize the valid input sequence codice_1, since the ambiguous sequence codice_2 is reduced to codice_3, rather than the correct codice_4, but codice_5 is not in the grammar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The LALR(\"j\") parsers are incomparable with LL(\"k\") parsers: for any \"j\" and \"k\" both greater than 0, there are LALR(\"j\") grammars that are not LL(\"k\") grammars and conversely. In fact, it is undecidable whether a given LL(1) grammar is LALR(\"k\") for any formula_1.", "qas": [{"question": "what are not ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Depending on the presence of empty derivations, a LL(1) grammar can be equal to a SLR(1) or a LALR(1) grammar. If the LL(1) grammar has no empty derivations it is SLR(1) and if all symbols with empty derivations have non-empty derivations it is LALR(1). If symbols having only an empty derivation exist, the grammar may or may not be LALR(1).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Language center", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The term language center or language centre (or more accurately centers, e.g. Broca's area and Wernicke's area) refers to the areas of the brain which serve a particular function for speech processing and production.", "qas": [{"question": "what does wernicke's area refer to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "New medical imaging techniques such as PET and fMRI have allowed researchers to generate pictures showing which areas of a living brain are active at a given time. In the past, research was primarily based on observations of loss of ability resulting from damage to the cerebral cortex. Indeed, medical imaging has represented a radical step forward for research on speech processing. Since then, a whole series of relatively large areas of the brain have been found to be involved in speech processing. In more recent research, subcortical regions (those lying below the cerebral cortex such as the putamen and the caudate nucleus) as well as the pre-motor areas (BA 6) have received increased attention. It is now generally assumed that the following structures of the cerebral cortex near the primary and secondary auditory cortices play a fundamental role in speech processing:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe left hemisphere is usually dominant in right-handed people, although bilateral activations are not uncommon in the area of syntactic processing. It is now accepted that the right hemisphere plays an important role in the processing of suprasegmental acoustic features like prosody.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most areas of speech processing develop in the second year of life in the dominant half (hemisphere) of the brain, which often (though not necessarily) corresponds to the opposite of the dominant hand. 98% of right-handed people are left-hemisphere dominant, and the majority of left-handed people as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The differentiation of speech production into only two large sections of the brain (i.e. Broca's and Wernicke's areas), accepted long before the advent of medical imaging techniques, is now considered outdated. Broca's Area was first suggested to play a role in speech function by the French neurologist and anthropologist Paul Broca in 1861. The basis for this discovery was analysis of speech problems resulting from injuries to this region of the brain, located in the inferior frontal gyrus. Lesions to Broca's Area resulted primarily in disruptions to speech production. Damage to Wernicke's Area, which is located in the lower part of the temporal lobe, lead mainly to disruptions in speech reception. This area was named for German doctor Carl Wernicke, who discovered it in 1874 in the course of his research into aphasias (loss of ability to speak).", "qas": [{"question": "how many sections of the brain are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Broca's Area is today still considered an important language center, playing a central role in processing syntax, grammar, and sentence structure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In summary, these early research efforts demonstrated that semantic and structural speech production takes place in different areas of the brain.", "qas": [{"question": "in what part of the brain does conceptual and structural speech take place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lift (force)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A fluid flowing past the surface of a body exerts a force on it. Lift is the component of this force that is perpendicular to the oncoming flow direction. It contrasts with the drag force, which is the component of the force parallel to the flow direction. Lift conventionally acts in an upward direction in order to counter the force of gravity, but it can act in any direction at right angles to the flow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If the surrounding fluid is air, the force is called an aerodynamic force. In water or any other liquid, it is called a hydrodynamic force.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dynamic lift is distinguished from other kinds of lift in fluids. Aerostatic lift or buoyancy, in which an internal fluid is lighter than the surrounding fluid, does not require movement and is used by balloons, blimps, dirigibles, boats, and submarines. Planing lift, in which only the lower portion of the body is immersed in a liquid flow, is used by motorboats, surfboards, and water-skis.", "qas": [{"question": "what is unique lift distinguished from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A fluid flowing past the surface of a body exerts a force on it. It makes no difference whether the fluid is flowing past a stationary body or the body is moving through a stationary volume of fluid. Lift is the component of this force that is perpendicular to the oncoming flow direction. Lift is always accompanied by a drag force, which is the component of the surface force parallel to the flow direction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lift is most commonly associated with the wings of fixed-wing aircraft, although it is more generally generated by many other streamlined bodies such as propellers, kites, helicopter rotors, racing car wings, maritime sails, and wind turbines in air, and by sailboat keels, ship's rudders, and hydrofoils in water. Lift is also exploited in the animal world, especially by birds, bats, and insects, and even in the plant world by the seeds of certain trees.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the common meaning of the word \"lift\" assumes that lift opposes weight, lift can be in any direction with respect to gravity, since it is defined with respect to the direction of flow rather than to the direction of gravity. When an aircraft is cruising in straight and level flight, most of the lift opposes gravity. However, when an aircraft is climbing, descending, or banking in a turn the lift is tilted with respect to the vertical. Lift may also act as downforce in some aerobatic manoeuvres, or on the wing on a racing car. Lift may also be largely horizontal, for instance on a sailing ship.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lift discussed in this article is mainly in relation to airfoils, although marine hydrofoils and propellers share the same physical principles and work in the same way, despite differences between air and water such as density, compressibility, and viscosity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An airfoil is a streamlined shape that is capable of generating significantly more lift than drag. A flat plate can generate lift, but not as much as a streamlined airfoil, and with somewhat higher drag.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a streamlined shape capable of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There are several ways to explain how an airfoil generates lift. Some are more complicated or more physically rigorous than others; some have been shown to be incorrect. For example, there are explanations based directly on Newton\u2019s laws of motion and explanations based on Bernoulli\u2019s principle. Either can be used to explain lift.", "qas": [{"question": "what is one way to describe a airfoil ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "what can be used to explain lift ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 8, 3)"}]}, {"context": "An airfoil generates lift by exerting a downward force on the air as it flows past. According to Newton's third law, the air must exert an equal and opposite (upward) force on the airfoil, which is lift.", "qas": [{"question": "how does an airfoil handle lift ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The airflow changes direction as it passes the airfoil and follows a path that is curved downward. According to Newton's second law, this change in flow direction requires a downward force applied to the air by the airfoil. Then Newton's third law requires the air to exert an upward force on the airfoil; thus a reaction force, lift, is generated opposite to the directional change. In the case of an airplane wing, the wing exerts a downward force on the air and the air exerts an upward force on the wing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The downward turning of the flow is not produced solely by the lower surface of the airfoil, and the air flow above the airfoil accounts for much of the downward-turning action.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the air flow do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Bernoulli's principle states: \"In a flow where no energy is being added or taken away, the sum of its various energies is a constant: consequently where the velocity increases the pressure decreases and vice versa.\" Thus, there is a direct mathematical relationship between the pressure and the speed, so if one knows the speed at all points within the airflow one can calculate the pressure, and vice versa. For any airfoil generating lift, there must be a pressure imbalance, i.e. lower average air pressure on the top than on the bottom. Bernoulli's principle states that this pressure difference must be accompanied by a speed difference.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Starting with the flow pattern observed in both theory and experiments, the increased flow speed over the upper surface can be explained in terms of streamtube pinching and conservation of mass.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For incompressible flow, the rate of volume flow (e.g. volume units per minute) must be constant within each streamtube since matter is not created or destroyed. If a streamtube becomes narrower, the flow speed must increase in the narrower region to maintain the constant flow rate, to satisfy the principle of conservation of mass.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the rate of volume flow ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The upper streamtubes constrict as they flow up and around the airfoil. Conservation of mass says that the flow speed must increase as the stream tube area decreases. Similarly, the lower streamtubes expand and their flowrate slows.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the upper streamtubes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From Bernoulli's principle, the pressure on the upper surface where the flow is moving faster is lower than the pressure on the lower surface where it is moving slower. This pressure difference creates a net aerodynamic force, pointing upward.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As explained below under a more comprehensive physical explanation, producing a lift force requires maintaining pressure differences in both the vertical and horizontal directions, and thus requires both downward turning of the flow and changes in flow speed consistent with Bernoulli's principle. The simplified explanations given above are therefore incomplete because they define lift in terms of only one or the other. And depending on the details, they have other shortcomings as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The explanation based on flow deflection and Newton's laws is correct but is incomplete. It does not explain how the airfoil can impart downward turning to a much deeper swath of the flow than it actually touches. Further, it doesn't explain how the pressure differences in the horizontal direction are sustained. That is, it leaves out the Bernoulli part of the interaction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Explanations based on increased flow speed and Bernoulli's principle first try to establish that there is higher flow speed over the upper surface, but they fail to explain correctly what causes the flow to speed up:", "qas": [{"question": "what principle is used to establish that there is higher flow speed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nBernoulli-only explanations imply that a speed difference arises from causes other than a pressure difference, and that the speed difference then leads to a pressure difference by Bernoulli\u2019s principle. This implied one-way causation is a misconception. The real cause-and-effect relationship between pressure and velocity is reciprocal. Finally, Bernoulli-only explanations don't explain how the pressure differences in the vertical direction are sustained. That is, they leave out the downward-turning part of the interaction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many alternative explanations for the generation of lift by an airfoil have been put forward, most intended to explain the phenomenon of lift to a general audience. Although the explanations may share features in common with the explanations above, additional assumptions and simplifications may be introduced. Some explanations introduce assumptions which proved to be wrong, such as \"equal transit-time\", and some used controversial terminology, such as \"Coanda effect\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Basic or popular sources often describe the \"equal transit-time\" theory of lift, which incorrectly assumes that the parcels of air that divide at the leading edge of an airfoil must rejoin at the trailing edge, forcing the air traveling along the longer upper surface to go faster. Bernoulli's principle is then cited to conclude that since the air moves slower along the bottom of the wing, the air pressure must be higher, pushing the wing up.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, there is no physical principle that requires equal transit time and experimental results show that this assumption is false. In fact, the air moving over the top of an airfoil generating lift moves \"much\" \"faster\" than the equal transit theory predicts. Further, the theory violates Newton's third law of motion, since it describes a force on the wing with no opposite force.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The assertion that the air must arrive simultaneously at the trailing edge is sometimes referred to as the \"equal transit-time fallacy\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In its original sense, the \"Coand\u0103 effect\" refers to the tendency of a fluid jet to stay attached to an adjacent surface that curves away from the flow, and the resultant entrainment of ambient air into the flow. The effect is named for Henri Coand\u0103, the Romanian aerodynamicist who exploited it in many of his patents.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More broadly, some consider the effect to include the tendency of any fluid boundary layer to adhere to a curved surface, not just the boundary layer accompanying a fluid jet. It is in this broader sense that the Coand\u0103 effect is used by some to explain why airflow remains attached to the top side of an airfoil. Jef Raskin, for example, describes a simple demonstration, using a straw to blow over the upper surface of a wing. The wing deflects upwards, thus demonstrating that the Coand\u0103 effect creates lift. This demonstration correctly demonstrates the Coand\u0103 effect as a fluid jet (the exhaust from a straw) adhering to a curved surface (the wing). However, the upper surface in this flow is a complicated, vortex-laden mixing layer, while on the lower surface the flow is quiescent. The physics of this demonstration are very different from that of the general flow over the wing. The usage in this sense is encountered in some popular references on aerodynamics. This is a controversial use of the term \"Coanda effect.\" The more established view in the aerodynamics field is that the Coand\u0103 effect is defined in the more limited sense above, and the flow following the upper surface simply reflects an absence of boundary-layer separation; thus it is not an example of the Coand\u0103 effect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lift is a result of pressure differences and depends on angle of attack, airfoil shape, air density, and airspeed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pressure is the normal force per unit area exerted by the air on itself and on surfaces that it touches. The lift force is transmitted through the pressure, which acts perpendicular to the surface of the airfoil. Thus, the net force manifests itself as pressure differences. The direction of the net force implies that the average pressure on the upper surface of the airfoil is lower than the average pressure on the underside.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These pressure differences arise in conjunction with the curved airflow. When a fluid follows a curved path, there is a pressure gradient perpendicular to the flow direction with higher pressure on the outside of the curve and lower pressure on the inside. This direct relationship between curved streamlines and pressure differences, sometimes called the streamline curvature theorem, was derived from Newton's second law by Leonhard Euler in 1754:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The left side of this equation represents the pressure difference perpendicular to the fluid flow. On the right hand side \u03c1 is the density, v is the velocity, and R is the radius of curvature. This formula shows that higher velocities and tighter curvatures create larger pressure differentials and that for straight flow (R \u2192 \u221e) the pressure difference is zero.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The angle of attack is the angle between the chord line of an airfoil and the oncoming airflow. A symmetrical airfoil will generate zero lift at zero angle of attack. But as the angle of attack increases, the air is deflected through a larger angle and the vertical component of the airstream velocity increases, resulting in more lift. For small angles a symmetrical airfoil will generate a lift force roughly proportional to the angle of attack.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the angle of attack increases, the lift reaches a maximum at some angle; increasing the angle of attack beyond this critical angle of attack causes the upper-surface flow to separate from the wing; there is less deflection downward so the airfoil generates less lift. The airfoil is said to be stalled.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the airfoil ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 32, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The lift force depends on the shape of the airfoil, especially the amount of camber (curvature such that the upper surface is more convex than the lower surface, as illustrated at right). Increasing the camber generally increases lift.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cambered airfoils will generate lift at zero angle of attack. When the chord line is horizontal, the trailing edge has a downward direction and since the air follows the trailing edge it is deflected downward. When a cambered airfoil is upside down, the angle of attack can be adjusted so that the lift force is upwards. This explains how a plane can fly upside down.", "qas": [{"question": "what will generate lift at zero angle of attacks ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The ambient flow conditions which affect lift include the fluid density, viscosity and speed of flow. Density is affected by temperature, and by the medium's acoustic velocity - i.e. by compressibility effects.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the infrared flow cause ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lift is proportional to the density of the air and approximately proportional to the square of the flow speed. Lift also depends on the size of the wing, being generally proportional to the wing's area projected in the lift direction. In calculations it is convenient to quantify lift in terms of a lift coefficient based on these factors.", "qas": [{"question": "what is proportional to the density of the flow speed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "No matter how smooth the surface of an airfoil seems, any surface is rough on the scale of air molecules. Air molecules flying into the surface bounce off the rough surface in random directions relative to their original velocities. The result is that when the air is viewed as a continuous material, it is seen to be unable to slide along the surface, and the air's velocity relative to the airfoil decreases to nearly zero at the surface (i.e., the air molecules \"stick\" to the surface instead of sliding along it), something known as the no-slip condition. Because the air at the surface has near-zero velocity but the air away from the surface is moving, there is a thin boundary layer in which air close to the surface is subjected to a shearing motion. The air's viscosity resists the shearing, giving rise to a shear stress at the airfoil's surface called skin-friction drag. Over most of the surface of most airfoils, the boundary layer is naturally turbulent, which increases skin-friction drag.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Under usual flight conditions, the boundary layer remains attached to both the upper and lower surfaces all the way to the trailing edge, and its effect on the rest of the flow is modest. Compared to the predictions of inviscid flow theory, in which there is no boundary layer, the attached boundary layer reduces the lift by a modest amount and modifies the pressure distribution somewhat, which results in a viscosity-related pressure drag over and above the skin-friction drag. The total of the skin-friction drag and the viscosity-related pressure drag is usually called the profile drag.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An airfoil's maximum lift at a given airspeed is limited by boundary-layer separation. As the angle of attack is increased, a point is reached where the boundary layer can no longer remain attached to the upper surface. When the boundary layer separates, it leaves a region of recirculating flow above the upper surface, as illustrated in the flow-visualization photo at right. This is known as the \"stall\", or \"stalling\". At angles of attack above the stall, lift is significantly reduced, though it does not drop to zero. The maximum lift that can be achieved before stall, in terms of the lift coefficient, is generally less than 1.5 for single-element airfoils and can be more than 3.0 for airfoils with high-lift slotted flaps and leading-edge devices deployed.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the maximum lift for a given airspeed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 39, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The flow around bluff bodies \u2013 i.e. without a streamlined shape, or stalling airfoils \u2013 may also generate lift, in addition to a strong drag force. This lift may be steady, or it may oscillate due to vortex shedding. Interaction of the object's flexibility with the vortex shedding may enhance the effects of fluctuating lift and cause vortex-induced vibrations. For instance, the flow around a circular cylinder generates a K\u00e1rm\u00e1n vortex street: vortices being shed in an alternating fashion from the cylinder's sides. The oscillatory nature of the flow produces a fluctuating lift force on the cylinder, even though the net (mean) force is negligible. The lift force frequency is characterised by the dimensionless Strouhal number, which depends on the Reynolds number of the flow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a flexible structure, this oscillatory lift force may induce vortex-induced vibrations. Under certain conditions \u2013 for instance resonance or strong spanwise correlation of the lift force \u2013 the resulting motion of the structure due to the lift fluctuations may be strongly enhanced. Such vibrations may pose problems and threaten collapse in tall man-made structures like industrial chimneys.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Magnus effect, a lift force is generated by a spinning cylinder in a freestream. Here the mechanical rotation acts on the boundary layer, causing it to separate at different locations on the two sides of the cylinder. The asymmetric separation changes the effective shape of the cylinder as far as the flow is concerned such that the cylinder acts like a lifting airfoil with circulation in the outer flow.", "qas": [{"question": "what changes the effective shape of the rotor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 42, 2)"}]}, {"context": "As described above under \"Simplified physical explanations of lift on an airfoil\", there are two main popular explanations: one based on downward deflection of the flow (Newton's laws), and one based on pressure differences accompanied by changes in flow speed (Bernoulli's principle). Either of these, by itself, correctly identifies some aspects of the lifting flow but leaves other important aspects of the phenomenon unexplained. A more comprehensive explanation involves both downward deflection and pressure differences (including changes in flow speed associated with the pressure differences), and requires looking at the flow in more detail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The airfoil shape and angle of attack work together so that the airfoil exerts a downward force on the air as it flows past. According to Newton's third law, the air must then exert an equal and opposite (upward) force on the airfoil, which is the lift.", "qas": [{"question": "what shape does the airfoil shape ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 44, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The net force exerted by the air occurs as a pressure difference over the airfoil's surfaces. Pressure in a fluid is always positive in an absolute sense, so that pressure must always be thought of as pushing, and never as pulling. The pressure thus pushes inward on the airfoil everywhere on both the upper and lower surfaces. The flowing air reacts to the presence of the wing by reducing the pressure on the wing's upper surface and increasing the pressure on the lower surface. The pressure on the lower surface pushes up harder than the reduced pressure on the upper surface pushes down, and the net result is upward lift.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The pressure difference which results in lift acts directly on the airfoil surfaces; however, understanding how the pressure difference is produced requires understanding what the flow does over a wider area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An airfoil affects the speed and direction of the flow over a wide area, producing a pattern called a \"velocity field\". When an airfoil produces lift, the flow ahead of the airfoil is deflected upward, the flow above and below the airfoil is deflected downward, and the flow behind the airfoil is deflected upward again, leaving the air far behind the airfoil in the same state as the oncoming flow far ahead. The flow above the upper surface is sped up, while the flow below the airfoil is slowed down. Together with the upward deflection of air in front and the downward deflection of the air immediately behind, this establishes a net circulatory component of the flow. The downward deflection and the changes in flow speed are pronounced and extend over a wide area, as can be seen in the flow animation on the right. These differences in the direction and speed of the flow are greatest close to the airfoil and decrease gradually far above and below. All of these features of the velocity field also appear in theoretical models for lifting flows.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the theoretical feature of the velocity field ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 47, 6)"}]}, {"context": "The pressure is also affected over a wide area, in a pattern of non-uniform pressure called a \"pressure field\". When an airfoil produces lift, there is a diffuse region of low pressure above the airfoil, and usually a diffuse region of high pressure below, as illustrated by the isobars (curves of constant pressure) in the drawing. The pressure difference that acts on the surface is just part of this pressure field.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The non-uniform pressure exerts forces on the air in the direction from higher pressure to lower pressure. The direction of the force is different at different locations around the airfoil, as indicated by the block arrows in the \"pressure distribution with isobars\" figure. Air above the airfoil is pushed toward the center of the low-pressure region, and air below the airfoil is pushed outward from the center of the high-pressure region.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to \"Newton's second law\", a force causes air to accelerate in the direction of the force. Thus the vertical arrows in the \"pressure distribution with isobars\" figure indicate that air above and below the airfoil is accelerated, or turned downward, and that the non-uniform pressure is thus the cause of the downward deflection of the flow visible in the flow animation. To produce this downward turning, the airfoil must have a positive angle of attack or have its rear portion curved downward as on an airfoil with camber. Note that the downward turning of the flow over the upper surface is the result of the air being pushed downward by higher pressure above it than below it. Some explanations that refer to the \"Coand\u0103 effect\" suggest that viscosity plays a key role in the downward turning, but this is false. (see below under \"Controversy regarding the Coand\u0103 effect\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "The arrows ahead of the airfoil indicate that the flow ahead of the airfoil is deflected upward, and the arrows behind the airfoil indicate that the flow behind is deflected upward again, after being deflected downward over the airfoil. These deflections are also visible in the flow animation.", "qas": [{"question": "what indicate the flow behind of the airfoil ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 51, 0)"}, {"question": "what are deflections ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 51, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The arrows ahead of the airfoil and behind also indicate that air passing through the low-pressure region above the airfoil is sped up as it enters, and slowed back down as it leaves. Air passing through the high-pressure region below the airfoil sees the opposite - it is slowed down and then sped up. Thus the non-uniform pressure is also the cause of the changes in flow speed visible in the flow animation. The changes in flow speed are consistent with \"Bernoulli's principle\", which states that in a steady flow without viscosity, lower pressure means higher speed, and higher pressure means lower speed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus changes in flow direction and speed are directly caused by the non-uniform pressure. But this cause-and-effect relationship is not just one-way; it works in both directions simultaneously. The air's motion is affected by the pressure differences, but the existence of the pressure differences depends on the air's motion. The relationship is thus a mutual, or reciprocal, interaction: Air flow changes speed or direction in response to pressure differences, and the pressure differences are sustained by the air's resistance to changing speed or direction. A pressure difference can exist only if something is there for it to push against. In aerodynamic flow, the pressure difference pushes against the air's inertia, as the air is accelerated by the pressure difference. This is why the air's mass is part of the calculation, and why lift depends on air density.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the air's mass part of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 53, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Sustaining the pressure difference that exerts the lift force on the airfoil surfaces requires sustaining a pattern of non-uniform pressure in a wide area around the airfoil. This requires maintaining pressure differences in both the vertical and horizontal directions, and thus requires both downward turning of the flow and changes in flow speed according to Bernoulli's principle. The pressure differences and the changes in flow direction and speed sustain each other in a mutual interaction. The pressure differences follow naturally from Newton's second law and from the fact that flow along the surface follows the predominantly downward-sloping contours of the airfoil. And the fact that the air has mass is crucial to the interaction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Producing a lift force requires both downward turning of the flow and changes in flow speed consistent with Bernoulli's principle. Each of the simplified explanations given above in Simplified physical explanations of lift on an airfoil falls short by trying to explain lift in terms of only one or the other, thus explaining only part of the phenomenon and leaving other parts unexplained.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the principle principle require ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 55, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When the pressure distribution on the airfoil surface is known, determining the total lift requires adding up the contributions to the pressure force from local elements of the surface, each with its own local value of pressure. The total lift is thus the integral of the pressure, in the direction perpendicular to the farfield flow, over the airfoil surface.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the purpose of the total lift ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 56, 1)"}]}, {"context": "formula_2", "qas": []}, {"context": "where:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The above lift equation neglects the skin friction forces, which are small compared to the pressure forces.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By using the streamwise vector i parallel to the freestream in place of k in the integral, we obtain an expression for the pressure drag \"D\" (which includes the pressure portion of the profile drag and, if the wing is three-dimensional, the induced drag). If we use the spanwise vector j, we obtain the side force \"Y\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The validity of this integration generally requires the airfoil shape to be a closed curve that is piecewise smooth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lift depends on the size of the wing, being approximately proportional to the wing area. It is often convenient to quantify the lift of a given airfoil by its \"lift coefficient\" formula_4, which defines its overall lift in terms of a unit area of the wing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If the value of formula_4 for a wing at a specified angle of attack is given, then the lift produced for specific flow conditions can be determined:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mathematical theories of lift are based on continuum fluid mechanics, assuming that air flows as a continuous fluid. Lift is generated in accordance with the fundamental principles of physics, the most relevant being the following three principles:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because an airfoil affects the flow in a wide area around it, the conservation laws of mechanics are embodied in the form of partial-differential equations combined with a set of boundary condition requirements which the flow has to satisfy at the airfoil surface and far away from the airfoil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To predict lift requires solving the equations for a particular airfoil shape and flow condition, which generally requires calculations that are so voluminous that they are practical only on a computer, through the methods of computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Determining the net aerodynamic force from a CFD solution requires \"adding up\" (integrating) the forces due to pressure and shear determined by the CFD over every surface element of the airfoil as described under \"pressure integration\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Navier-Stokes equations (NS) provide the potentially most accurate theory of lift, but in practice, capturing the effects of turbulence in the boundary layer on the airfoil surface requires sacrificing some accuracy, and requires use of the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS). Simpler but less accurate theories have also been developed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These equations represent conservation of mass, Newton's second law (conservation of momentum), conservation of energy, the Newtonian law for the action of viscosity, the Fourier heat conduction law, an equation of state relating density, temperature, and pressure, and formulas for the viscosity and thermal conductivity of the fluid.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In principle, the NS equations, combined with boundary conditions of no through-flow and no slip at the airfoil surface, could be used to predict lift in any situation in ordinary atmospheric flight with high accuracy. However, airflows in practical situations always involve turbulence in the boundary layer next to the airfoil surface, at least over the aft portion of the airfoil. Predicting lift by solving the NS equations in their raw form would require the calculations to resolve the details of the turbulence, down to the smallest eddy. This is not yet possible, even on the most powerful current computer. So in principle the NS equations provide a complete and very accurate theory of lift, but practical prediction of lift requires that the effects of turbulence be modeled in the RANS equations rather than computed directly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These are the NS equations with the turbulence motions averaged over time, and the effects of the turbulence on the time-averaged flow represented by turbulence modeling (an additional set of equations based on a combination of dimensional analysis and empirical information on how turbulence affects a boundary layer in a time-averaged average sense). A RANS solution consists of the time-averaged velocity vector, pressure, density, and temperature defined at a dense grid of points surrounding the airfoil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The amount of computation required is a minuscule fraction (billionths) of what would be required to resolve all of the turbulence motions in a raw NS calculation, and with large computers available it is now practical to carry out RANS calculations for complete airplanes in three dimensions. Because turbulence models are not perfect, the accuracy of RANS calculations is imperfect, but it is adequate for practical aircraft design. Lift predicted by RANS is usually within a few percent of the actual lift.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Euler equations are the NS equations without the viscosity, heat conduction, and turbulence effects. As with a RANS solution, an Euler solution consists of the velocity vector, pressure, density, and temperature defined at a dense grid of points surrounding the airfoil. While the Euler equations are simpler than the NS equations, they do not lend themselves to exact analytic solutions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further simplification is available through potential flow theory, which reduces the number of unknowns to be determined, and makes analytic solutions possible in some cases, as described below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Either Euler or potential-flow calculations predict the pressure distribution on the airfoil surfaces roughly correctly for angles of attack below stall, where they might miss the total lift by as much as 10-20%. At angles of attack above stall, inviscid calculations do not predict that stall has happened, and as a result they grossly overestimate the lift.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In potential-flow theory, the flow is assumed to be irrotational, i.e. that small fluid parcels have no net rate of rotation. Mathematically, this is expressed by the statement that the curl of the velocity vector field is everywhere equal to zero. Irrotational flows have the convenient property that the velocity can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar function called a potential. A flow represented in this way is called potential flow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In potential-flow theory, the flow is assumed to be incompressible. Incompressible potential-flow theory has the advantage that the equation (Laplace's equation) to be solved for the potential is linear, which allows solutions to be constructed by superposition of other known solutions. The incompressible-potential-flow equation can also be solved by conformal mapping, a method based on the theory of functions of a complex variable. In the early 20th century, before computers were available, conformal mapping was used to generate solutions to the incompressible potential-flow equation for a class of idealized airfoil shapes, providing some of the first practical theoretical predictions of the pressure distribution on a lifting airfoil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A solution of the potential equation directly determines only the velocity field. The pressure field is deduced from the velocity field through Bernoulli's equation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Applying potential-flow theory to a lifting flow requires special treatment and an additional assumption. The problem arises because lift on an airfoil in inviscid flow requires circulation in the flow around the airfoil (See \"Circulation and the Kutta-Joukowski theorem\" below), but a single potential function that is continuous throughout the domain around the airfoil cannot represent a flow with nonzero circulation. The solution to this problem is to introduce a branch cut, a curve or line from some point on the airfoil surface out to infinite distance, and to allow a jump in the value of the potential across the cut. The jump in the potential imposes circulation in the flow equal to the potential jump and thus allows nonzero circulation to be represented. However, the potential jump is a free parameter that is not determined by the potential equation or the other boundary conditions, and the solution is thus indeterminate. A potential-flow solution exists for any value of the circulation and any value of the lift. One way to resolve this indeterminacy is to impose the Kutta condition, which is that, of all the possible solutions, the physically reasonable solution is the one in which the flow leaves the trailing edge smoothly. The streamline sketches illustrate one flow pattern with zero lift, in which the flow goes around the trailing edge and leaves the upper surface ahead of the trailing edge, and another flow pattern with positive lift, in which the flow leaves smoothly at the trailing edge in accordance with the Kutta condition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is potential-flow theory with the further assumptions that the airfoil is very thin and the angle of attack is small. The linearized theory predicts the general character of the airfoil pressure distribution and how it is influenced by airfoil shape and angle of attack, but is not accurate enough for design work. For a 2D airfoil, such calculations can be done in a fraction of a second in a spreadsheet on a PC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When an airfoil generates lift, several components of the overall velocity field contribute to a net circulation of air around it: the upward flow ahead of the airfoil, the accelerated flow above, the decelerated flow below, and the downward flow behind.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The circulation can be understood as the total amount of \"spinning\" (or vorticity) of an inviscid fluid around the airfoil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Kutta\u2013Joukowski theorem relates the lift per unit width of span of a two-dimensional airfoil to this circulation component of the flow. In particular, it requires the Kutta condition to be met, in which the rear stagnation point moves to the airfoil trailing edge and attaches there for the duration of flight.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Kutta-Joukowski theorem is a key element in an explanation of lift that follows the development of the flow around an airfoil as the airfoil starts its motion from rest and a starting vortex is formed and left behind, leading to the formation of circulation around the airfoil. Lift is then inferred from the Kutta-Joukowski theorem. This explanation is largely mathematical, and its general progression is based on logical inference, not physical cause-and-effect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Kutta-Joukowski model does not predict how much circulation or lift a two-dimensional airfoil will produce. Calculating the lift per unit span using Kutta-Joukowski requires a known value for the circulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lift generated by a conventional airfoil is dictated by both its design and the flight conditions, such as forward velocity, angle of attack and air density. Lift can be increased by artificially increasing the circulation, for example by boundary-layer blowing or the use of blown flaps. In the Flettner rotor the entire airfoil is circular and spins about a spanwise axis to create the circulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The flow around a three-dimensional wing involves significant additional issues, especially relating to the wing tips. For a wing of low aspect ratio, such as a typical delta wing, two-dimensional theories may provide a poor model and three-dimensional flow effects can dominate. Even for wings of high aspect ratio, the three-dimensional effects associated with finite span can affect the whole span, not just close to the tips.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The vertical pressure gradient at the wing tips causes air to flow sideways, out from under the wing then up and back over the upper surface. This reduces the pressure gradient at the wing tip, therefore also reducing lift. The lift tends to decrease in the spanwise direction from root to tip, and the pressure distributions around the airfoil sections change accordingly in the spanwise direction. Pressure distributions in planes perpendicular to the flight direction tend to look like the illustration at right. This spanwise-varying pressure distribution is sustained by a mutual interaction with the velocity field. Flow below the wing is accelerated outboard, flow outboard of the tips is accelerated upward, and flow above the wing is accelerated inboard, which results in the flow pattern illustrated at right.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is more downward turning of the flow than there would be in a two-dimensional flow with the same airfoil shape and sectional lift, and a higher sectional angle of attack is required to achieve the same lift compared to a two-dimensional flow. The wing is effectively flying in a downdraft of its own making, as if the freestream flow were tilted downward, with the result that the total aerodynamic force vector is tilted backward slightly compared to what it would be in two dimensions. The additional backward component of the force vector is called lift-induced drag.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The difference in the spanwise component of velocity above and below the wing (between being in the inboard direction above and in the outboard direction below) persists at the trailing edge and into the wake downstream. After the flow leaves the trailing edge, this difference in velocity takes place across a relatively thin shear layer called a vortex sheet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The wingtip flow leaving the wing creates a tip vortex. As the main vortex sheet passes downstream from the trailing edge, it rolls up at its outer edges, merging with the tip vortices. The combination of the wingtip vortices and the vortex sheets feeding them is called the vortex wake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to the vorticity in the trailing vortex wake there is vorticity in the wing's boundary layer, called 'bound vorticity', which connects the trailing sheets from the two sides of the wing into a vortex system in the general form of a horseshoe. The horseshoe form of the vortex system was recognized by the British aeronautical pioneer Lanchester in 1907.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Given the distribution of bound vorticity and the vorticity in the wake, the Biot-Savart law (a vector-calculus relation) can be used to calculate the velocity perturbation anywhere in the field, caused by the lift on the wing. Approximate theories for the lift distribution and lift-induced drag of three-dimensional wings are based on such analysis applied to the wing's horseshoe vortex system. In these theories, the bound vorticity is usually idealized and assumed to reside at the camber surface inside the wing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because the velocity is deduced from the vorticity in such theories, some authors describe the situation to imply that the vorticity is the cause of the velocity perturbations, using terms such as \"the velocity induced by the vortex,\" for example. But attributing mechanical cause-and-effect between the vorticity and the velocity in this way is not consistent with the physics. The velocity perturbations in the flow around a wing are in fact produced by the pressure field.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The flow around a lifting airfoil must satisfy Newton's second law regarding conservation of momentum, both locally at every point in the flow field, and in an integrated sense over any extended region of the flow. For an extended region, Newton's second law takes the form of the \"momentum theorem for a control volume\", where a control volume can be any region of the flow chosen for analysis. The momentum theorem states that the integrated force exerted at the boundaries of the control volume (a surface integral), is equal to the integrated time rate of change (material derivative) of the momentum of fluid parcels passing through the interior of the control volume. For a steady flow, this can be expressed in the form of the net surface integral of the flux of momentum through the boundary.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lifting flow around a 2D airfoil is usually analyzed in a control volume that completely surrounds the airfoil, so that the inner boundary of the control volume is the airfoil surface, where the downward force per unit span formula_12 is exerted on the fluid by the airfoil. The outer boundary is usually either a large circle or a large rectangle. At this outer boundary distant from the airfoil, the velocity and pressure are well represented by the velocity and pressure associated with a uniform flow plus a vortex, and viscous stress is negligible, so that the only force that must be integrated over the outer boundary is the pressure. The free-stream velocity is usually assumed to be horizontal, with lift vertically upward, so that the vertical momentum is the component of interest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the free-air case (no ground plane), the force formula_12 exerted by the airfoil on the fluid is manifested partly as momentum fluxes and partly as pressure differences at the outer boundary, in proportions that depend on the shape of the outer boundary, as shown in the diagram at right. For a flat horizontal rectangle that is much longer than it is tall, the fluxes of vertical momentum through the front and back are negligible, and the lift is accounted for entirely by the integrated pressure differences on the top and bottom. For a square or circle, the momentum fluxes and pressure differences account for half the lift each. For a vertical rectangle that is much taller than it is wide, the unbalanced pressure forces on the top and bottom are negligible, and lift is accounted for entirely by momentum fluxes, with a flux of upward momentum that enters the control volume through the front accounting for half the lift, and a flux of downward momentum that exits the control volume through the back accounting for the other half.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The results of all of the control-volume analyses described above are consistent with the Kutta-Joukowski theorem described above. Both the tall rectangle and circle control volumes have been used in derivations of the theorem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An airfoil produces a pressure field in the surrounding air, as explained under \"The wider flow around the airfoil\" above. The pressure differences associated with this field die off gradually, becoming very small at large distances, but never disappearing altogether. Below the airplane, the pressure field persists as a positive pressure disturbance that reaches the ground, forming a pattern of slightly-higher-than-ambient pressure on the ground, as shown on the right. Although the pressure differences are very small far below the airplane, they are spread over a wide area and add up to a substantial force. For steady, level flight, the integrated force due to the pressure differences is equal to the total aerodynamic lift of the airplane and to the airplane's weight. According to Newton's third law, this pressure force exerted on the ground by the air is matched by an equal-and-opposite upward force exerted on the air by the ground, which offsets all of the downward force exerted on the air by the airplane. The net force due to the lift, acting on the atmosphere as a whole, is therefore zero, and thus there is no integrated accumulation of vertical momentum in the atmosphere, as was noted by Lanchester early in the development of modern aerodynamics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Leo III the Isaurian", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Leo III the Isaurian, also known as the Syrian (; 685 \u2013 18 June 741), was Byzantine Emperor from 717 until his death in 741 who founded the Isaurian dynasty. He put an end to the Twenty Years' Anarchy, a period of great instability in the Byzantine Empire between 695 and 717, marked by the rapid succession of several emperors to the throne. He also successfully defended the Empire against the invading Umayyads and forbade the veneration of icons.", "qas": [{"question": "when did leo iii die ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Leo, whose original name was Konon, was born in Germanikeia in the Syrian province of Commagene (modern Kahramanmara\u015f in Turkey). Some, including the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes, have claimed that Konon's family had been resettled in Thrace, where he entered the service of Emperor Justinian II, when the latter was advancing on Constantinople with an army of loyalist followers, and horsemen provided by Tervel of Bulgaria in 705.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the victory of Justinian II, Konon was dispatched on a diplomatic mission to Alania and Lazica to organize an alliance against the Umayyad Caliphate under Al-Walid I. Konon was appointed commander (\"strat\u0113gos\") of the Anatolic theme by Emperor Anastasius II. On his deposition, Konon joined with his colleague Artabasdus, the \"strat\u0113gos\" of the Armeniac theme, in conspiring to overthrow the new Emperor Theodosius III. Artabasdus was betrothed to Anna,\ndaughter of Leo as part of the agreement.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the daughter of diana ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Leo entered Constantinople on 25 March 717 and forced the abdication of Theodosios III, becoming emperor as Leo III. The new Emperor was immediately forced to attend to the Second Arab siege of Constantinople, which commenced in August of the same year. The Arabs were Umayyad forces sent by Caliph Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik and serving under his brother Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik. They had taken advantage of the civil discord in the Byzantine Empire to bring a force of 80,000 to 150,000 men and a massive fleet to the Bosphorus.", "qas": [{"question": "when did leo enter constantinople ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Careful preparations, begun three years earlier under Anastasius II, and the stubborn resistance put up by Leo wore out the invaders. An important factor in the victory of the Byzantines was their use of Greek fire. The Arab forces also fell victim to Bulgarian reinforcements arriving to aid the Byzantines. Leo was allied with the Bulgarians but the chronicler Theophanes the Confessor was uncertain if they were still serving under Tervel of Bulgaria or his eventual successor Kormesiy of Bulgaria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unable to continue the siege in the face of the Bulgarian onslaught, the impenetrability of Constantinople's walls, and their own exhausted provisions, the Arabs were forced to abandon the siege in August, 718. Sulayman himself had died the previous year and his successor Umar II would not attempt another siege. The siege had lasted 12 months.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Having thus preserved the Empire from extinction, Leo proceeded to consolidate its administration, which in the previous years of anarchy had become completely disorganized. In 718 he suppressed a rebellion in Sicily and in 719 did the same on behalf of the deposed Emperor Anastasios II.", "qas": [{"question": "in what region of sicily did napoleon suppressed a rebellion ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 6, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Leo secured the Empire's frontiers by inviting Slavic settlers into the depopulated districts and by restoring the army to efficiency; when the Umayyad Caliphate renewed their invasions in 726 and 739, as part of the campaigns of Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik, the Arab forces were decisively beaten, particularly at Akroinon in 740. His military efforts were supplemented by his alliances with the Khazars and the Georgians.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leo undertook a set of civil reforms including the abolition of the system of prepaying taxes which had weighed heavily upon the wealthier proprietors, the elevation of the serfs into a class of free tenants and the remodelling of family, maritime law and criminal law, notably substituting mutilation for the death penalty in many cases. The new measures, which were embodied in a new code called the \"Ecloga\" (\"Selection\"), published in 726, met with some opposition on the part of the nobles and higher clergy. The Emperor also undertook some reorganization of the theme structure by creating new themata in the Aegean region.", "qas": [{"question": "what part of the festival did the emperor create ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Leo's most striking legislative reforms dealt with religious matters, especially iconoclasm (\"icon-breaking,\" therefore an iconoclast is an \"icon-breaker\"). After an apparently successful attempt to enforce the baptism of all Jews and Montanists in the empire (722), he issued a series of edicts against the veneration of images (726\u2013729). This prohibition of a custom which had been in use for centuries seems to have been inspired by a genuine desire to improve public morality, and received the support of the official aristocracy and a section of the clergy. A majority of the theologians and all the monks opposed these measures with uncompromising hostility, and in the western parts of the Empire the people refused to obey the edict.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A revolt which broke out in Greece, mainly on religious grounds, was crushed by the imperial fleet in 727 (cf. Agallianos Kontoskeles). In 730, Patriarch Germanos I of Constantinople resigned rather than subscribe to an iconoclastic decree. Leo had him replaced by Anastasios, who willingly sided with the Emperor on the question of icons. Thus Leo suppressed the overt opposition of the capital.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Italian Peninsula, the defiant attitude of Popes Gregory II and Gregory III on behalf of image-veneration led to a fierce quarrel with the Emperor. The former summoned councils in Rome to anathematize and excommunicate the iconoclasts (730, 732); in 740 Leo retaliated by transferring Southern Italy and Illyricum from the papal diocese to that of the Patriarch of Constantinople. The struggle was accompanied by an armed outbreak in the exarchate of Ravenna in 727, which Leo finally endeavoured to subdue by means of a large fleet. But the destruction of the armament by a storm decided the issue against him; his southern Italian subjects successfully defied his religious edicts, and the Exarchate of Ravenna became effectively detached from the Empire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scholars have discussed the mutual influence of Muslim and Byzantine iconoclasm, noting that Caliph Yazid II had issued an iconoclastic edict also targeting his Christian subjects, already in 721.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The emperor died of dropsy in June 741.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With his wife Maria, Leo III had four known children:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lombards", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Lombards () or Longobards (; ) were a Germanic people who ruled most of the Italian Peninsula from 568 to 774.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombard historian Paul the Deacon wrote in the \"Historia Langobardorum\" that the Lombards descended from a small tribe called the \"Winnili\", who dwelt in southern Scandinavia (\"Scadanan\") before migrating to seek new lands. In the 1st century AD, they formed part of the Suebi, in northwestern Germany. By the end of the 5th century, they had moved into the area roughly coinciding with modern Austria and Slovakia north of the Danube river, where they subdued the Heruls and later fought frequent wars with the Gepids. The Lombard king Audoin defeated the Gepid leader Thurisind in 551 or 552; his successor Alboin eventually destroyed the Gepids in 567.", "qas": [{"question": "where did the lombards originate from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Following this victory, Alboin decided to lead his people to Italy, which had become severely depopulated and devastated after the long Gothic War (535\u2013554) between the Byzantine Empire and the Ostrogothic Kingdom there. In contrast with the Goths and the Vandals, the Lombards left Scandinavia and descended due south through Germany, Austria and Slovenia, only leaving Germanic territory a few decades before reaching Italy. The Lombards would have consequently remained a predominantly Germanic tribe by the time they invaded Italy. The Lombards were joined by numerous Saxons, Heruls, Gepids, Bulgars, Thuringians, and Ostrogoths, and their invasion of Italy was almost unopposed. By late 569 they had conquered all of northern Italy and the principal cities north of the Po River except Pavia, which fell in 572. At the same time, they occupied areas in central Italy and southern Italy. They established a Lombard Kingdom in north and central Italy, later named \"Regnum Italicum\" (\"Kingdom of Italy\"), which reached its zenith under the 8th-century ruler Liutprand. In 774, the Kingdom was conquered by the Frankish King Charlemagne and integrated into his Empire. However, Lombard nobles continued to rule southern parts of the Italian peninsula, well into the 11th century when they were conquered by the Normans and added to their County of Sicily. In this period, the southern part of Italy still under Longobardic domination was known to the foreigners, by the name Langbar\u00f0aland (Land of the Lombards), in the Norse runestones. Their legacy is also apparent in the regional name Lombardy (in the north of Italy).", "qas": [{"question": "where is lombardy located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 2, 10)"}]}, {"context": "The fullest account of Lombard origins, history, and practices is the \"Historia Langobardorum\" (\"History of the Lombards\") of Paul the Deacon, written in the 8th century. Paul's chief source for Lombard origins, however, is the 7th-century \"Origo Gentis Langobardorum\" (\"Origin of the Lombard People\").", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for the `` history of the lombards '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"Origo Gentis Langobardorum\" tells the story of a small tribe called the \"Winnili\" dwelling in southern Scandinavia (\"Scadanan\") (the \"Codex Gothanus\" writes that the Winnili first dwelt near a river called \"Vindilicus\" on the extreme boundary of Gaul). The Winnili were split into three groups and one part left their native land to seek foreign fields. The reason for the exodus was probably overpopulation. The departing people were led by the brothers Ybor and Aio and their mother Gambara and arrived in the lands of \"Scoringa\", perhaps the Baltic coast or the Bardengau on the banks of the Elbe. Scoringa was ruled by the Vandals and their chieftains, the brothers Ambri and Assi, who granted the Winnili a choice between tribute or war.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Winnili were young and brave and refused to pay tribute, saying \"It is better to maintain liberty by arms than to stain it by the payment of tribute.\" The Vandals prepared for war and consulted Godan (the god Odin), who answered that he would give the victory to those whom he would see first at sunrise. The Winnili were fewer in number and Gambara sought help from Frea (the goddess Frigg), who advised that all Winnili women should tie their hair in front of their faces like beards and march in line with their husbands. At sunrise, Frea turned her husband's bed so that he was facing east, and woke him. So Godan spotted the Winnili first and asked, \"Who are these long-beards?,\" and Frea replied, \"My lord, thou hast given them the name, now give them also the victory.\" From that moment onwards, the Winnili were known as the \"Longbeards\" (Latinised as \"Langobardi\", Italianised as \"Longobardi\", and Anglicized as \"Longobards\" or \"Lombards\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Paul the Deacon wrote the \"Historia\" between 787 and 796 he was a Catholic monk and devoted Christian. He thought the pagan stories of his people \"silly\" and \"laughable\". Paul explained that the name \"Langobard\" came from the length of their beards. A modern theory suggests that the name \"Langobard\" comes from \"Langbar\u00f0r\", a name of Odin. Priester states that when the Winnili changed their name to \"Lombards\", they also changed their old agricultural fertility cult to a cult of Odin, thus creating a conscious tribal tradition. Fr\u00f6hlich inverts the order of events in Priester and states that with the Odin cult, the Lombards grew their beards in resemblance of the Odin of tradition and their new name reflected this. Bruckner remarks that the name of the Lombards stands in close relation to the worship of Odin, whose many names include \"the Long-bearded\" or \"the Grey-bearded\", and that the Lombard given name \"Ansegranus\" (\"he with the beard of the gods\") shows that the Lombards had this idea of their chief deity. The same Old Norse root Barth or Bar\u00f0i, meaning \"beard\", is shared with the Hea\u00f0obards mentioned in both \"Beowulf\" and in \"Widsith\", where they are in conflict with the Danes. They were possibly a branch of the Langobards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alternatively some etymological sources suggest an Old High German root, barta, meaning \u201caxe\u201d (and related to English halberd), while Edward Gibbon puts forth an alternative suggestion which argues that:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u2026B\u00f6rde (or B\u00f6rd) still signifies \u201ca fertile plain by the side of a river,\u201d and a district near Magdeburg is still called the lange B\u00f6rde. According to this view Langobardi would signify \u201cinhabitants of the long bord of the river;\u201d and traces of their name are supposed still to occur in such names as Bardengau and Bardewick in the neighborhood of the Elbe.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the view that marks the long of the long ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 8, 1)"}]}, {"context": "According to the Gallaecian Christian priest, historian and theologian Paulus Orosius, the Lombards or Winnili lived originally in the Vinuiloth (Vinovilith) mentioned by Jordanes, in his masterpiece Getica, to the north of Uppsala, Sweden. Scoringa was near the province of Uppland, so just north of \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The historian then explains the etymology of the name Scoringa:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The shores of Uppland and \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland are covered with small rocks and rocky islands, which are called in German Sch\u00e6ren and in Swedish Skiaeren. Heal signifies a port in the northern languages; consequently Ski\u00e6ren-Heal is the port of the Ski\u00e6ren, a name well adapted to the port of Stockholm, in the Upplandske Ski\u00e6ren, and the country may be justly called Scorung or Ski\u00e6runga.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The legendary king Sceafa of Scandza was an ancient Lombardic king in Anglo-Saxon legend. The Old English poem Widsith, in a listing of famous kings and their countries, has Sceafa [weold] Longbeardum, so naming Sceafa as ruler of the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarities between Langobardic and Gothic migration traditions have been noted among scholars. These early migration legends suggest that a major shifting of tribes occurred sometime between the 1st and 2nd century BC, which would coincide with the time that the Teutoni and Cimbri left their homelands in Scandinavia and migrated through Germany, eventually invading Roman Italy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first mention of the Lombards occurred between AD 9 and 16, by the Roman court historian Velleius Paterculus, who accompanied a Roman expedition as prefect of the cavalry. Paterculus says that under Tiberius the \"power of the Langobardi was broken, a race surpassing even the Germans in savagery\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the combined testimony of Strabo (AD 20) and Tacitus (AD 117), the Lombards dwelt near the mouth of the Elbe shortly after the beginning of the Christian era, next to the Chauci. Strabo states that the Lombards dwelt on both sides of the Elbe. He treats them as a branch of the Suebi, and states that:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Now as for the tribe of the Suebi, it is the largest, for it extends from the Rhenus to the Albis; and a part of them even dwell on the far side of the Albis, as, for instance, the Hermondori and the Langobardi; and at the present time these latter, at least, have, to the last man, been driven in flight out of their country into the land on the far side of the river.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Suetonius wrote that Roman general Nero Drusus defeated a large force of Germans and drove some \u201cto the farther side of the Albis (Elbe)\u201d river. It is conceivable that these refugees were the Langobardi and the Hermunduri mentioned by Strabo not long after.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The German archaeologist Willi Wegewitz defined several Iron Age burial sites at the Lower Elbe as \"Langobardic\". The burial sites are crematorial and are usually dated from the 6th century BC through the 3rd century AD, so a settlement breakoff seems unlikely. The lands of the lower Elbe fall into the zone of the Jastorf Culture and became Elbe-Germanic, differing from the lands between Rhine, Weser, and the North Sea. Archaeological finds show that the Lombards were an agricultural people.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tacitus also counted the Lombards as a remote and aggressive Suebian tribe, one of those united in worship of the deity Nerthus, who he referred to as \"Mother Earth\", and also as subjects of Marobod the King of the Marcomanni. Marobod had made peace with the Romans, and that is why the Lombards were not part of the Germanic confederacy under Arminius at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest in AD 9. In AD 17, war broke out between Arminius and Marobod. Tacitus records:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 47, a struggle ensued amongst the Cherusci and they expelled their new leader, the nephew of Arminius, from their country. The Lombards appeared on the scene with sufficient power to control the destiny of the tribe that had been the leader in the struggle for independence thirty-eight years earlier, for they restored the deposed leader to sovereignty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To the south, Cassius Dio reported that just before the Marcomannic Wars, 6,000 Lombards and Obii (sometimes thought to be Ubii), crossed the Danube and invaded Pannonia. The two tribes were defeated, whereupon they ceased their invasion and sent Ballomar, King of the Marcomanni, as ambassador to Aelius Bassus, who was then administering Pannonia. Peace was made and the two tribes returned to their homes, which in the case of the Lombards was the lands of the lower Elbe. At about this time, in his \"Germania\" Tacitus says that \"their scanty numbers are a distinction\" because \"surrounded by a host of most powerful tribes, they are safe, not by submitting, but by daring the perils of war\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the mid-2nd century, the Lombards apparently appeared in the Rhineland, because according to Claudius Ptolemy, the Suebic Lombards lived \"below\" the Bructeri and Sugambri, and between these and the Tencteri. To their east stretching northwards to the central Elbe are the Suebi Angili. But Ptolemy also mentions the \"Laccobardi\" to the north of the above-mentioned Suebic territories, east of the Angrivarii on the Weser, and south of the Chauci on the coast, probably indicating a Lombard expansion from the Elbe to the Rhine. This double mention has been interpreted as an editorial error by Gudmund Sch\u00fctte, in his analysis of Ptolemy. However, the \"Codex Gothanus\" also mentions \"Patespruna\" (Paderborn) in connection with the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the 2nd century onwards, many of the Germanic tribes recorded as active during the Principate started to unite into bigger tribal unions, such as the Franks, Alamanni, Bavarii, and Saxons. The Lombards are not mentioned at first, perhaps because they were not initially on the border of Rome, or perhaps because they were subjected to a larger tribal union, like the Saxons. It is, however, highly probable that, when the bulk of the Lombards migrated, a considerable part remained behind and afterwards became absorbed by the Saxon tribes in the Elbe region, while the emigrants alone retained the name of Lombards. However, the \"Codex Gothanus\" states that the Lombards were subjected by the Saxons around 300 but rose up against them under their first king, Agelmund, who ruled for 30 years. In the second half of the 4th century, the Lombards left their homes, probably due to bad harvests, and embarked on their migration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The migration route of the Lombards in 489, from their homeland to \"Rugiland\", encompassed several places: \"Scoringa\" (believed to be their land on the Elbe shores), \"Mauringa\", \"Golanda\", \"Anthaib\", \"Banthaib\", and \"Vurgundaib\" (\"Burgundaib\"). According to the Ravenna Cosmography, Mauringa was the land east of the Elbe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The crossing into Mauringa was very difficult. The Assipitti (possibly the Usipetes) denied them passage through their lands and a fight was arranged for the strongest man of each tribe. The Lombard was victorious, passage was granted, and the Lombards reached Mauringa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombards departed from Mauringa and reached Golanda. Scholar Ludwig Schmidt thinks this was further east, perhaps on the right bank of the Oder. Schmidt considers the name the equivalent of Gotland, meaning simply \"good land.\" This theory is highly plausible; Paul the Deacon mentions the Lombards crossing a river, and they could have reached \"Rugiland\" from the Upper Oder area via the Moravian Gate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Moving out of Golanda, the Lombards passed through Anthaib and Banthaib until they reached Vurgundaib, believed to be the old lands of the Burgundes. In Vurgundaib, the Lombards were stormed in camp by \"Bulgars\" (probably Huns) and were defeated; King Agelmund was killed and Laimicho was made king. He was in his youth and desired to avenge the slaughter of Agelmund. The Lombards themselves were probably made subjects of the Huns after the defeat but rose up and defeated them with great slaughter, gaining great booty and confidence as they \"became bolder in undertaking the toils of war.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 540s, Audoin (ruled 546\u2013560) led the Lombards across the Danube once more into Pannonia, where they received Imperial subsidies as Justinian encouraged them to battle the Gepids. In 552, the Byzantines, aided by a large contingent of Foederati, notably Lombards, Heruls and Bulgars, defeated the last Ostrogoths led by Teia in the Battle of Taginae.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In approximately 560, Audoin was succeeded by his son Alboin, a young and energetic leader who defeated the neighboring Gepidae and made them his subjects; in 566, he married Rosamund, daughter of the Gepid king Cunimund. In the spring of 568, Alboin led the Lombard migration into Italy. According to the \"History of the Lombards,\" \"Then the Langobards, having left Pannonia, hastened to take possession of Italy with their wives and children and all their goods.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Various other peoples who either voluntarily joined or were subjects of King Alboin were also part of the migration. \"Whence, even until today, we call the villages in which they dwell Gepidan, Bulgarian, Sarmatian, Pannonian, Suabian, Norican, or by other names of this kind.\" At least 20,000 Saxon warriors, old allies of the Lombards, and their families joined them in their new migration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first important city to fall was \"Forum Iulii\" (Cividale del Friuli) in northeastern Italy, in 569. There, Alboin created the first Lombard duchy, which he entrusted to his nephew Gisulf. Soon Vicenza, Verona and Brescia fell into Germanic hands. In the summer of 569, the Lombards conquered the main Roman centre of northern Italy, Milan. The area was then recovering from the terrible Gothic Wars, and the small Byzantine army left for its defence could do almost nothing. Longinus, the Exarch sent to Italy by Emperor Justin II, could only defend coastal cities that could be supplied by the powerful Byzantine fleet. \nPavia fell after a siege of three years, in 572, becoming the first capital city of the new Lombard kingdom of Italy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the following years, the Lombards penetrated further south, conquering Tuscany and establishing two duchies, Spoleto and Benevento under Zotto, which soon became semi-independent and even outlasted the northern kingdom, surviving well into the 12th century. Wherever they went, they were joined by the Ostrogothic population, which was allowed to live peacefully in Italy with their Rugian allies under Roman sovereignty. The Byzantines managed to retain control of the area of Ravenna and Rome, linked by a thin corridor running through Perugia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When they entered Italy, some Lombards retained their native form of paganism, while some were Arian Christians. Hence they did not enjoy good relations with the Early Christian Church. Gradually, they adopted Roman or Romanized titles, names, and traditions, and partially converted to orthodoxy (in the 7th century), though not without a long series of religious and ethnic conflicts. By the time Paul the Deacon was writing, the Lombard language, dress and even hairstyles had nearly all disappeared \"in toto\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The whole Lombard territory was divided into 36 duchies, whose leaders settled in the main cities. The king ruled over them and administered the land through emissaries called \"gastaldi\". This subdivision, however, together with the independent indocility of the duchies, deprived the kingdom of unity, making it weak even when compared to the Byzantines, especially since these had begun to recover from the initial invasion. This weakness became even more evident when the Lombards had to face the increasing power of the Franks. In response, the kings tried to centralize power over time, but they definitively lost control over Spoleto and Benevento in the attempt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn 572, Alboin was murdered in Verona in a plot led by his wife, Rosamund, who later fled to Ravenna. His successor, Cleph, was also assassinated, after a ruthless reign of 18 months. His death began an interregnum of years (the \"Rule of the Dukes\") during which the dukes did not elect any king, a period regarded as a time of violence and disorder. In 586, threatened by a Frankish invasion, the dukes elected Cleph's son, Authari, as king. In 589, he married Theodelinda, daughter of Garibald I of Bavaria, the Duke of Bavaria. The Catholic Theodelinda was a friend of Pope Gregory I and pushed for Christianization. In the meantime, Authari embarked on a policy of internal reconciliation and tried to reorganize royal administration. The dukes yielded half their estates for the maintenance of the king and his court in Pavia. On the foreign affairs side, Authari managed to thwart the dangerous alliance between the Byzantines and the Franks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Authari died in 591 and was succeeded by Agilulf, the duke of Turin, who also married Theodelinda in the same year. Agilulf successfully fought the rebel dukes of northern Italy, conquering Padua in 601, Cremona and Mantua in 603, and forcing the Exarch of Ravenna to pay tribute. Agilulf died in 616; Theodelinda reigned alone until 628 when she was succeeded by Adaloald. Arioald, the head of the Arian opposition who had married Theodelinda's daughter Gundeperga, later deposed Adaloald.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arioald was succeeded by Rothari, regarded by many authorities as the most energetic of all Lombard kings. He extended his dominions, conquering Liguria in 643 and the remaining part of the Byzantine territories of inner Veneto, including the Roman city of \"Opitergium\" (Oderzo). Rothari also made the famous edict bearing his name, the \"Edictum Rothari\", which established the laws and the customs of his people in Latin: the edict did not apply to the tributaries of the Lombards, who could retain their own laws. Rothari's son Rodoald succeeded him in 652, still very young, and was killed by his opponents.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the death of King Aripert I in 661, the kingdom was split between his children Perctarit, who set his capital in Milan, and Godepert, who reigned from Pavia (Ticinum). Perctarit was overthrown by Grimoald, son of Gisulf, duke of Friuli and Benevento since 647. Perctarit fled to the Avars and then to the Franks. Grimoald managed to regain control over the duchies and deflected the late attempt of the Byzantine emperor Constans II to conquer southern Italy. He also defeated the Franks. At Grimoald's death in 671 Perctarit returned and promoted tolerance between Arians and Catholics, but he could not defeat the Arian party, led by Arachi, duke of Trento, who submitted only to his son, the philo-Catholic Cunincpert.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombards engaged in fierce battles with Slavic peoples during these years: from 623\u201326 the Lombards unsuccessfully attacked the Carantanians, and, in 663\u201364, the Slavs raided the Vipava Valley and the Friuli.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Religious strife and the Slavic raids remained a source of struggle in the following years. In 705, the Friuli Lombards were defeated and lost the land to the west of the So\u010da River, namely the Gorizia Hills and the Venetian Slovenia. A new ethnic border was established that has lasted for over 1200 years up until the present time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombard reign began to recover only with Liutprand the Lombard (king from 712), son of Ansprand and successor of the brutal Aripert II. He managed to regain a certain control over Spoleto and Benevento, and, taking advantage of the disagreements between the Pope and Byzantium concerning the reverence of icons, he annexed the Exarchate of Ravenna and the duchy of Rome. He also helped the Frankish marshal Charles Martel drive back the Arabs. The Slavs were defeated in the Battle of Lavariano, when they tried to conquer the Friulian Plain in 720. Liutprand's successor Aistulf conquered Ravenna for the Lombards for the first time but had to relinquish it when he was subsequently defeated by the king of the Franks, Pippin III, who was called by the Pope.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the death of Aistulf, Ratchis attempted to become king of Lombardy, but he was deposed by Desiderius, duke of Tuscany, the last Lombard to rule as king. Desiderius managed to take Ravenna definitively, ending the Byzantine presence in northern Italy. He decided to reopen struggles against the Pope, who was supporting the dukes of Spoleto and Benevento against him, and entered Rome in 772, the first Lombard king to do so. But when Pope Hadrian I called for help from the powerful Frankish king Charlemagne, Desiderius was defeated at Susa and besieged in Pavia, while his son Adelchis was forced to open the gates of Verona to Frankish troops. Desiderius surrendered in 774, and Charlemagne, in an utterly novel decision, took the title \"King of the Lombards\". Before then the Germanic kingdoms had frequently conquered each other, but none had adopted the title of King of another people. Charlemagne took part of the Lombard territory to create the Papal States.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombardy region in Italy, which includes the cities of Brescia, Bergamo, Milan, and the old capital Pavia, is a reminder of the presence of the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though the kingdom centred on Pavia in the north fell to Charlemagne and the Franks in 774, the Lombard-controlled territory to the south of the Papal States was never subjugated by Charlemagne or his descendants. In 774, Duke Arechis II of Benevento, whose duchy had only nominally been under royal authority, though certain kings had been effective at making their power known in the south, claimed that Benevento was the successor state of the kingdom. He tried to turn Benevento into a \"secundum Ticinum\": a second Pavia. He tried to claim the kingship, but with no support and no chance of a coronation in Pavia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Charlemagne came down with an army, and his son Louis the Pious sent men, to force the Beneventan duke to submit, but his submission and promises were never kept and Arechis and his successors were \"de facto\" independent. The Beneventan dukes took the title \"pr\u00ednceps\" (prince) instead of that of king.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombards of southern Italy were thereafter in the anomalous position of holding land claimed by two empires: the Carolingian Empire to the north and west and the Byzantine Empire to the east. They typically made pledges and promises of tribute to the Carolingians, but effectively remained outside Frankish control. Benevento meanwhile grew to its greatest extent yet when it imposed a tribute on the Duchy of Naples, which was tenuously loyal to Byzantium and even conquered the Neapolitan city of Amalfi in 838. At one point in the reign of Sicard, Lombard control covered most of southern Italy save the very south of Apulia and Calabria and Naples, with its nominally attached cities. It was during the 9th century that a strong Lombard presence became entrenched in formerly Greek Apulia. However, Sicard had opened up the south to the invasive actions of the Saracens in his war with Andrew II of Naples and when he was assassinated in 839, Amalfi declared independence and two factions fought for power in Benevento, crippling the principality and making it susceptible to external enemies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The civil war lasted ten years and ended with a peace treaty imposed in 849 by Emperor Louis II, the only Frankish king to exercise actual sovereignty over the Lombard states. The treaty divided the kingdom into two states: the Principality of Benevento and the Principality of Salerno, with its capital at Salerno on the Tyrrhenian Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Andrew II of Naples hired Saracen mercenaries for his war with Sicard of Benevento in 836; Sicard responded with other Muslim mercenaries. The Saracens initially concentrated their attacks on Sicily and Byzantine Italy, but soon Radelchis I of Benevento called in more mercenaries, who destroyed Capua in 841. Landulf the Old founded the present-day Capua, \"New Capua\", on a nearby hill. In general, the Lombard princes were less inclined to ally with the Saracens than with their Greek neighbours of Amalfi, Gaeta, Naples, and Sorrento. Guaifer of Salerno, however, briefly put himself under Muslim suzerainty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 847 a large Muslim force seized Bari, until then a Lombard gastaldate under the control of Pandenulf. Saracen incursions proceeded northwards until Adelchis of Benevento sought the help of his suzerain, Louis II, who allied with the Byzantine emperor Basil I to expel the Arabs from Bari in 869. An Arab landing force was defeated by the emperor in 871. Adelchis and Louis remained at war until the death of Louis in 875. Adelchis regarded himself as the true successor of the Lombard kings, and in that capacity he amended the \"Edictum Rothari\", the last Lombard ruler to do so.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the death of Louis, Landulf II of Capua briefly flirted with a Saracen alliance, but Pope John VIII convinced him to break it off. Guaimar I of Salerno fought the Saracens with Byzantine troops. Throughout this period the Lombard princes swung in allegiance from one party to another. Finally, towards 915, Pope John X managed to unite the Christian princes of southern Italy against the Saracen establishments on the Garigliano river. The Saracens were ousted from Italy in the Battle of the Garigliano in 915.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The independent state of Salerno inspired the gastalds of Capua to move towards independence, and by the end of the century they were styling themselves \"princes\" and as a third Lombard state. The Capuan and Beneventan states were united by Atenulf I of Capua in 900. He subsequently declared them to be in perpetual union, and they were separated only in 982, on the death of Pandulf Ironhead. With all of the Lombard south under his control, except Salerno, Atenulf felt safe to use the title \"Princeps Gentis Langobardorum\" (\"prince of the Lombard people\"), which Arechis II had begun using in 774. Among Atenulf's successors the principality was ruled jointly by fathers, sons, brothers, cousins, and uncles for the greater part of the century. Meanwhile, the prince Gisulf I of Salerno began using the title \"Langobardorum Gentis Princeps\" around mid-century, but the ideal of a united Lombard principality was realised only in December 977, when Gisulf died and his domains were inherited by Pandulf Ironhead, who temporarily held almost all Italy south of Rome and brought the Lombards into alliance with the Holy Roman Empire. His territories were divided upon his death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Landulf the Red of Benevento and Capua tried to conquer the principality of Salerno with the help of John III of Naples, but with the aid of Mastalus I of Amalfi, Gisulf repulsed him. The rulers of Benevento and Capua made several attempts on Byzantine Apulia at this time, but late in the century, the Byzantines, under the stiff rule of Basil II, gained ground on the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The principal source for the history of the Lombard principalities in this period is the \"Chronicon Salernitanum\", composed late in the 10th century at Salerno.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The diminished Beneventan principality soon lost its independence to the papacy and declined in importance until it fell in the Norman conquest of southern Italy. The Normans, first called in by the Lombards to fight the Byzantines for control of Apulia and Calabria (under the likes of Melus of Bari and Arduin, among others), had become rivals for hegemony in the south. The Salernitan principality experienced a golden age under Guaimar III and Guaimar IV, but under Gisulf II, the principality shrank to insignificance and fell in 1078 to Robert Guiscard, who had married Gisulf's sister Sichelgaita. The Capua principality was hotly contested during the reign of the hated Pandulf IV, the \"Wolf of the Abruzzi\", and, under his son, it fell, almost without contest, to the Norman Richard Drengot (1058). The Capuans revolted against Norman rule in 1091, expelling Richard's grandson Richard II and setting up one Lando IV.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capua was again put under Norman rule after the Siege of Capua of 1098 and the city quickly declined in importance under a series of ineffectual Norman rulers. The independent status of these Lombard states is in general attested by the ability of their rulers to switch suzerains at will. Often the legal vassal of pope or emperor (either Byzantine or Holy Roman), they were the real power-brokers in the south until their erstwhile allies, the Normans, rose to preeminence: The Lombards regarded the Normans as barbarians and the Byzantines as oppressors. Regarding their own civilisation as superior, the Lombards did indeed provide the environment for the illustrious Schola Medica Salernitana.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The genes of the Lombards became quickly diluted into the Italian population owing to their relatively small number and their geographic dispersal in order to rule and administer their kingdom. Some regions were never under Lombard domination, including Sardinia, Sicily, Calabria, southern Apulia, Naples and the Latium. In all these regions the Byzantines brought more Greek-Anatolian lineages, which were already the dominant lineages from the Magna Graecia period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombardic language is extinct (unless Cimbrian and Mocheno represent surviving dialects). The Germanic language declined, beginning in the 7th century, but may have been in scattered use until as late as about the year 1000. Only fragments of the language have survived, the main evidence being individual words quoted in Latin texts. In the absence of Lombardic texts, it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the language's morphology and syntax. The genetic classification of the language depends entirely on phonology. Since there is evidence that Lombardic participated in, and indeed shows some of the earliest evidence for, the High German consonant shift, it is usually classified as an Elbe Germanic or Upper German dialect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lombardic fragments are preserved in runic inscriptions. Primary source texts include short inscriptions in the Elder Futhark, among them the \"bronze capsule of Schretzheim\" (c. 600) and the silver belt buckle found in Pforzen, Ostallg\u00e4u (Schwaben). A number of Latin texts include Lombardic names, and Lombardic legal texts contain terms taken from the legal vocabulary of the vernacular. In 2005, Emilia Den\u010deva argued that the inscription of the Pernik sword may be Lombardic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Italian language preserves a large number of Lombardic words, although it is not always easy to distinguish them from other Germanic borrowings such as those from Gothic or from Frankish. They often bear some resemblance to English words, as Lombardic was akin to Saxon. For instance, \"landa\" from \"land\", \"guardia\" from \"wardan\" (warden), \"guerra\" from \"werra\" (war), \"ricco\" from \"rikki\" (rich), and \"guadare\" from \"wadjan\" (to wade).", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the \"Codice diplomatico longobardo\", a collection of legal documents that makes reference to many Lombardic terms, we obtain several terms still in use in the Italian language:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"barba\" (beard), \"marchio\" (mark), \"maniscalco\" (blacksmith), \"aia\" (courtyard), \"braida\" (suburban meadow), \"borgo\" (burg, village), \"fara\" (fundamental unity of Lombard social and military organization, presently used as toponym), \"pizzo\" (peak, mountain top, now used as toponym), \"sala\" (hall, room, also used as toponym), \"staffa\" (stirrup), \"stalla\" (stable), \"sculdascio\", \"faida\" (feud), \"manigoldo\" (scoundrel), \"sgherro\" (henchman); \"fanone\" (baleen), \"stamberga\" (hovel); \"anca\" (hip), \"guancia\" (cheek), \"nocca\" (knuckle), \"schiena\" (back); \"gazza\" (magpie), \"martora\" (marten); \"gualdo\" (wood, presently used as toponym), \"pozza\" (pool); verbs like \"bussare\" (to knock), \"piluccare\" (to peck), \"russare\" (to snore).", "qas": []}, {"context": "During their stay at the mouth of the Elbe, the Lombards came into contact with other western Germanic populations, such as the Saxons and the Frisians. From these populations, which for long had been in contact with the Celts (especially the Saxons), they learned a rigid social organization into castes, rarely present in other Germanic peoples.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombard kings can be traced back as early as c. 380 and thus to the beginning of the Great Migration. Kingship developed amongst the Germanic peoples when the unity of a single military command was found necessary. Schmidt believed that the Germanic tribes were divided according to cantons and that the earliest government was a general assembly that selected canton chiefs and war leaders in times of conflict. All such figures were probably selected from a caste of nobility. As a result of the wars of their wanderings, royal power developed such that the king became the representative of the people, but the influence of the people on the government did not fully disappear. Paul the Deacon gives an account of the Lombard tribal structure during the migration:", "qas": []}, {"context": ". . . in order that they might increase the number of their warriors, [the Lombards] confer liberty upon many whom they deliver from the yoke of bondage, and that the freedom of these may be regarded as established, they confirm it in their accustomed way by an arrow, uttering certain words of their country in confirmation of the fact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Complete emancipation appears to have been granted only among the Franks and the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lombard society was divided into classes comparable to those found in the other Germanic successor states of Rome, Frankish Gaul and Visigothic Spain. There was a noble class, a class of free persons beneath them, a class of unfree non-slaves (serfs), and finally slaves. The aristocracy itself was poorer, more urbanised, and less landed than elsewhere. Aside from the richest and most powerful of the dukes and the king himself, Lombard noblemen tended to live in cities (unlike their Frankish counterparts) and hold little more than twice as much in land as the merchant class (a far cry from provincial Frankish aristocrats who held vast swathes of land, hundreds of times larger than those beneath his status). The aristocracy by the 8th century was highly dependent on the king for means of income related especially to judicial duties: many Lombard nobles are referred to in contemporary documents as \"iudices\" (judges) even when their offices had important military and legislative functions as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The freemen of the Lombard kingdom were far more numerous than in Frank lands, especially in the 8th century, when they are almost invisible in surviving documentary evidence. Smallholders, owner-cultivators, and rentiers are the most numerous types of person in surviving diplomata for the Lombard kingdom. They may have owned more than half of the land in Lombard Italy. The freemen were \"exercitales\" and \"viri devoti\", that is, soldiers and \"devoted men\" (a military term like \"retainers\"); they formed the levy of the Lombard army, and they were sometimes, if infrequently, called to serve, though this seems not to have been their preference. The small landed class, however, lacked the political influence necessary with the king (and the dukes) to control the politics and legislation of the kingdom. The aristocracy was more thoroughly powerful politically if not economically in Italy than in contemporary Gaul and Spain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The urbanisation of Lombard Italy was characterised by the \"citt\u00e0 ad isole\" (or \"city as islands\"). It appears from archaeology that the great cities of Lombard Italy \u2014 Pavia, Lucca, Siena, Arezzo, Milan \u2014 were themselves formed of minute islands of urbanisation within the old Roman city walls. The cities of the Roman Empire had been partially destroyed in the series of wars of the 5th and 6th centuries. Many sectors were left in ruins and ancient monuments became fields of grass used as pastures for animals, thus the Roman Forum became the \"Campo Vaccino\", the field of cows. The portions of the cities that remained intact were small, modest, contained a cathedral or major church (often sumptuously decorated), and a few public buildings and townhomes of the aristocracy. Few buildings of importance were stone, most were wood. In the end, the inhabited parts of the cities were separated from one another by stretches of pasture even within the city walls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe evidence contained in the myth hints that initially, before the passage from Scandinavia to the southern coast of the Baltic Sea, the Lombards worshiped the Vanir. Later, in contact with other Germanic populations, they adopted the worship of the \u00c6sir: an evolution that marked the passage from the adoration of deities related to fertility and the earth to the cult of warlike gods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In chapter 40 of his Germania, Roman historian Tacitus, discussing the Suebian tribes of Germania, writes that the Lombards were one of the Suebian tribes united in worship of the deity Nerthus, who is often identified with the Norse goddess Freyja. The other tribes were the Reudigni, Aviones, Anglii, Varini, Eudoses, Suarines, and Nuitones.", "qas": []}, {"context": "St. Barbatus of Benevento observed many pagan rituals and traditions amongst the Lombards authorised by the Duke Romuald, son of King Grimoald:<BR>", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lombards were first touched by Christianity while still in Pannonia, but only touched: their conversion and Christianisation was largely nominal and far from complete. During the reign of Wacho, they were Orthodox Catholics allied with the Byzantine Empire, but Alboin converted to Arianism as an ally of the Ostrogoths and invaded Italy. All these Christian conversions primarily affected the aristocracy, while the common people remained pagan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Italy, the Lombards were intensively Christianised, and the pressure to convert to Catholicism was great. With the Bavarian queen Theodelinda, a Catholic, the monarchy was brought under heavy Catholic influence. After initial support for the anti-Rome party in the Schism of the Three Chapters, Theodelinda remained a close contact and supporter of Pope Gregory I. In 603, Adaloald, the heir to the throne, received Catholic baptism. During the next century, Arianism and paganism continued to hold out in Austria (the northeast of Italy) and in the Duchy of Benevento. A succession of Arian kings was militarily aggressive and presented a threat to the Papacy in Rome. In the 7th century, the nominally Christian aristocracy of Benevento was still practising pagan rituals such as sacrifices in \"sacred\" woods. By the end of the reign of Cunincpert, however, the Lombards were more or less completely Catholicised. Under Liutprand Catholicism became tangible as the king sought to justify his title \"rex totius Italiae\" by uniting the south of the peninsula with the north, thereby bringing together his Italo-Roman and Germanic subjects into one Catholic State.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Duchy and eventually Principality of Benevento in southern Italy developed a unique Christian rite in the 7th and 8th centuries. The Beneventan rite is more closely related to the liturgy of the Ambrosian rite than to the Roman rite. The Beneventan rite has not survived in its complete form, although most of the principal feasts and several feasts of local significance are extant. The Beneventan rite appears to have been less complete, less systematic, and more liturgically flexible than the Roman rite.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Characteristic of this rite was the Beneventan chant, a Lombard-influenced chant that bore similarities to the Ambrosian chant of Milan. The Beneventan chant is largely defined by its role in the liturgy of the Beneventan rite; many Beneventan chants were assigned multiple roles when inserted into Gregorian chantbooks, appearing variously as antiphons, offertories, and communions, for example. It was eventually supplanted by the Gregorian chant in the 11th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The chief centre of the Beneventan chant was Montecassino, one of the first and greatest abbeys of Western monasticism. Gisulf II of Benevento had donated a large swathe of land to Montecassino in 744, and that became the basis for an important state, the \"Terra Sancti Benedicti\", which was a subject only to Rome. The Cassinese influence on Christianity in southern Italy was immense. Montecassino was also the starting point for another characteristic of Beneventan monasticism, the use of the distinct Beneventan script, a clear, angular script derived from the Roman cursive as used by the Lombards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During their nomadic phase, the Lombards primarily created art that was easily carried with them, like arms and jewellery. Though relatively little of this has survived, it bears resemblance to the similar endeavours of other Germanic tribes of northern and central Europe from the same era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first major modifications to the Germanic style of the Lombards came in Pannonia and especially in Italy, under the influence of local, Byzantine, and Christian styles. The conversions from nomadism and paganism to settlement and Christianity also opened up new arenas of artistic expression, such as architecture (especially churches) and its accompanying decorative arts (such as frescoes).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Few Lombard buildings have survived. Most have been lost, rebuilt, or renovated at some point, so they preserve little of their original Lombard structure. Lombard architecture was well-studied in the 20th century, and the four-volume \"Lombard Architecture\" (1919) by Arthur Kingsley Porter is a \"monument of illustrated history\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The small Oratorio di Santa Maria in Valle in Cividale del Friuli is probably one of the oldest preserved examples of Lombard architecture, as Cividale was the first Lombard city in Italy. Parts of Lombard constructions have been preserved in Pavia (San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro, crypts of Sant'Eusebio and San Giovanni Domnarum) and Monza (cathedral). The \"Basilic autariana\" in Fara Gera d'Adda near Bergamo and the church of San Salvatore in Brescia also have Lombard elements. All these buildings are in northern Italy (Langobardia major), but by far the best-preserved Lombard structure is in southern Italy (Langobardia minor). The Church of Santa Sofia in Benevento was erected in 760 by Duke Arechis II, and it preserves Lombard frescoes on the walls and even Lombard capitals on the columns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lombard architecture flourished under the impulse provided by the Catholic monarchs like Theodelinda, Liutprand, and Desiderius to the foundation of monasteries to further their political control. Bobbio Abbey was founded during this time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some of the late Lombard structures of the 9th and 10th centuries have been found to contain elements of style associated with Romanesque architecture and have been so dubbed \"first Romanesque\". These edifices are considered, along with some similar buildings in southern France and Catalonia, to mark a transitory phase between the Pre-Romanesque and full-fledged Romanesque.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Loki", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Loki (, , ) is a god in Norse mythology. Loki is in some sources the son of F\u00e1rbauti and Laufey, and the brother of Helblindi and B\u00fdleistr. By the j\u00f6tunn Angrbo\u00f0a, Loki is the father of Hel, the wolf Fenrir, and the world serpent J\u00f6rmungandr. By his wife Sigyn, Loki is the father of Narfi and/or Nari. By the stallion Sva\u00f0ilfari, Loki is the mother\u2014giving birth in the form of a mare\u2014to the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. In addition, Loki is referred to as the father of V\u00e1li in \"Prose Edda\", though this source also refers to Odin as the father of V\u00e1li twice, and V\u00e1li is found mentioned as a Son of Loki only once.", "qas": [{"question": "who is a god in mythology ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Loki's relation with the gods varies by source; Loki sometimes assists the gods and sometimes behaves in a malicious manner towards them. Loki is a shape shifter and in separate incidents he appears in the form of a salmon, a mare, a fly, and possibly an elderly woman named \u00de\u00f6kk (Old Norse 'thanks'). Loki's positive relations with the gods end with his role in engineering the death of the god Baldr and Loki is eventually bound by V\u00e1li with the entrails of one of his sons. In both the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\", the goddess Ska\u00f0i is responsible for placing a serpent above him while he is bound. The serpent drips venom from above him that Sigyn collects into a bowl; however, she must empty the bowl when it is full, and the venom that drips in the meantime causes Loki to writhe in pain, thereby causing earthquakes. With the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k, Loki is foretold to slip free from his bonds and to fight against the gods among the forces of the j\u00f6tnar, at which time he will encounter the god Heimdallr and the two will slay each other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki is referred to in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; the \"Prose Edda\" and \"Heimskringla\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson; the Norwegian Rune Poems, in the poetry of skalds, and in Scandinavian folklore. Loki may be depicted on the Snaptun Stone, the Kirkby Stephen Stone, and the Gosforth Cross. Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology, which some scholars have described as that of a trickster god, have been much debated by scholars. Loki has been depicted in or is referenced in a variety of media in modern popular culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The etymology of the name \"Loki\" has been extensively debated. The name has at times been associated with the Old Norse word \"logi\" ('flame'), but there seems not to be a sound linguistic basis for this. Rather, the later Scandinavian variants of the name (such as Faroese \"Lokki\", Danish \"Lokkemand\", Norwegian \"Loke\" and \"Lokke\", Swedish \"Luki\" and \"Luku\", along with Finnish \"Lukki\") point to an origin in the Germanic root *\"luk\"-, which denoted things to do with loops (like knots, hooks, closed-off rooms, and locks). This corresponds with usages such as the Swedish \"lokkan\u00e4t\" and Faroese \"Lokkanet\" ('cobweb', literally 'Lokke's web') and Faroese \"lokki\"~\"grindalokki\"~\"grindalokkur\" ('daddy-long-legs', associated in pre-modern folk-taxonomy with spiders). Some Eastern Swedish traditions referring to the same figure use forms in \"n\"- like \"Nokk(e)\", but this corresponds to the *\"luk\"- etymology insofar as those dialects consistently used a different root, Germanic *\"hnuk\"-, in contexts where western varieties used *\"luk\"-: \"\"nokke\" corresponds to \"n\u00f8kkel\"\" ('key' in Eastern Scandinavian) \"as \"loki\"~\"lokke\" to \"lykil\"\" ('key' in Western Scandinavian). While it has been suggested that this association with closing could point to Loki's apocalyptic role at Ragnar\u00f6k, \"there is quite a bit of evidence that Loki in premodern society was thought to be the causer of knots/tangles/loops, or himself a knot/tangle/loop. Hence, it is natural that Loki is the inventor of the fishnet, which consists of loops and knots, and that the word \"loki\" (\"lokke\", \"lokki\", \"loke\", \"luki\") is a term for makers of cobwebs: spiders and the like.\" Though not prominent in the oldest sources, this identity as a \"tangler\" may be the etymological meaning of Loki's name.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the name `` loki '' have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In various poems from the \"Poetic Edda\" (stanza 2 of \"Lokasenna\", stanza 41 of \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\", and stanza 26 of \"Fj\u00f6lsvinnsm\u00e1l\"), and sections of the \"Prose Edda\" (chapter 32 of \"Gylfaginning\", stanza 8 of \"Haustl\u00f6ng\", and stanza 1 of \"\u00de\u00f3rsdr\u00e1pa\") Loki is alternatively referred to as \"Loptr\", which is generally considered derived from Old Norse \"lopt\" meaning \"air\", and therefore points to an association with the air.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The name \"Hve\u00f0rungr\" (Old Norse '?roarer') is also used in reference to Loki, occurring in names for Hel (such as in \"Ynglingatal\"; \"hve\u00f0rungs m\u00e6r\") and in reference to Fenrir (as in \"V\u00f6luspa\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the \"Poetic Edda\", Loki appears (or is referenced) in the poems \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", \"Lokasenna\", \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\", \"Reginsm\u00e1l\", \"Baldrs draumar\", and \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In stanza 35 of the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", a v\u00f6lva tells Odin that, among many other things, she sees Sigyn sitting very unhappily with her bound husband, Loki, under a \"grove of hot springs\". In stanza 51, during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, Loki appears free from his bonds and is referred to as the \"brother of B\u00fdleistr\" (here transcribed as \"Byleist\"):", "qas": []}, {"context": "In stanza 54, after consuming Odin and being killed by Odin's son V\u00ed\u00f0arr, Fenrir is described as \"Loki's kinsman\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The poem \"Lokasenna\" (Old Norse \"Loki's Quarrel\") centers around Loki flyting with other gods; Loki puts forth two stanzas of insults while the receiving figure responds with a single stanza, and then another figure chimes in. The poem begins with a prose introduction detailing that \u00c6gir, a figure associated with the sea, is hosting a feast in his hall for a number of the gods and elves. There, the gods praise \u00c6gir's servers Fimafeng and Eldir. Loki \"could not bear to hear that,\" and kills the servant Fimafeng. In response, the gods grab their shields, shrieking at Loki, and chase him out of the hall and to the woods. The gods then return to the hall, and continue drinking.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki comes out of the woods, and meets Eldir outside of the hall. Loki greets Eldir (and the poem itself begins) with a demand that Eldir tell him what the gods are discussing over their ale inside the hall. Eldir responds that they discuss their \"weapons and their prowess in war\" and yet no one there has anything friendly to say about Loki. Loki says that he will go into the feast, and that, before the end of the feast, he will induce quarrelling among the gods, and \"mix their mead with malice.\" Eldir responds that \"if shouting and fighting you pour out on\" to the gods, \"they'll wipe it off on you.\" Loki then enters the hall, and everyone there falls silent upon noticing him.", "qas": [{"question": "what does loki stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Breaking the silence, Loki says that, thirsty, he had come to these halls from a long way away to ask the gods for a drink of \"the famous mead.\" Calling the gods arrogant, Loki asks why they are unable to speak, and demands that they assign him a seat and a place for him at the feast, or tell him to leave. The skaldic god Bragi is the first to respond to Loki by telling him that Loki will not have a seat and place assigned to him by the gods at the feast, for the gods know what men they should invite. Loki does not respond to Bragi directly, but instead directs his attention to Odin, and states:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Odin then asks his silent son V\u00ed\u00f0arr to sit up, so that Loki (here referred to as the \"wolf's father\") may sit at the feast, and so that he may not speak words of blame to the gods in \u00c6gir's hall. V\u00ed\u00f0arr stands and pours a drink for Loki. Prior to drinking, Loki declaims a toast to the gods, with a specific exception for Bragi. Bragi responds that he will give a horse, sword, and ring from his possessions so that he does not repay the gods \"with hatred.\" Loki responds that Bragi will always be short of all of these things, accusing him of being \"wary of war\" and \"shy of shooting.\" Bragi responds that, were they outside of \u00c6gir's hall, Bragi would be holding Loki's head as a reward for his lies. Loki replies that Bragi is brave when seated, calling him a \"bench-ornament,\" and that Bragi would run away when troubled by an angry, spirited man.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The goddess I\u00f0unn interrupts, asking Bragi, as a service to his relatives and adopted relatives, not to say words of blame to Loki in \u00c6gir's hall. Loki tells I\u00f0unn to be silent, calling her the most \"man-crazed\" of all women, and saying that she placed her washed, bright arms around her brother's slayer. I\u00f0unn says that she won't say words of blame in \u00c6gir's hall, and affirms that she quietened Bragi, who was made talkative by beer, and that she doesn't want the two of them to fight. The goddess Gefjun asks why the two gods must fight, saying that Loki knows that he is joking, and that \"all living things love him.\" Loki responds to Gefjun by stating that Gefjun's heart was once seduced by a \"white boy\" who gave her a jewel, and who Gefjun laid her thigh over.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Odin says that Loki must be insane to make Gefjun his enemy, as her wisdom about the fates of men may equal Odin's own. Loki says that Odin does a poor job in handing out honor in war to men, and that he's often given victory to the faint-hearted. Odin responds that even if this is true, Loki (in a story otherwise unattested) once spent eight winters beneath the earth as a woman milking cows, and during this time bore children. Odin declares this perverse. Loki counters that Odin once practiced sei\u00f0r (a type of sorcery) on the island of \"Samsey\" (now Sams\u00f8, Denmark), and, appearing as a wizard, traveled among mankind, which Loki condemns as perverse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Frigg, a major goddess and Odin's wife, says that what Loki and Odin did in the ancient past should not be spoken of in front of others, and that ancient matters should always remain hidden. Loki brings up that Frigg is the daughter of Fj\u00f6rgyn, a personification of the earth, and that she had once taken Odin's brothers Vili and V\u00e9 into her embrace. Frigg responds that if there was a boy like her now-deceased son Baldr in the hall, Loki would not be able to escape from the wrath of the gods. Loki reminds Frigg that he is responsible for the death of her son Baldr.", "qas": [{"question": "who is responsible for the death of victorias son ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 15, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The goddess Freyja declares that Loki must be mad, stating that Frigg knows all fate, yet she does not speak it. Loki claims each of the gods and elves that are present have been Freyja's lover. Freyja replies that Loki is lying, that he just wants to \"yelp about wicked things\" that gods and goddesses are furious with him, and that he will go home thwarted. In response, Loki calls Freyja a malicious witch, and claims that Freyja was once astride her brother Freyr, when all of the other laughing gods surprised her, Freyja then farted. This scenario is otherwise unattested. Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r (Freyja and Freyr's father) says that it is harmless for a woman to have a lover or \"someone else\" beside her husband, and that what is surprising is a \"pervert god coming here who has borne children.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki tells Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r to be silent, recalling Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r's status as once having been a hostage from the Vanir to the \u00c6sir during the \u00c6sir-Vanir War, that the \"daughters of Hymir\" once used Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r \"as a pisspot,\" urinating in his mouth (an otherwise unattested comment). Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r responds that this was his reward when he was sent as a hostage to the \u00c6sir, and that he fathered his son (Freyr), whom no one hates, and is considered a prince of the \u00c6sir. Loki tells Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r to maintain his moderation, and that he won't keep it secret any longer that Nj\u00f6r\u00f0r fathered this son with his sister (unnamed), although one would expect him to be worse than he turned out.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The god Tyr defends Freyr, to which Loki replies that Tyr should be silent, for Tyr cannot \"deal straight with people,\" and points out that it was Loki's son, the wolf Fenrir, who tore Tyr's hand off. (According to the prose introduction to the poem Tyr is now one-handed from having his arm bitten off by Loki's son Fenrir while Fenrir was bound.) Tyr responds that while he may have lost a hand, Loki has lost the wolf, and trouble has come to them both. Further, that Fenrir must now wait in shackles until the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k. Loki tells Tyr to be silent a second time, and states that Tyr's wife (otherwise unattested) had a son by Loki, and that Tyr never received any compensation for this \"injury,\" further calling him a \"wretch.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Freyr himself interrupts at this point, and says that he sees a wolf lying before a river mouth, and that, unless Loki is immediately silent, like the wolf, Loki shall also be bound until Ragnar\u00f6k. Loki retorts that Freyr purchased his consort Ger\u00f0r with gold, having given away his sword, which he will lack at Ragnar\u00f6k. Byggvir (referred to in the prose introduction to the poem as a servant of Freyr) says that if he had as noble a lineage and as an honorable a seat as Freyr, he would grind down Loki, and make all of his limbs lame. Loki refers to Byggvir in terms of a dog, and says that Byggvir is always found at Freyr's ears, or twittering beneath a grindstone. Byggvir says that he's proud to be here by all the gods and men, and that he's said to be speedy. Loki tells him to be silent, that Byggvir does not know how to apportion food among men, and that he hides among the straw and dais when men go to battle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The god Heimdallr says that Loki is drunk and witless, and asks Loki why he won't stop speaking. Loki tells Heimdallr to be silent, that he was fated a \"hateful life,\" that Heimdallr must always have a muddy back, and serve as watchman of the gods. The goddess Ska\u00f0i says that while Loki now appears light-hearted and \"playing\" with his \"tail-wagging,\" he will soon be bound with his ice-cold son's guts on a sharp rock by the gods. Loki says that, even if this is his fate, that he was \"first and foremost\" with the other gods at the killing of Ska\u00f0i's father, \u00dejazi. Ska\u00f0i says that, with these events in mind, \"baneful advice\" will always come from her \"sanctuaries and plains\" to Loki. Loki says that Ska\u00f0i was once gentler in speech to him (referring to himself as the \"son of Laufey\") when Ska\u00f0i once invited him to her bed (an event that is unattested elsewhere), and that such events must be mentioned if they are to recall \"shameful deeds.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what does says mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sif, wife of Thor, goes forth and pours Loki a glass of mead into a crystal cup in a prose narrative. Continuing the poem, Sif welcomes Loki and invites him to take a crystal cup filled with ancient mead, and says that among the children of the \u00c6sir, she is singularly blameless. Loki \"takes the horn,\" drinks it, and says that she would be, if it were so, and states that Sif had a lover beside Thor, namely, Loki himself (an event that is otherwise unattested). Beyla (referred to in the prose introduction to the poem as a servant of Freyr) says that all of the mountains are shaking, that she thinks Thor must be on his way home, and when Thor arrives he will bring peace to those that quarrel there. Loki tells Beyla to be silent, that she is \"much imbued with malice,\" that no worse female has ever been among the \"\u00c6sir's children,\" and calling her a bad \"serving-wench.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thor arrives, and tells Loki to be silent, referring to him as an \"evil creature,\" stating that with his hammer Mj\u00f6llnir he will silence Loki by hammering his head from his shoulders. Acknowledging that Thor has arrived, Loki asks Thor why he is raging, and says that Thor won't be so bold to fight against the wolf when he swallows Odin at Ragnar\u00f6k. Thor again tells Loki to be silent, and threatens him with Mj\u00f6llnir, adding that he will throw Loki \"up on the roads to the east,\" and thereafter no one will be able to see Loki. Loki states that Thor should never brag of his journeys to the east, claiming that there Thor crouched cowering in the thumb of a glove, mockingly referring to him as a \"hero,\" and adding that such behaviour was unlike Thor. Thor responds by telling Loki to be silent, threatening him with Mj\u00f6llnir, and adding that every one of Loki's bones will be broken with it. Loki says he intends to live for a long while yet despite Thor's threats, and taunts Thor about an encounter Thor once had with the Skr\u00fdmir (\u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki in disguise). Thor again commands Loki to be silent, threatens Loki with Mj\u00f6llnir, and says he will send Loki to Hel, below the gates of N\u00e1grind.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the person who will commands ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 22, 6)"}, {"question": "what did thor call his head from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In response to Thor, Loki says that he \"spoke before the \u00c6sir,\" and \"before the sons of the \u00c6sir\" what his \"spirit urged\" him to say, yet before Thor alone he will leave, as he knows that Thor does strike. Loki ends the poetic verses of \"Lokasenna\" with a final stanza:", "qas": [{"question": "what does loki mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 23, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Following this final stanza a prose section details that after Loki left the hall, he disguised himself as a salmon and hid in the waterfall of Franangrsfors, where the \u00c6sir caught him. The narrative continues that Loki was bound with the entrails of his son Nari, and his son Narfi changed into a wolf. Ska\u00f0i fastened a venomous snake over Loki's face, and from it poison dripped. Sigyn, Loki's wife, sat with him holding a basin beneath the dripping venom, yet when the basin became full, she carried the poison away; and during this time the poison dripped on to Loki, causing him to writhe with such violence that all of the earth shook from the force, resulting in what are now known as earthquakes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the poem \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\", Thor wakes and finds that his powerful hammer, Mj\u00f6llnir, is missing. Thor turns to Loki first, and tells him that nobody knows that the hammer has been stolen. The two then go to the court of the goddess Freyja, and Thor asks her if he may borrow her feather cloak so that he may attempt to find Mj\u00f6llnir. Freyja agrees, saying she'd lend it even if it were made of silver and gold, and Loki flies off, the feather cloak whistling.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In J\u00f6tunheimr, the j\u00f6tunn \u00derymr sits on a burial mound, plaiting golden collars for his female dogs, and trimming the manes of his horses. \u00derymr sees Loki, and asks what could be amiss among the \u00c6sir and the Elves; why is Loki alone in the J\u00f6tunheimr? Loki responds that he has bad news for both the elves and the \u00c6sir: that Thor's hammer, Mj\u00f6llnir, is gone. \u00derymr says that he has hidden Mj\u00f6llnir eight leagues beneath the earth, from which it will be retrieved, if Freyja is brought to him as his wife. Loki flies off, the feather cloak whistling, away from J\u00f6tunheimr and back to the court of the gods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thor asks Loki if his efforts were successful, and that Loki should tell him while he's still in the air as \"tales often escape a sitting man, and the man lying down often barks out lies.\" Loki states that it was indeed an effort, and also a success, for he has discovered that \u00derymr has the hammer, but that it cannot be retrieved unless Freyja is brought to \u00derymr as his wife. The two return to Freyja, and tell her to dress herself in a bridal head dress, as they will drive her to J\u00f6tunheimr. Freyja, indignant and angry, goes into a rage, causing all of the halls of the \u00c6sir to tremble in her anger, and her necklace, the famed Br\u00edsingamen, falls from her. Freyja pointedly refuses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a result, the gods and goddesses meet and hold a thing to discuss and debate the matter. At the thing, the god Heimdallr puts forth the suggestion that, in place of Freyja, Thor should be dressed as the bride, complete with jewels, women's clothing down to his knees, a bridal head-dress, and the necklace Br\u00edsingamen. Thor rejects the idea, and Loki (here described as \"son of Laufey\") interjects that this will be the only way to get back Mj\u00f6llnir, and points out that without Mj\u00f6llnir, the j\u00f6tnar will be able to invade and settle in Asgard. The gods dress Thor as a bride, and Loki states that he will go with Thor as his maid, and that the two shall drive to J\u00f6tunheimr together.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After riding together in Thor's goat-driven chariot, the two, disguised, arrive in J\u00f6tunheimr. \u00derymr commands the j\u00f6tnar in his hall to spread straw on the benches, for Freyja has arrived to be his wife. \u00derymr recounts his treasured animals and objects, stating that Freyja was all that he was missing in his wealth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Early in the evening, the disguised Loki and Thor meet with \u00derymr and the assembled j\u00f6tnar. Thor eats and drinks ferociously, consuming entire animals and three casks of mead. \u00derymr finds the behaviour at odds with his impression of Freyja, and Loki, sitting before \u00derymr and appearing as a \"very shrewd maid\", makes the excuse that \"Freyja's\" behaviour is due to her having not consumed anything for eight entire days before arriving due to her eagerness to arrive. \u00derymr then lifts \"Freyja's\" veil and wants to kiss \"her\" until catching the terrifying eyes staring back at him, seemingly burning with fire. Loki states that this is because \"Freyja\" had not slept for eight nights in her eagerness.", "qas": [{"question": "how many nights in her eagerness did loki have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 30, 4)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the group that thor and thor together with thor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"wretched sister\" of the j\u00f6tnar appears, asks for a bridal gift from \"Freyja\", and the j\u00f6tnar bring out Mj\u00f6llnir to \"sanctify the bride\", to lay it on her lap, and marry the two by \"the hand\" of the goddess V\u00e1r. Thor laughs internally when he sees the hammer, takes hold of it, strikes \u00derymr, beats all of the j\u00f6tnar, and kills the \"older sister\" of the j\u00f6tnar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki appears in both prose and the first six stanzas of the poem \"Reginsm\u00e1l\". The prose introduction to \"Reginsm\u00e1l\" details that, while the hero Sigurd was being fostered by Regin, son of Hreidmar, Regin tells him that once the gods Odin, H\u0153nir, and Loki went to Andvara-falls, which contained many fish. Regin, a dwarf, had two brothers; Andvari, who gained food by spending time in the Andvara-falls in the form of a pike, and \u00d3tr, who would often go to the Andvara-falls in the form of an otter.", "qas": [{"question": "how many stanzas of the poet 's poem did loki appear in ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While the three gods are at the falls, \u00d3tr (in the form of an otter) catches a salmon and eats it on a river bank, his eyes shut, when Loki hits and kills him with a stone. The gods think that this is great, and flay the skin from the otter to make a bag. That night, the three gods stay with Hreidmar (the father of Regin, Andvari, and the now-dead \u00d3tr) and show him their catches, including the skin of the otter. Upon seeing the skin, Regin and Hreidmar \"seized them and made them ransom their lives\" in exchange for filling the otterskin bag the gods had made with gold and covering the exterior of the bag with red gold.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki is sent to retrieve the gold, and Loki goes to the goddess R\u00e1n, borrows her net, and then goes back to the Andvara-falls. At the falls, Loki spreads his net before Andvari (who is in the form of a pike), which Andvari jumps into. The stanzas of the poem then begin: Loki mocks Andvari, and tells him that he can save his head by telling Loki where his gold is. Andvari gives some background information about himself, including that he was cursed by a \"norn of misfortune\" in his \"early days\". Loki responds by asking Andvari \"what requital\" does mankind get if \"they wound each other with words\". Andvari responds that lying men receive a \"terrible requital\": having to wade in the river Vadgelmir, and that their suffering will be long.", "qas": [{"question": "who is sent to retrieve the gold ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Loki looks over the gold that Andvari possesses, and after Andvari hands over all of his gold, Andvari holds on to but a single ring; the ring Andvarinaut, which Loki also takes. Andvari, now in the form of a dwarf, goes into a rock, and tells Loki that the gold will result in the death of two brothers, will cause strife between eight princes, and will be useless to everyone.", "qas": [{"question": "what does andvari stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Loki returns, and the three gods give Hreidmar the money from the gold hoard and flatten out the otter skin, stretch out its legs, and heap gold atop it, covering it. Hreidmar looks it over, and notices a single hair that has not been covered. Hreidmar demands that it be covered as well. Odin puts forth the ring Andvarinaut, covering the single hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki states that they have now handed over the gold, and that gold is cursed as Andvari is, and that it will be the death of Hreidmar and Regin both. Hreidmar responds that if he had known this before, he would have taken their lives, yet that he believes those are not yet born whom the curse is intended for, and that he doesn't believe him. Further, with the hoard, he will have red gold for the rest of his life. Hreidmar tells them to leave, and the poem continues without further mention of Loki.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Baldr draumar\", Odin has awoken a deceased v\u00f6lva in Hel, and questions her repeatedly about his son Baldr's bad dreams. Loki is mentioned in stanza 14, the final stanza of the poem, where the v\u00f6lva tells Odin to ride home, to be proud of himself, and that no one else will come visit until \"Loki is loose, escaped from his bonds\" and the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki is referenced in two stanzas in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 hin skamma\", found within the poem \"Hyndlulj\u00f3\u00f0\". The first stanza notes that Loki produced \"the wolf\" with the j\u00f6tunn Angrbo\u00f0a, that Loki himself gave birth to the horse Sleipnir by the stallion Sva\u00f0ilfari, and that Loki (referred to as the \"brother of B\u00fdleistr\") thirdly gave birth to \"the worst of all marvels\". This stanza is followed by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the second of the two stanzas, Loki is referred to as \"Lopt\". Loki's consumption of a woman's heart is otherwise unattested.", "qas": [{"question": "what is loki ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 40, 0)"}, {"question": "what is a woman's heart ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 40, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In the poem \"Fj\u00f6lsvinnsm\u00e1l\", a stanza mentions Loki (as \"Lopt\") in association with runes. In the poem, Fj\u00f6lsvi\u00f0r describes to the hero Svipdagr that Sinmara keeps the weapon L\u00e6vateinn within a chest, locked with nine strong locks (due to significant translation differences, two translations of the stanza are provided here):", "qas": [{"question": "what does fj\u00f6lsvinnsm\u00e1l mean in english ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 41, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"Prose Edda\" book \"Gylfaginning\" tells various myths featuring Loki, including Loki's role in the birth of the horse Sleipnir and Loki's contest with Logi, fire personified.", "qas": [{"question": "what does `` gylfaginning '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "High's introduction", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki first appears in the \"Prose Edda\" in chapter 20 of the book \"Gylfaginning\", where he is referred to as the \"\u00e1s called Loki\" while the enthroned figure of Third explains to \"Gangleri\" (King Gylfi in disguise) the goddess Frigg's prophetic abilities while citing a stanza of \"Lokasenna\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki is more formally introduced by High in chapter 34, where he is \"reckoned among the \u00c6sir\", and High states that Loki is called by some \"the \u00c6sir's calumniator\", \"originator of deceits\", and \"the disgrace of all gods and men\". High says that Loki's alternative name is \"Lopt\", that he is the son of the male j\u00f6tunn F\u00e1rbauti, his mother is \"Laufey or N\u00e1l\", and his brothers are Helblindi and B\u00fdleistr. High describes Loki as \"pleasing and handsome\" in appearance, malicious in character, \"very capricious in behaviour\", and as possessing \"to a greater degree than others\" learned cunning, and \"tricks for every purpose\", often getting the \u00c6sir into trouble, and then getting them out of it with his trickery. Loki's wife is named Sigyn, and they have a son named \"Nari or Narfi\". Otherwise, Loki had three children with the female j\u00f6tunn Angrbo\u00f0a from J\u00f6tunheimr; the wolf Fenrir, the serpent J\u00f6rmungandr, and the female being Hel. The gods realized that these three children were being raised in J\u00f6tunheimr, and expected trouble from them partially due to the nature of Angrbo\u00f0a, but worse yet Loki. In chapter 35, Gangleri comments that Loki produced a \"pretty terrible\"\u2014yet important\u2014family.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki, Sva\u00f0ilfari, and Sleipnir", "qas": []}, {"context": "In chapter 42, High tells a story set \"right at the beginning of the gods' settlement, when the gods at established Midgard and built Val-Hall.\" The story is about an unnamed builder who has offered to build a fortification for the gods that will keep out invaders in exchange for the goddess Freyja, the sun, and the moon. After some debate, the gods agree to these conditions, but place a number of restrictions on the builder, including that he must complete the work within three seasons without the help of any man. The builder makes a single request; that he may have help from his stallion Sva\u00f0ilfari, and due to Loki's influence, this is allowed. The stallion Sva\u00f0ilfari performs twice the deeds of strength as the builder, and hauls enormous rocks\u2014to the surprise of the gods. The builder, with Sva\u00f0ilfari, makes fast progress on the wall, and three days before the deadline of summer, the builder is nearly at the entrance to the fortification. The gods convene, and figure out who is responsible, resulting in a unanimous agreement that, along with most trouble, Loki is to blame (here referred to as \"Loki Laufeyjarson\"\u2014his surname derived from his mother's name, \"Laufey\").\nThe gods declare that Loki deserves a horrible death if he cannot find a scheme that will cause the builder to forfeit his payment, and threaten to attack him. Loki, afraid, swears oaths that he will devise a scheme to cause the builder to forfeit the payment, whatever it may cost himself. That night, the builder drives out to fetch stone with his stallion Sva\u00f0ilfari, and out from a wood runs a mare. The mare neighs at Sva\u00f0ilfari, and \"realizing what kind of horse it was,\" Sva\u00f0ilfari becomes frantic, neighs, tears apart his tackle, and runs towards the mare. The mare runs to the wood, Sva\u00f0ilfari follows, and the builder chases after. The two horses run around all night, causing the building to be halted and the builder is then unable to regain the previous momentum of his work.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The builder goes into a rage, and when the \u00c6sir realize that the builder is a hrimthurs, they disregard their previous oaths with the builder, and call for Thor. Thor arrives, and subsequently kills the builder by smashing the builder's skull into shards with the hammer Mj\u00f6llnir. However, Loki \"had such dealings\" with Sva\u00f0ilfari that \"somewhat later\" Loki gives birth to a gray foal with eight legs; the horse Sleipnir\u2014\"the best horse among gods and men.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki, \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki, and Logi", "qas": []}, {"context": "In chapter 44, Third reluctantly relates a tale where Thor and Loki are riding in Thor's chariot, which is pulled by his two goats. Loki and Thor stop at the house of a peasant farmer, and there they are given lodging for a night. Thor slaughters his goats, prepares them, puts them in a pot, and Loki and Thor sit down for their evening meal. Thor invites the peasant family who own the farm to share with him the meal he has prepared, but warns them not to break the bones. Afterward, at the suggestion of Loki, the peasant child \u00dej\u00e1lfi sucks the bone marrow from one of the goat bones, and when Thor goes to resurrect the goats, he finds one of the goats to be lame. In their terror, the family atones to Thor by giving Thor their son \u00dej\u00e1lfi and their daughter R\u00f6skva.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Minus the goats, Thor, Loki, and the two children continue east until they arrive at a vast forest in J\u00f6tunheimr. They continue through the woods until dark. The four seek shelter for the night. They encounter an immense building. Finding shelter in a side room, they experience earthquakes through the night. The earthquakes cause all four but Thor, who grips his hammer in preparation of defense, to be fearful. The building turns out to be the huge glove of Skrymir, who has been snoring throughout the night, causing what seemed to be earthquakes. All four sleep beneath an oak tree near Skrymir in fear.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thor wakes up in the middle of the night, and a series of events occur where Thor twice attempts to kill the sleeping Skr\u00fdmir with his hammer. Skr\u00fdmir awakes after each attempt, only to say that he detected an acorn falling on his head or that he wonders if bits of tree from the branches above have fallen on top of him. The second attempt awakes Skr\u00fdmir. Skr\u00fdmir gives them advice; if they are going to be cocky at the keep of \u00datgar\u00f0r it would be better for them to turn back now, for \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki's men there won't put up with it. Skr\u00fdmir throws his knapsack onto his back and abruptly goes into the forest. High comments that \"there is no report that the \u00c6sir expressed hope for a happy reunion\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The four travelers continue their journey until midday. They find themselves facing a massive castle in an open area. The castle is so tall that they must bend their heads back to their spines to see above it. At the entrance to the castle is a shut gate, and Thor finds that he cannot open it. Struggling, all four squeeze through the bars of the gate, and continue to a large hall. Inside the great hall are two benches, where many generally large people sit on two benches. The four see \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki, the king of the castle, sitting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki says that no visitors are allowed to stay unless they can perform a feat. Loki, standing in the rear of the party, is the first to speak, claiming that he can eat faster than anyone. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki comments that this would be a feat indeed, and calls for a being by the name of Logi to come from the benches. A trencher is fetched, placed on the floor of the hall, and filled with meat. Loki and Logi sit down on opposing sides. The two eat as quickly as they can and meet at the midpoint of the trencher. Loki consumed all of the meat off of the bones on his side, yet Logi had not only consumed his meat, but also the bones and the trencher itself. It was evident to all that Loki had lost. In turn, \u00dej\u00e1lfi races against a figure by the name of Hugi three times and thrice loses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thor agrees to compete in a drinking contest but after three immense gulps fails. Thor agrees to lift a large, gray cat in the hall but finds that it arches his back no matter what he does, and that he can raise only a single paw. Thor demands to fight someone in the hall, but the inhabitants say doing so would be demeaning, considering Thor's weakness. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki then calls for his nurse Elli, an old woman. The two wrestle but the harder Thor struggles the more difficult the battle becomes. Thor is finally brought down to a single knee. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki says to Thor that fighting anyone else would be pointless. Now late at night, \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki shows the group to their rooms and they are treated with hospitality.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The next morning the group gets dressed and prepares to leave the keep. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki appears, has his servants prepare a table, and they all merrily eat and drink. As they leave, \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki asks Thor how he thought he fared in the contests. Thor says that he is unable to say he did well, noting that he is particularly annoyed that \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki will now speak negatively about him. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki points out that the group has left his keep and says that he hopes that they never return to it, for if he had an inkling of what he was dealing with he would never have allowed the group to enter in the first place. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki reveals that all was not what it seemed to the group. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki was in fact the immense Skr\u00fdmir, and that if the three blows Thor attempted to land had hit their mark, the first would have killed Skr\u00fdmir. In reality, Thor's blows were so powerful that they had resulted in three square valleys.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The contests, too, were an illusion. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki reveals that Loki had actually competed against wildfire itself (\"Logi\", Old Norse \"flame\"), \u00dej\u00e1lfi had raced against thought (\"Hugi\", Old Norse \"thought\"), Thor's drinking horn had actually reached to the ocean and with his drinks he lowered the ocean level (resulting in tides). The cat that Thor attempted to lift was in actuality the world serpent, J\u00f6rmungandr, and everyone was terrified when Thor was able to lift the paw of this \"cat\", for Thor had actually held the great serpent up to the sky. The old woman Thor wrestled was in fact old age (\"Elli\", Old Norse \"old age\"), and there is no one that old age cannot bring down. \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki tells Thor that it would be better for \"both sides\" if they did not meet again. Upon hearing this, Thor takes hold of his hammer and swings it at \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki but he is gone and so is his castle. Only a wide landscape remains.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki is mentioned in stanza 13 of the Norwegian rune poem in connection with the Younger Futhark Bjarkan rune:", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Bruce Dickins, the reference to \"Loki's deceit\" in the poem \"is doubtless to Loki's responsibility for Balder's death.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1950, a semi-circular flat stone featuring a depiction of a mustachioed face was discovered on a beach near Snaptun, Denmark. Made of soapstone that originated in Norway or Sweden, the depiction was carved around the year 1000 CE and features a face with scarred lips. The figure is identified as Loki due to his lips, considered a reference to a tale recorded in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" where sons of Ivaldi stitch up Loki's lips.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The stone is identified as a hearth stone; the nozzle of the bellows would be inserted into the hole in the front of the stone, and the air produced by the bellows pushed flame through the top hole, all the while the bellows were protected from the heat and flame. The stone may point to a connection between Loki and smithing and flames. According to Hans J\u00f8rgen Madsen, the Snaptun Stone is \"the most beautifully made hearth-stone that is known.\" The stone is housed and on display at the Moesg\u00e5rd Museum near Aarhus, Denmark.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A fragmentary late 10th-century cross located in St Stephen's Church, Kirkby Stephen, Cumbria, England, features a bound figure with horns and a beard. This figure is sometimes theorized as depicting the bound Loki. Discovered in 1870, the stone consists of yellowish-white sandstone, and now sits at the front of the Kirkby Stephen church. A depiction of a similarly horned and round-shouldered figure was discovered in Gainford, County Durham and is now housed in the Durham Cathedral Library.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The mid-11th century Gosforth Cross has been interpreted as featuring various figures from Norse mythology and, like the Kirkby Stephen Stone, is also located in Cumbria. The bottom portion of the west side of the cross features a depiction of a long-haired female, kneeling figure holding an object above another prostrate, bound figure. Above and to their left is a knotted serpent. This has been interpreted as Sigyn soothing the bound Loki.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The notion of Loki survived into the modern period in the folklore of Scandinavia. In Denmark, Loki appeared as \"Lokke\". In Jutland, the phrases \"Lokke sl\u00e5r sin havre\" (\"Lokke is reaping his oats\") and \"Lokkemand driver sine geder\" (\"Lokkemand drives his goats\") are thereby recorded in the beginning of the 20th century, the latter with the variation of simply \"Lokke\". In Zealand the name \"Lokke lejemand\" (\"Lokke the Playing Man\") was used. In his study of Loki's appearance in Scandinavian folklore in the modern period, Danish folklorist Axel Olrik cites numerous examples of natural phenomena explained by way of Lokke in popular folk tradition, including rising heat. An example from 1841 reads as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "And in Thy, from the same source: \"... when you look at the horizon in clear weather and sunshine, and the air seems to move in shimmering waves, or like a sheet of water which seems to rise and sink in waves.\" Olrik further cites several different types of plants named after Loki. Olrik detects three major themes in folklore attestations; Lokke appeared as an \"air phenomenon\", connected with the \"home fire\", and as a \"teasing creature of the night\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Loka T\u00e1ttur\" or \"Lokka T\u00e1ttur\" (Faroese \"tale\u2014or \"\u00fe\u00e1ttr\"\u2014of Loki\") is a Faroese ballad dating to the late Middle Ages that features the gods Loki, Odin, and H\u0153nir helping a farmer and a boy escape the wrath of a bet-winning j\u00f6tunn. The tale notably features Loki as a benevolent god in this story, although his slyness is in evidence as usual.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regarding scholarship on Loki, scholar Gabriel Turville-Petre comments (1964) that \"more ink has been spilled on Loki than on any other figure in Norse myth. This, in itself, is enough to show how little scholars agree, and how far we are from understanding him.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology have been much debated by scholars. In 1835, Jacob Grimm was first to produce a major theory about Loki, in which he advanced the notion of Loki as a \"god of fire\". In 1889, Sophus Bugge theorized Loki to be variant of Lucifer of Christianity, an element of Bugge's larger effort to find a basis of Christianity in Norse mythology. After World War II, four scholarly theories dominated. The first of the four theories is that of Folke Str\u00f6m, who in 1956 concluded that Loki is a hypostasis of the god Odin. In 1959, Jan de Vries theorized that Loki is a typical example of a trickster figure. In 1961, by way of excluding all non-Scandinavian mythological parallels in her analysis, Anna Birgitta Rooth concluded that Loki was originally a spider. Anne Holtsmark, writing in 1962, concluded that no conclusion could be made about Loki.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A popular theory proposed by the scholar Ursula Dronke is that \"L\u00f3\u00f0urr\" is \"a third name of Loki/Loptr\". The main argument for this is that the gods Odin, H\u0153nir and Loki occur as a trio in \"Haustl\u00f6ng\", in the prose prologue to \"Reginsm\u00e1l\" and also in the \"Loka T\u00e1ttur\" a Faroese ballad, an example of Norse deities appearing in later folklore. The Odin-kenning \"L\u00f3\u00f0urr's friend\" furthermore appears to parallel the kenning \"Loptr's friend\" and Loki is similarly referred to as \"H\u0153nir's friend\" in \"Haustl\u00f6ng\", strengthening the trio connection. While many scholars agree with this identification, it is not universally accepted. One argument against it is that Loki appears as a malevolent being later in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", seemingly conflicting with the image of L\u00f3\u00f0urr as a \"mighty and loving\" figure. Many scholars, including Jan de Vries and Georges Dum\u00e9zil, have also identified L\u00f3\u00f0urr as being the same deity as Loki. Scholar Haukur \u00deorgeirsson suggests that \"Loki\" and \"L\u00f3\u00f0urr\" were different names for the same deity based on that Loki is referred to as L\u00f3\u00f0ur in the r\u00edmur \"Lokrur\". \u00deorgeirsson argues that the writer must have had information about the identification from either a tradition or that the author drew the conclusion based on the \"Prose Edda\", as Snorri does not mention L\u00f3\u00f0urr. Since the contents of the \"Poetic Edda\" are assumed to have been forgotten around 1400 when the r\u00edmur was written, Haukur argues for a traditional identification. \u00deorgeirsson also points to \"\u00derymlur\" where the same identification is made with Loki and L\u00f3\u00f0urr. Haukur says that unless the possible but unlikely idea that the 14th- and 15th-century poets possessed written sources unknown to us is true, the idea must have come from either an unlikely amount of sources from where the poets could have drawn a similar conclusion that Loki and L\u00f3\u00f0urr are identical (like some recent scholars) or that remnants of an oral tradition remained. Haukur concludes that if L\u00f3\u00f0urr was historically considered an independent deity from Loki, then a discussion of when and why he became identified with Loki is appropriate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The scholar John Lindow highlights the recurring pattern of the bound monster in Norse mythology as being particularly associated to Loki. Loki and his three children by Angrboda were all bound in some way, and were all destined to break free at Ragnarok to wreak havoc on the world. He suggests a borrowed element from the traditions of the Caucasus region, and identifies a mythological parallel with the \"Christian legend of the bound Antichrist awaiting the Last Judgment\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki has been depicted in or is referred to in an array of media in modern popular culture. During the 19th century, Loki was depicted in a variety of manners, sometimes strongly at odds. According to Stefan Arvidssen, \"the conception of Loki varied during the nineteenth century. Sometimes he was presented as a dark-haired Semitic fifth columnist among the Nordic Aesir, but sometimes he was described as a Nordic Prometheus, a heroic bearer of culture\". Famously, Loki appears in Richard Wagner's opera cycle Ring of the Nibelung as \"Loge\" (a play on Old Norse \"loge\" \"fire\"). He is depicted as an ally of the gods (specifically Wotan's assistant rather than Donner's), although he generally dislikes them and thinks of them as greedy, as they refuse to return the Rhine Gold to its rightful owners. In the conclusion of the first opera \"Das Rheingold\" he reveals his hope to turn into fire and destroy Valhalla, and in the final opera \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" Valhalla is set alight, destroying the Gods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki appears in Marvel Comics and in the Marvel Cinematic Universe as an antihero where he consistently comes into conflict with the superhero Thor, his adopted brother and archenemy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki appears in the 1975 fantasy novel \"Eight Days of Luke\" by Diana Wynne Jones. He is also a central character in Neil Gaiman's novel \"American Gods\" and an important character in a few arcs of Gaiman's comic \"The Sandman\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Loki's Castle is a group of five black smokers discovered in 2008 between Greenland and Norway, the most northerly group so far discovered. The vent field was named after the god as its shape reminded its discoverers of a fantasy castle. The reference to Loki is explained by a University of Bergen press release as \"an appropriate name for a field that was so difficult to locate\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lisp (programming language)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Lisp (historically LISP) is a family of computer programming languages with a long history and a distinctive, fully parenthesized prefix notation.\nOriginally specified in 1958, Lisp is the second-oldest high-level programming language in widespread use today. Only Fortran is older, by one year. Lisp has changed since its early days, and many dialects have existed over its history. Today, the best known general-purpose Lisp dialects are Clojure, Common Lisp, and Scheme.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the best known lisp dialects ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 0, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Lisp was originally created as a practical mathematical notation for computer programs, influenced by the notation of Alonzo Church's lambda calculus. It quickly became the favored programming language for artificial intelligence (AI) research. As one of the earliest programming languages, Lisp pioneered many ideas in computer science, including tree data structures, automatic storage management, dynamic typing, conditionals, higher-order functions, recursion, the self-hosting compiler, and the read\u2013eval\u2013print loop.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The name \"LISP\" derives from \"LISt Processor\". Linked lists are one of Lisp's major data structures, and Lisp source code is made of lists. Thus, Lisp programs can manipulate source code as a data structure, giving rise to the macro systems that allow programmers to create new syntax or new domain-specific languages embedded in Lisp.", "qas": [{"question": "what does `` list '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The interchangeability of code and data gives Lisp its instantly recognizable syntax. All program code is written as \"s-expressions\", or parenthesized lists. A function call or syntactic form is written as a list with the function or operator's name first, and the arguments following; for instance, a function that takes three arguments would be called as .", "qas": []}, {"context": "John McCarthy developed Lisp in 1958 while he was at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). McCarthy published its design in a paper in \"Communications of the ACM\" in 1960, entitled \"Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I\". He showed that with a few simple operators and a notation for functions, one can build a Turing-complete language for algorithms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Information Processing Language was the first AI language, from 1955 or 1956, and already included many of the concepts, such as list-processing and recursion, which came to be used in Lisp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "McCarthy's original notation used bracketed \"M-expressions\" that would be translated into S-expressions. As an example, the M-expression is equivalent to the S-expression . Once Lisp was implemented, programmers rapidly chose to use S-expressions, and M-expressions were abandoned. M-expressions surfaced again with short-lived attempts of MLisp by Horace Enea and CGOL by Vaughan Pratt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp was first implemented by Steve Russell on an IBM 704 computer. Russell had read McCarthy's paper and realized (to McCarthy's surprise) that the Lisp \"eval\" function could be implemented in machine code. The result was a working Lisp interpreter which could be used to run Lisp programs, or more properly, \"evaluate Lisp expressions\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is the result of a translator translator ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 7, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Two assembly language macros for the IBM 704 became the primitive operations for decomposing lists: (\"Contents of the Address part of Register\" number) and (\"Contents of the Decrement part of Register\" number), where the term \"register\" is used to mean \"memory register\", nowadays called \"memory location\". Lisp dialects still use and ( and ) for the operations that return the first item in a list and the rest of the list, respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first complete Lisp compiler, written in Lisp, was implemented in 1962 by Tim Hart and Mike Levin at MIT. This compiler introduced the Lisp model of incremental compilation, in which compiled and interpreted functions can intermix freely. The language used in Hart and Levin's memo is much closer to modern Lisp style than McCarthy's earlier code.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the first complete lisp script created ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Lisp was a difficult system to implement with the compiler techniques and stock hardware of the 1970s. Garbage collection routines, developed by MIT graduate student Daniel Edwards, made it practical to run Lisp on general-purpose computing systems, but efficiency was still a problem. This led to the creation of Lisp machines: dedicated hardware for running Lisp environments and programs.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the creation of lisp provide ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 10, 2)"}]}, {"context": "During the 1980s and 1990s, a great effort was made to unify the work on new Lisp dialects (mostly successors to Maclisp such as ZetaLisp and NIL (New Implementation of Lisp) into a single language. The new language, Common Lisp, was somewhat compatible with the dialects it replaced (the book \"Common Lisp the Language\" notes the compatibility of various constructs). In 1994, ANSI published the Common Lisp standard, \"ANSI X3.226-1994 Information Technology Programming Language Common Lisp\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is the standard standard standard ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 11, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Since inception, Lisp was closely connected with the artificial intelligence research community, especially on PDP-10 systems. Lisp was used as the implementation of the programming language Micro Planner which was used in the famous AI system SHRDLU. In the 1970s, as AI research spawned commercial offshoots, the performance of existing Lisp systems became a growing issue.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over its sixty-year history, Lisp has spawned many variations on the core theme of an S-expression language. Moreover, each given dialect may have several implementations\u2014for instance, there are more than a dozen implementations of Common Lisp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Differences between dialects may be quite visible\u2014for instance, Common Lisp uses the keyword codice_1 to name a function, but Scheme uses codice_2. Within a dialect that is standardized, however, conforming implementations support the same core language, but with different extensions and libraries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAfter having declined somewhat in the 1990s, Lisp has experienced a resurgence of interest after 2000. Most new activity has been focused around implementations of Common Lisp, Scheme, Emacs Lisp, Clojure, and Racket, and includes development of new portable libraries and applications.", "qas": [{"question": "in what decade did lisp decline ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Many new Lisp programmers were inspired by writers such as Paul Graham and Eric S. Raymond to pursue a language others considered antiquated. New Lisp programmers often describe the language as an eye-opening experience and claim to be substantially more productive than in other languages. This increase in awareness may be contrasted to the \"AI winter\" and Lisp's brief gain in the mid-1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dan Weinreb lists in his survey of Common Lisp implementations eleven actively maintained Common Lisp implementations. Scieneer Common Lisp is a new commercial implementation forked from CMUCL with a first release in 2002.", "qas": [{"question": "how many actively implementations configurations are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The open source community has created new supporting infrastructure: CLiki is a wiki that collects Common Lisp related information, the Common Lisp directory lists resources, #lisp is a popular IRC channel and allows the sharing and commenting of code snippets (with support by lisppaste, an IRC bot written in Lisp), Planet Lisp collects the contents of various Lisp-related blogs, on LispForum users discuss Lisp topics, Lispjobs is a service for announcing job offers and there is a weekly news service, \"Weekly Lisp News\". \"Common-lisp.net\" is a hosting site for open source Common Lisp projects. Quicklisp is a library manager for Common Lisp.", "qas": [{"question": "what is quicklisp ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 18, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Fifty years of Lisp (1958\u20132008) was celebrated at LISP50@OOPSLA. There are regular local user meetings in Boston, Vancouver, and Hamburg. Other events include the European Common Lisp Meeting, the European Lisp Symposium and an International Lisp Conference.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the european common conference ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 19, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The Scheme community actively maintains over twenty implementations. Several significant new implementations (Chicken, Gambit, Gauche, Ikarus, Larceny, Ypsilon) have been developed in the 2000s (decade). The Revised Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme standard of Scheme was widely accepted in the Scheme community. The Scheme Requests for Implementation process has created a lot of quasi standard libraries and extensions for Scheme. User communities of individual Scheme implementations continue to grow. A new language standardization process was started in 2003 and led to the RRS Scheme standard in 2007. Academic use of Scheme for teaching computer science seems to have declined somewhat. Some universities are no longer using Scheme in their computer science introductory courses; MIT now uses Python instead of Scheme for its undergraduate computer science program and MITx massive open online course.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several new dialects of Lisp: Arc, Hy, Nu, Liskell, and LFE (Lisp Flavored Erlang). The parser for Julia is implemented in Femtolisp, a dialect of Scheme (Julia is inspired by Scheme, and is often considered a Lisp).", "qas": [{"question": "what are some new dialects of lisp: ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Common Lisp and Scheme represent two major streams of Lisp development. These languages embody significantly different design choices.", "qas": [{"question": "how many major streams of lisp development are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Common Lisp is a successor to Maclisp. The primary influences were Lisp Machine Lisp, Maclisp, NIL, S-1 Lisp, Spice Lisp, and Scheme. It has many of the features of Lisp Machine Lisp (a large Lisp dialect used to program Lisp Machines), but was designed to be efficiently implementable on any personal computer or workstation. Common Lisp is a general-purpose programming language and thus has a large language standard including many built-in data types, functions, macros and other language elements, and an object system (Common Lisp Object System). Common Lisp also borrowed certain features from Scheme such as lexical scoping and lexical closures. Common Lisp implementations are available for targeting different platforms such as the LLVM, the Java virtual machine, \nx86-64, PowerPC, Alpha, ARM, Motorola 68000, and MIPS, and operating systems such as Windows, macOS, Linux, Solaris, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Dragonfly BSD, and Heroku.", "qas": [{"question": "what is common lisp ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Scheme is a statically scoped and properly tail-recursive dialect of the Lisp programming language invented by Guy L. Steele, Jr. and Gerald Jay Sussman. It was designed to have exceptionally clear and simple semantics and few different ways to form expressions. Designed about a decade earlier than Common Lisp, Scheme is a more minimalist design. It has a much smaller set of standard features but with certain implementation features (such as tail-call optimization and full continuations) not specified in Common Lisp. A wide variety of programming paradigms, including imperative, functional, and message passing styles, find convenient expression in Scheme. Scheme continues to evolve with a series of standards (Revised Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme) and a series of Scheme Requests for Implementation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Clojure is a recent dialect of Lisp that targets mainly the Java virtual machine, and the Common Language Runtime (CLR), the Python VM, the Ruby VM YARV, and compiling to JavaScript. It is designed to be a pragmatic general-purpose language. Clojure draws considerable influences from Haskell and places a very strong emphasis on immutability. Clojure provides access to Java frameworks and libraries, with optional type hints and type inference, so that calls to Java can avoid reflection and enable fast primitive operations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further, Lisp dialects are used as scripting languages in many applications, with the best-known being Emacs Lisp in the Emacs editor, AutoLISP and later Visual Lisp in AutoCAD, Nyquist in Audacity, Scheme in LilyPond. The potential small size of a useful Scheme interpreter makes it particularly popular for embedded scripting. Examples include SIOD and TinyScheme, both of which have been successfully embedded in the GIMP image processor under the generic name \"Script-fu\". LIBREP, a Lisp interpreter by John Harper originally based on the Emacs Lisp language, has been embedded in the Sawfish window manager.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp was the first language where the structure of program code is represented faithfully and directly in a standard data structure\u2014a quality much later dubbed \"homoiconicity\". Thus, Lisp functions can be manipulated, altered or even created within a Lisp program without lower-level manipulations. This is generally considered one of the main advantages of the language with regard to its expressive power, and makes the language suitable for syntactic macros and metacircular evaluation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A conditional using an \"if\u2013then\u2013else\" syntax was invented by McCarthy in a Fortran context. He proposed its inclusion in ALGOL, but it was not made part of the Algol 58 specification. For Lisp, McCarthy used the more general \"cond\"-structure. Algol 60 took up \"if\u2013then\u2013else\" and popularized it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp deeply influenced Alan Kay, the leader of the research team that developed Smalltalk at Xerox PARC; and in turn Lisp was influenced by Smalltalk, with later dialects adopting object-oriented programming features (inheritance classes, encapsulating instances, message passing, etc.) in the 1970s. The Flavors object system introduced the concept of multiple inheritance and the mixin. The Common Lisp Object System provides multiple inheritance, multimethods with multiple dispatch, and first-class generic functions, yielding a flexible and powerful form of dynamic dispatch. It has served as the template for many subsequent Lisp (including Scheme) object systems, which are often implemented via a metaobject protocol, a reflective metacircular design in which the object system is defined in terms of itself: Lisp was only the second language after Smalltalk (and is still one of the very few languages) to possess such a metaobject system. Many years later, Alan Kay suggested that as a result of the confluence of these features, only Smalltalk and Lisp could be regarded as properly conceived object-oriented programming systems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp introduced the concept of automatic garbage collection, in which the system walks the heap looking for unused memory. Progress in modern sophisticated garbage collection algorithms such as generational garbage collection was stimulated by its use in Lisp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Edsger W. Dijkstra in his 1972 Turing Award lecture said,", "qas": []}, {"context": "Largely because of its resource requirements with respect to early computing hardware (including early microprocessors), Lisp did not become as popular outside of the AI community as Fortran and the ALGOL-descended C language. Because of its suitability to complex and dynamic applications, Lisp is enjoying some resurgence of popular interest in the 2010s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp is an expression oriented language. Unlike most other languages, no distinction is made between \"expressions\" and \"statements\"; all code and data are written as expressions. When an expression is \"evaluated\", it produces a value (in Common Lisp, possibly multiple values), which can then be embedded into other expressions. Each value can be any data type.", "qas": []}, {"context": "McCarthy's 1958 paper introduced two types of syntax: \"Symbolic expressions\" (S-expressions, sexps), which mirror the internal representation of code and data; and \"Meta expressions\" (M-expressions), which express functions of S-expressions. M-expressions never found favor, and almost all Lisps today use S-expressions to manipulate both code and data.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The use of parentheses is Lisp's most immediately obvious difference from other programming language families. As a result, students have long given Lisp nicknames such as \"Lost In Stupid Parentheses\", or \"Lots of Irritating Superfluous Parentheses\". However, the S-expression syntax is also responsible for much of Lisp's power: the syntax is extremely regular, which facilitates manipulation by computer. However, the syntax of Lisp is not limited to traditional parentheses notation. It can be extended to include alternative notations. For example, XMLisp is a Common Lisp extension that employs the metaobject protocol to integrate S-expressions with the Extensible Markup Language (XML).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The reliance on expressions gives the language great flexibility. Because Lisp functions are written as lists, they can be processed exactly like data. This allows easy writing of programs which manipulate other programs (metaprogramming). Many Lisp dialects exploit this feature using macro systems, which enables extension of the language almost without limit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lisp list is written with its elements separated by whitespace, and surrounded by parentheses. For example, is a list whose elements are the three \"atoms\" , , and . These values are implicitly typed: they are respectively two integers and a Lisp-specific data type called a \"symbol\", and do not have to be declared as such.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The empty list is also represented as the special atom . This is the only entity in Lisp which is both an atom and a list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Expressions are written as lists, using prefix notation. The first element in the list is the name of a function, the name of a macro, a lambda expression or the name of a \"special operator\" (see below). The remainder of the list are the arguments. For example, the function returns its arguments as a list, so the expression", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to the list . The \"quote\" before the in the preceding example is a \"special operator\" which returns its argument without evaluating it. Any unquoted expressions are recursively evaluated before the enclosing expression is evaluated. For example,", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to the list . Note that the third argument is a list; lists can be nested.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arithmetic operators are treated similarly. The expression", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to 10. The equivalent under infix notation would be \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp has no notion of operators as implemented in Algol-derived languages. Arithmetic operators in Lisp are variadic functions (or \"n-ary\"), able to take any number of arguments. A C-style '++' increment operator is sometimes implemented under the name incf giving syntax", "qas": []}, {"context": "equivalent to (setq x (+ x 1)), returning the new value of x.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Special operators\" (sometimes called \"special forms\") provide Lisp's control structure. For example, the special operator takes three arguments. If the first argument is non-nil, it evaluates to the second argument; otherwise, it evaluates to the third argument. Thus, the expression", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to . Of course, this would be more useful if a non-trivial expression had been substituted in place of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp also provides logical operators and, or and not. The and and or operators do short circuit evaluation and will return their first nil and non-nil argument respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "will evaluate to \"James\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another special operator, , is used to bind variables to values which are then evaluated within an expression. This operator is also used to create functions: the arguments to are a list of arguments, and the expression or expressions to which the function evaluates (the returned value is the value of the last expression that is evaluated). The expression", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to a function that, when applied, takes one argument, binds it to and returns the number one greater than that argument. Lambda expressions are treated no differently from named functions; they are invoked the same way. Therefore, the expression", "qas": []}, {"context": "evaluates to . Here, we're doing a function application: we execute the anonymous function by passing to it the value 5.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Named functions are created by storing a lambda expression in a symbol using the defun macro.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the original LISP there were two fundamental data types: atoms and lists. A list was a finite ordered sequence of elements, where each element is either an atom or a list, and an atom was a number or a symbol. A symbol was essentially a unique named item, written as an alphanumeric string in source code, and used either as a variable name or as a data item in symbolic processing. For example, the list contains three elements: the symbol , the list , and the number 2.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The essential difference between atoms and lists was that atoms were immutable and unique. Two atoms that appeared in different places in source code but were written in exactly the same way represented the same object, whereas each list was a separate object that could be altered independently of other lists and could be distinguished from other lists by comparison operators.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As more data types were introduced in later Lisp dialects, and programming styles evolved, the concept of an atom lost importance. Many dialects still retained the predicate \"atom\" for legacy compatibility, defining it true for any object which is not a cons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Lisp list is implemented as a singly linked list. Each cell of this list is called a \"cons\" (in Scheme, a \"pair\"), and is composed of two pointers, called the \"car\" and \"cdr\". These are respectively equivalent to the and fields discussed in the article \"linked list\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Of the many data structures that can be built out of cons cells, one of the most basic is called a \"proper list\". A proper list is either the special (empty list) symbol, or a cons in which the points to a datum (which may be another cons structure, such as a list), and the points to another proper list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If a given cons is taken to be the head of a linked list, then its car points to the first element of the list, and its cdr points to the rest of the list. For this reason, the and functions are also called and when referring to conses which are part of a linked list (rather than, say, a tree).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus, a Lisp list is not an atomic object, as an instance of a container class in C++ or Java would be. A list is nothing more than an aggregate of linked conses. A variable which refers to a given list is simply a pointer to the first cons in the list. Traversal of a list can be done by \"cdring down\" the list; that is, taking successive cdrs to visit each cons of the list; or by using any of several higher-order functions to map a function over a list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because conses and lists are so universal in Lisp systems, it is a common misconception that they are Lisp's only data structures. In fact, all but the most simplistic Lisps have other data structures, such as vectors (arrays), hash tables, structures, and so forth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Parenthesized S-expressions represent linked list structures. There are several ways to represent the same list as an S-expression. A cons can be written in \"dotted-pair notation\" as , where is the car and the cdr. A longer proper list might be written in dotted-pair notation. This is conventionally abbreviated as in \"list notation\". An improper list may be written in a combination of the two \u2013 as for the list of three conses whose last cdr is (i.e., the list in fully specified form).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp provides many built-in procedures for accessing and controlling lists. Lists can be created directly with the procedure, which takes any number of arguments, and returns the list of these arguments.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of the way that lists are constructed from cons pairs, the procedure can be used to add an element to the front of a list. Note that the procedure is asymmetric in how it handles list arguments, because of how lists are constructed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The procedure appends two (or more) lists to one another. Because Lisp lists are linked lists, appending two lists has asymptotic time complexity formula_1", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp lists, being simple linked lists, can share structure with one another. That is to say, two lists can have the same \"tail\", or final sequence of conses. For instance, after the execution of the following Common Lisp code:", "qas": []}, {"context": "the lists and are and respectively. However, the tail is the same structure in both lists. It is not a copy; the cons cells pointing to and are in the same memory locations for both lists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sharing structure rather than copying can give a dramatic performance improvement. However, this technique can interact in undesired ways with functions that alter lists passed to them as arguments. Altering one list, such as by replacing the with a , will affect the other:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This changes to , but thereby also changes to \u2013 a possibly unexpected result. This can be a source of bugs, and functions which alter their arguments are documented as \"destructive\" for this very reason.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aficionados of functional programming avoid destructive functions. In the Scheme dialect, which favors the functional style, the names of destructive functions are marked with a cautionary exclamation point, or \"bang\"\u2014such as (read \"set car bang\"), which replaces the car of a cons. In the Common Lisp dialect, destructive functions are commonplace; the equivalent of is named for \"replace car.\" This function is rarely seen however as Common Lisp includes a special facility, , to make it easier to define and use destructive functions. A frequent style in Common Lisp is to write code functionally (without destructive calls) when prototyping, then to add destructive calls as an optimization where it is safe to do so.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp evaluates expressions which are entered by the user. Symbols and lists evaluate to some other (usually, simpler) expression \u2013 for instance, a symbol evaluates to the value of the variable it names; evaluates to . However, most other forms evaluate to themselves: if entering into Lisp, it returns .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Any expression can also be marked to prevent it from being evaluated (as is necessary for symbols and lists). This is the role of the special operator, or its abbreviation (one quotation mark). For instance, usually if entering the symbol , it returns the value of the corresponding variable (or an error, if there is no such variable). To refer to the literal symbol, enter or, usually, .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both Common Lisp and Scheme also support the \"backquote\" operator (termed \"quasiquote\" in Scheme), entered with the character (grave accent). This is almost the same as the plain quote, except it allows expressions to be evaluated and their values interpolated into a quoted list with the comma \"unquote\" and comma-at \"splice\" operators. If the variable has the value then evaluates to , while evaluates to . The backquote is most often used in defining macro expansions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Self-evaluating forms and quoted forms are Lisp's equivalent of literals. It may be possible to modify the values of (mutable) literals in program code. For instance, if a function returns a quoted form, and the code that calls the function modifies the form, this may alter the behavior of the function on subsequent iterations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modifying a quoted form like this is generally considered bad style, and is defined by ANSI Common Lisp as erroneous (resulting in \"undefined\" behavior in compiled files, because the file-compiler can coalesce similar constants, put them in write-protected memory, etc.).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp's formalization of quotation has been noted by Douglas Hofstadter (in \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\") and others as an example of the philosophical idea of self-reference.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lisp family splits over the use of dynamic or static (a.k.a. lexical) scope. Clojure, Common Lisp and Scheme make use of static scoping by default, while newLISP, Picolisp and the embedded languages in Emacs and AutoCAD use dynamic scoping. Since version 24.1, Emacs uses both dynamic and lexical scoping.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A fundamental distinction between Lisp and other languages is that in Lisp, the textual representation of a program is simply a human-readable description of the same internal data structures (linked lists, symbols, number, characters, etc.) as would be used by the underlying Lisp system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp uses this to implement a very powerful macro system. Like other macro languages such as C, a macro returns code that can then be compiled. However, unlike C macros, the macros are Lisp functions and so can exploit the full power of Lisp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further, because Lisp code has the same structure as lists, macros can be built with any of the list-processing functions in the language. In short, anything that Lisp can do to a data structure, Lisp macros can do to code. In contrast, in most other languages, the parser's output is purely internal to the language implementation and cannot be manipulated by the programmer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This feature makes it easy to develop \"efficient\" languages within languages. For example, the Common Lisp Object System can be implemented cleanly as a language extension using macros. This means that if an application needs a different inheritance mechanism, it can use a different object system. This is in stark contrast to most other languages; for example, Java does not support multiple inheritance and there is no reasonable way to add it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In simplistic Lisp implementations, this list structure is directly interpreted to run the program; a function is literally a piece of list structure which is traversed by the interpreter in executing it. However, most substantial Lisp systems also include a compiler. The compiler translates list structure into machine code or bytecode for execution. This code can run as fast as code compiled in conventional languages such as C.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Macros expand before the compilation step, and thus offer some interesting options. If a program needs a precomputed table, then a macro might create the table at compile time, so the compiler need only output the table and need not call code to create the table at run time. Some Lisp implementations even have a mechanism, codice_3, that allows code to be present during compile time (when a macro would need it), but not present in the emitted module.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp languages are often used with an interactive command line, which may be combined with an integrated development environment (IDE). The user types in expressions at the command line, or directs the IDE to transmit them to the Lisp system. Lisp \"reads\" the entered expressions, \"evaluates\" them, and \"prints\" the result. For this reason, the Lisp command line is called a \"read\u2013eval\u2013print loop\" (REPL).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The basic operation of the REPL is as follows. This is a simplistic description which omits many elements of a real Lisp, such as quoting and macros.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The function accepts textual S-expressions as input, and parses them into an internal data structure. For instance, if you type the text at the prompt, translates this into a linked list with three elements: the symbol , the number 1, and the number 2. It so happens that this list is also a valid piece of Lisp code; that is, it can be evaluated. This is because the car of the list names a function\u2014the addition operation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note that a will be read as a single symbol. will be read as the number one hundred and twenty-three. will be read as the string \"123\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The function evaluates the data, returning zero or more other Lisp data as a result. Evaluation does not have to mean interpretation; some Lisp systems compile every expression to native machine code. It is simple, however, to describe evaluation as interpretation: To evaluate a list whose car names a function, first evaluates each of the arguments given in its cdr, then applies the function to the arguments. In this case, the function is addition, and applying it to the argument list yields the answer . This is the result of the evaluation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The symbol evaluates to the value of the symbol foo. Data like the string \"123\" evaluates to the same string. The list evaluates to the list (1 2 3).", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is the job of the function to represent output to the user. For a simple result such as this is trivial. An expression which evaluated to a piece of list structure would require that traverse the list and print it out as an S-expression.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To implement a Lisp REPL, it is necessary only to implement these three functions and an infinite-loop function. (Naturally, the implementation of will be complex, since it must also implement all special operators like or .) This done, a basic REPL is one line of code: .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Lisp REPL typically also provides input editing, an input history, error handling and an interface to the debugger.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp is usually evaluated eagerly. In Common Lisp, arguments are evaluated in applicative order ('leftmost innermost'), while in Scheme order of arguments is undefined, leaving room for optimization by a compiler.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp originally had very few control structures, but many more were added during the language's evolution. (Lisp's original conditional operator, , is the precursor to later structures.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Programmers in the Scheme dialect often express loops using tail recursion. Scheme's commonality in academic computer science has led some students to believe that tail recursion is the only, or the most common, way to write iterations in Lisp, but this is incorrect. All oft-seen Lisp dialects have imperative-style iteration constructs, from Scheme's loop to Common Lisp's complex expressions. Moreover, the key issue that makes this an objective rather than subjective matter is that Scheme makes specific requirements for the handling of tail calls, and thus the reason that the use of tail recursion is generally encouraged for Scheme is that the practice is expressly supported by the language definition. By contrast, ANSI Common Lisp does not require the optimization commonly termed a tail call elimination. Thus, the fact that tail recursive style as a casual replacement for the use of more traditional iteration constructs (such as , or ) is discouraged in Common Lisp is not just a matter of stylistic preference, but potentially one of efficiency (since an apparent tail call in Common Lisp may not compile as a simple jump) and program correctness (since tail recursion may increase stack use in Common Lisp, risking stack overflow).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some Lisp control structures are \"special operators\", equivalent to other languages' syntactic keywords. Expressions using these operators have the same surface appearance as function calls, but differ in that the arguments are not necessarily evaluated\u2014or, in the case of an iteration expression, may be evaluated more than once.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In contrast to most other major programming languages, Lisp allows implementing control structures using the language. Several control structures are implemented as Lisp macros, and can even be macro-expanded by the programmer who wants to know how they work.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both Common Lisp and Scheme have operators for non-local control flow. The differences in these operators are some of the deepest differences between the two dialects. Scheme supports \"re-entrant continuations\" using the procedure, which allows a program to save (and later restore) a particular place in execution. Common Lisp does not support re-entrant continuations, but does support several ways of handling escape continuations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Often, the same algorithm can be expressed in Lisp in either an imperative or a functional style. As noted above, Scheme tends to favor the functional style, using tail recursion and continuations to express control flow. However, imperative style is still quite possible. The style preferred by many Common Lisp programmers may seem more familiar to programmers used to structured languages such as C, while that preferred by Schemers more closely resembles pure-functional languages such as Haskell.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of Lisp's early heritage in list processing, it has a wide array of higher-order functions relating to iteration over sequences. In many cases where an explicit loop would be needed in other languages (like a loop in C) in Lisp the same task can be accomplished with a higher-order function. (The same is true of many functional programming languages.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "A good example is a function which in Scheme is called and in Common Lisp is called . Given a function and one or more lists, applies the function successively to the lists' elements in order, collecting the results in a new list:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This applies the function to each corresponding pair of list elements, yielding the result .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Here are examples of Common Lisp code.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The basic \"Hello world\" program:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lisp syntax lends itself naturally to recursion. Mathematical problems such as the enumeration of recursively defined sets are simple to express in this notation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Evaluate a number's factorial:", "qas": []}, {"context": "An alternative implementation takes less stack space than the previous version if the underlying Lisp system optimizes tail recursion:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Contrast with an iterative version which uses Common Lisp's macro:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following function reverses a list. (Lisp's built-in \"reverse\" function does the same thing.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Various object systems and models have been built on top of, alongside, or into Lisp, including:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "List of logarithmic identities", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In mathematics, there are many logarithmic identities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note that is undefined because there is no number such that . In fact, there is a vertical asymptote on the graph of at .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Logarithms and exponentials with the same base cancel each other. This is true because logarithms and exponentials are inverse operations (just like multiplication and division or addition and subtraction).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both of the above are derived from the following two equations that define a logarithm:-", "qas": []}, {"context": "Substituting in the left equation gives , and substituting in the right gives . Finally, replace by .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Logarithms can be used to make calculations easier. For example, two numbers can be multiplied just by using a logarithm table and adding. The first three operations below assume , and/or so that and . Derivations also use the log definitions and .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where formula_4, formula_5, and formula_6 are positive real numbers and formula_7. Both formula_8 and formula_9 are real numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The laws result from canceling exponentials and appropriate law of indices. Starting with the first law:", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_10", "qas": []}, {"context": "The law for powers exploits another of the laws of indices:", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_11", "qas": []}, {"context": "The law relating to quotients then follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_12", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_13", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarly, the root law is derived by rewriting the root as a reciprocal power:", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_14", "qas": []}, {"context": "This identity is useful to evaluate logarithms on calculators. For instance, most calculators have buttons for ln and for , but not all calculators have buttons for the logarithm of an arbitrary base.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This formula has several consequences:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_26 is any permutation of the subscripts 1,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"n\". For example", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following summation/subtraction rule is especially useful in probability theory when one is dealing with a sum of log-probabilities:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note that in practice formula_30 and formula_8 have to be switched on the right hand side of the equations if formula_32. Also note that the subtraction identity is not defined if formula_33 since the logarithm of zero is not defined. Many programming languages have a specific codice_1 function that calculates formula_34 without underflow when formula_5 is small.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More generally:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_37 are sorted in descending order.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A useful identity involving exponents:", "qas": []}, {"context": "or more universally:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Based on and", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both are accurate around x=0, but not for large numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The last limit is often summarized as \"logarithms grow more slowly than any power or root of \"x\"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where formula_51, formula_52, and formula_7.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To remember higher integrals, it's convenient to define:\nWhere formula_57 is the nth Harmonic number.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then,", "qas": []}, {"context": "The identities of logarithms can be used to approximate large numbers. Note that , where \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are arbitrary constants. Suppose that one wants to approximate the 44th Mersenne prime, . To get the base-10 logarithm, we would multiply 32,582,657 by , getting . We can then get .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarly, factorials can be approximated by summing the logarithms of the terms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The complex logarithm is the complex number analogue of the logarithm function. No single valued function on the complex plane can satisfy the normal rules for logarithms. However a multivalued function can be defined which satisfies most of the identities. It is usual to consider this as a function defined on a Riemann surface. A single valued version called the principal value of the logarithm can be defined which is discontinuous on the negative x axis and equals the multivalued version on a single branch cut.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The convention will be used here that a capital first letter is used for the principal value of functions and the lower case version refers to the multivalued function. The single valued version of definitions and identities is always given first followed by a separate section for the multiple valued versions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The multiple valued version of is a set but it is easier to write it without braces and using it in formulas follows obvious rules.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When \"k\" is any integer:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Principal value forms:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiple value forms, for any \"k\" an integer:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Principal value forms:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiple value forms:", "qas": []}, {"context": "A complex power of a complex number can have many possible values.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Principal value form:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiple value forms:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where , are any integers:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lost city", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A lost city is a settlement that fell into terminal decline and became extensively or completely uninhabited, with the consequence that the site's former significance was no longer known to the wider world. The locations of many lost cities have been forgotten, but some have been rediscovered and studied extensively by scientists. Recently abandoned cities or cities whose location was never in question might be referred to as ruins or ghost towns. The search for such lost cities by European explorers and adventurers in Africa, the Americas, and Southeast Asia from the 15th century onwards eventually led to the development of archaeology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lost cities generally fall into two broad categories: those where all knowledge of the city's existence was forgotten before it was rediscovered, and those whose memory was preserved in myth, legend, or historical records but whose location was lost or at least no longer widely recognized.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the broad that was lost ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Cities may become lost for a variety of reasons including natural disasters, economic or social upheaval, or war.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Incan capital city of Vilcabamba was destroyed and depopulated during the Spanish conquest of Peru in 1572. The Spanish did not rebuild the city, and the location went unrecorded and was forgotten until it was rediscovered through a detailed examination of period letters and documents.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Troy was a city located in northwest Anatolia in what is now Turkey. It is best known for being the focus of the Trojan War described in the Greek Epic Cycle and especially in the \"Iliad\", one of the two epic poems attributed to Homer. Repeatedly destroyed and rebuilt, the city slowly declined and was abandoned in the Byzantine era. Buried by time, the city was consigned to the realm of legend until the location was first excavated in the 1860s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other settlements are lost with few or no clues to their decline. For example, Malden Island, in the central Pacific, was deserted when first visited by Europeans in 1825, but the unsuspected presence of ruined temples and the remains of other structures found on the island indicate that a population of Polynesians had lived there for perhaps several generations some centuries earlier. Prolonged drought seems the most likely explanation for their demise and the remote nature of the island meant few visitors.", "qas": [{"question": "how many settlements are lost ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "With the development of archaeology and the application of modern techniques, many previously lost cities have been rediscovered.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Machu Picchu is a pre-Columbian Inca site situated on a mountain ridge above the Urubamba Valley in Peru. Often referred to as the \"Lost City of the Incas\", it is perhaps the most familiar icon of the Inca World. Machu Picchu was built around 1450, at the height of the Inca Empire. It was abandoned just over 100 years later, in 1572, as a belated result of the Spanish Conquest. It is possible that most of its inhabitants died from smallpox introduced by travelers before the Spanish conquistadors arrived in the area. In 1911, Melchor Arteaga led the explorer Hiram Bingham to Machu Picchu, which had been largely forgotten by everybody except the small number of people living in the immediate valley.", "qas": [{"question": "where is machu located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Helike was an ancient Greek city that sank at night in the winter of 373 BCE. The city was located in Achaea, Northern Peloponnesos, two kilometres (12 stadia) from the Corinthian Gulf. The city was thought to be legend until 2001, when it was rediscovered in the Helike Delta. In 1988, the Greek archaeologist Dora Katsonopoulou launched the Helike Project to locate the site of the lost city. In 1994, in collaboration with the University of Patras, a magnetometer survey was carried out in the midplain of the delta, which revealed the outlines of a buried building. In 1995, this target was excavated (now known as the Klonis site), and a large Roman building with standing walls was brought to light. The city was rediscovered in 2001, buried in an ancient lagoon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some cities which are considered lost are (or may be) places of legend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other lost cities, having once been considered legendary, are now known to have existed, such as Troy and Bjarmaland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n\"Incomplete list \u2013 for further information, see Maya civilization\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louis Agassiz", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Jean Louis Rodolphe Agassiz (; ; May 28, 1807December 14, 1873) was a Swiss-American biologist and geologist recognized as an innovative and prodigious scholar of Earth's natural history. Agassiz grew up in Switzerland, and he received Doctor of Philosophy and medical degrees at Erlangen and Munich, respectively. After studying with Cuvier and Humboldt in Paris, Agassiz was appointed professor of natural history at the University of Neuch\u00e2tel. After visiting Harvard University mid-career, he emigrated to the United States in 1847. He went on to become professor of zoology and geology at Harvard, to head its Lawrence Scientific School, and to found its Museum of Comparative Zoology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz is known for his regimen of observational data gathering and analysis. He made vast institutional and scientific contributions to zoology, geology, and related areas, including writing multi-volume research books running to thousands of pages. He is particularly known for his contributions to ichthyological classification, including of extinct species, and to the study of geological history, including to the founding of glaciology. In the 20th and 21st centuries, Agassiz's resistance to Darwinian evolution, and the scientific racism implicit in his writings on human polygenism, have tarnished his reputation and led to controversies over his legacy.", "qas": [{"question": "what is agassiz known for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Louis Agassiz was born in M\u00f4tier (now part of Haut-Vully) in the canton of Fribourg, Switzerland. The son of a pastor, Agassiz was educated first at home, he then spent four years of secondary school in Bienne, entering in 1818 and completing his elementary studies in Lausanne. Having adopted medicine as his profession, Agassiz studied successively at the universities of Z\u00fcrich, Heidelberg, and Munich; while there, he extended his knowledge of natural history, especially of botany. In 1829 he received the degree of doctor of philosophy at Erlangen, and in 1830 that of doctor of medicine at Munich. Moving to Paris, he came under the tutelage of Alexander von Humboldt (and later his financial benevolence). Humboldt and Georges Cuvier launched him on his careers of geology and zoology respectively. Previously, he had not paid special attention to the study of ichthyology, but it soon became the focus of his life's work.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1819\u20131820, the German biologists Johann Baptist von Spix and Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius undertook an expedition to Brazil. They returned home to Europe with many natural objects, including an important collection of the freshwater fish of Brazil, especially of the Amazon River. Spix, who died in 1826, did not live long enough to work out the history of these fish, and Martius selected Agassiz for this project. Agassiz threw himself into the work with an enthusiasm that would go on to characterize the rest of life's work. The task of describing the Brazilian fish was completed and published in 1829. This was followed by research into the history of fish found in Lake Neuch\u00e2tel. Enlarging his plans, in 1830 he issued a prospectus of a \"History of the Freshwater Fish of Central Europe\". It was only in 1839, however, that the first part of this publication appeared, and it was completed in 1842.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1832, Agassiz was appointed professor of natural history at the University of Neuch\u00e2tel. The fossil fish in the rock of the surrounding region, the slates of Glarus and the limestones of Monte Bolca, soon attracted his attention. At the time, very little had been accomplished in their scientific study. Agassiz, as early as 1829, planned the publication of a work which, more than any other, laid the foundation of his worldwide fame. Five volumes of his \"Recherches sur les poissons fossiles\" (\"Research on Fossil Fish\") were published from 1833 to 1843. They were magnificently illustrated, chiefly by Joseph Dinkel. In gathering materials for this work Agassiz visited the principal museums in Europe, and, meeting Cuvier in Paris, he received much encouragement and assistance from him. They had known him for seven years at the time.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the appointed professor of natural history at the university of neuch\u00e2tel ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Agassiz found that his palaeontological analyses required a new ichthyological classification. The fossils he examined rarely showed any traces of the soft tissues of fish, but, instead, consisted chiefly of the teeth, scales, and fins, with the bones being perfectly preserved in comparatively few instances. He, therefore, adopted a classification that divided fish into four groups: Ganoids, Placoids, Cycloids and Ctenoids, based on the nature of the scales and other dermal appendages. This did much to improve fish taxonomy, but Aggasiz's classification has since been superseded.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of classification did agassiz study ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Agassiz needed financial support to continue his work. The British Association and the Earl of Ellesmere\u2014then Lord Francis Egerton\u2014stepped in to help. The 1,290 original drawings made for the work were purchased by the Earl, and presented by him to the Geological Society of London. In 1836, the Wollaston Medal was awarded to Agassiz by the council of that society for his work on fossil ichthyology; and, in 1838, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Society. Meanwhile, invertebrate animals engaged his attention. In 1837, he issued the \"Prodrome\" of a monograph on the recent and fossil Echinodermata, the first part of which appeared in 1838; in 1839\u201340, he published two quarto volumes on the fossil Echinoderms of Switzerland; and in 1840\u201345 he issued his \"\u00c9tudes critiques sur les mollusques fossiles\" (\"Critical Studies on Fossil Mollusks\").", "qas": [{"question": "what assistance did agassiz help to continue his work ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Before Agassiz's first visit to England in 1834, Hugh Miller and other geologists had brought to light the remarkable fossil fish of the Old Red Sandstone of the northeast of Scotland. The strange forms of the \"Pterichthys\", the \"Coccosteus\" and other genera were then made known to geologists for the first time. They were of intense interest to Agassiz, and formed the subject of a monograph by him published in 1844\u201345: \"Monographie des poissons fossiles du Vieux Gr\u00e8s Rouge, ou Syst\u00e8me D\u00e9vonien (Old Red Sandstone) des \u00celes Britanniques et de Russie\" (\"Monograph on Fossil Fish of the Old Red Sandstone, or Devonian System of the British Isles and of Russia\"). In the early stages of his career in Neuchatel, Agassiz also made a name for himself as a man who could run a scientific department well. Under his care, the University of Neuch\u00e2tel soon became a leading institution for scientific inquiry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1842\u20131846, Agassiz issued his \"Nomenclator Zoologicus\", a classification list, with references, of all names used in zoological genera and groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1837, Agassiz proposed that the Earth had been subjected to a past ice age. He presented the theory to the Helvetic Society that ancient glaciers had not only flowed outward from the Alps, but that even larger glaciers had covered the plains and mountains of Europe, Asia, and North America, smothering the entire northern hemisphere in a prolonged ice age. In the same year, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Prior to this proposal, Goethe, de Saussure, Venetz, Jean de Charpentier, Karl Friedrich Schimper and others had studied the glaciers of the Alps, and Goethe, Charpentier and Schimper had even concluded that the erratic blocks of alpine rocks scattered over the slopes and summits of the Jura Mountains had been moved there by glaciers. These ideas attracted the attention of Agassiz, and he discussed them with Charpentier and Schimper, whom he accompanied on successive trips to the Alps. Agassiz even had a hut constructed upon one of the Aar Glaciers, which for a time he made his home, to investigate the structure and movements of the ice.", "qas": [{"question": "what did agassiz propose about the earth ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1840, Agassiz published a two-volume work entitled \"\u00c9tudes sur les glaciers\" (\"Studies on Glaciers\"). In this, he discussed the movements of the glaciers, their moraines, their influence in grooving and rounding the rocks, and in producing the striations and \"roches moutonnees\" seen in Alpine-style landscapes. He accepted Charpentier's and Schimper's idea that some of the alpine glaciers had extended across the wide plains and valleys of the Aar and Rh\u00f4ne. But he went further, concluding that, in the recent past, Switzerland had been covered with one vast sheet of ice, originating in the higher Alps and extending over the valley of northwestern Switzerland to southern slopes of the Jura. The publication of this work gave fresh impetus to the study of glacial phenomena in all parts of the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Familiar, then, with recent glaciation, Agassiz and the English geologist William Buckland visited the mountains of Scotland in 1840. There they found clear evidence in different locations of glacial action. The discovery was announced to the Geological Society of London in successive communications. The mountainous districts of England, Wales, and Ireland were understood to have been centres for the dispersion of glacial debris. Agassiz remarked \"that great sheets of ice, resembling those now existing in Greenland, once covered all the countries in which unstratified gravel (boulder drift) is found; that this gravel was in general produced by the trituration of the sheets of ice upon the subjacent surface, etc.\"\nWith the aid of a grant of money from the King of Prussia, Agassiz crossed the Atlantic in the autumn of 1846 to investigate the natural history and geology of North America and to deliver a course of lectures on \"The Plan of Creation as shown in the Animal Kingdom,\" by invitation from J. A. Lowell, at the Lowell Institute in Boston, Massachusetts. The financial offers presented to him in the United States induced him to settle there, where he remained to the end of his life. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1846. Agassiz had a cordial relationship with Harvard botanist Asa Gray, but they disagreed on some scientific issues. For example, Agassiz was a member of the Scientific Lazzaroni, a group of mostly physical scientists who wanted American academia to mimic the autocratic academic structures of European universities, whereas Gray was a staunch opponent of that group. Agassiz also felt each human race had different origins, but Gray believed in the unity of all humans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz's engagement for the Lowell Institute lectures precipitated the establishment, in 1847, of the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard University, with Agassiz as its head. Harvard appointed him professor of zoology and geology, and he founded the Museum of Comparative Zoology there in 1859, serving as the museum's first director until his death in 1873. During his tenure at Harvard, Agassiz studied the effect of the last ice age on North America.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the head of the lawrence research school ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 12, 0)"}, {"question": "what did agassiz study during his presidency at harvard ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 12, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Agassiz continued his lectures for the Lowell Institute. In succeeding years, he gave lectures on \"Ichthyology\" (1847\u201348 season), \"Comparative Embryology\" (1848\u201349), \"Functions of Life in Lower Animals\" (1850\u201351), \"Natural History\" (1853\u201354), \"Methods of Study in Natural History\" (1861\u201362), \"Glaciers and the Ice Period\" (1864\u201365), \"Brazil\" (1866\u201367) and \"Deep Sea Dredging\" (1869\u201370). In 1850, he married an American college teacher, Elizabeth Cabot Cary, who later wrote introductory books about natural history and a lengthy biography of her husband after he died.", "qas": [{"question": "what organization did agassiz work for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Agassiz served as a non-resident lecturer at Cornell University while also being on faculty at Harvard. In 1852, he accepted a medical professorship of comparative anatomy at Charlestown, Massachusetts, but he resigned in two years. From this time, Agassiz's, scientific studies dropped off, but he became one of the best-known scientists in the world. By 1857, Agassiz was so well-loved that his friend Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote \"The fiftieth birthday of Agassiz\" in his honor, and read it at a dinner given for Agassiz by the Saturday Club in Cambridge. His own writing continued with four (of a planned ten) volumes of \"Natural History of the United States\", published from 1857 to 1862. He also published a catalog of papers in his field, \"Bibliographia Zoologiae et Geologiae\", in four volumes between 1848 and 1854.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stricken by ill health in the 1860s, Agassiz resolved to return to the field for relaxation and to resume his studies of Brazilian fish. In April 1865, he led a party to Brazil. Returning home in August 1866, an account of this expedition, entitled \"A Journey in Brazil\", was published in 1868. In December 1871 he made a second eight-month excursion, known as the \"Hassler\" expedition under the command of Commander Philip Carrigan Johnson (brother of Eastman Johnson), visiting South America on its southern Atlantic and Pacific seaboards. The ship explored the Magellan Strait, which drew the praise of Charles Darwin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Elizabeth Agassiz wrote, at the Strait: '. ... .the Hassler pursued her course, past a seemingly endless panorama of mountains and forests rising into the pale regions of snow and ice, where lay glaciers in which every rift and crevasse, as well as the many cascades flowing down to join the waters beneath, could be counted as she steamed by them. ... These were weeks of exquisite delight to Agassiz. The vessel often skirted the shore so closely that its geology could be studied from the deck.'", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote at the strait: ' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From his first marriage to Cecilie Bruan, Agassiz had two daughters in addition to son Alexander.\nIn 1863, Agassiz's daughter Ida married Henry Lee Higginson, who later founded the Boston Symphony Orchestra and was a benefactor to Harvard University and other schools.\nOn November 30, 1860, Agassiz's daughter Pauline was married to Quincy Adams Shaw (1825\u20131908), a wealthy Boston merchant and later benefactor to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the last years of his life, Agassiz worked to establish a permanent school where zoological science could be pursued amid the living subjects of its study. In 1873, a private philanthropist (John Anderson) gave Agassiz the island of Penikese, in Buzzards Bay, Massachusetts (south of New Bedford), and presented him with $50,000 to permanently endow it as a practical school of natural science, especially devoted to the study of marine zoology. The John Anderson school collapsed soon after Agassiz's death; it is considered a precursor of the Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory, which is nearby.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz had a profound influence on the American branches of his two fields, teaching many future scientists that would go on to prominence, including Alpheus Hyatt, David Starr Jordan, Joel Asaph Allen, Joseph Le Conte, Ernest Ingersoll, William James, Nathaniel Shaler, Samuel Hubbard Scudder, Alpheus Packard, and his son Alexander Emanuel Agassiz, among others. He had a profound impact on paleontologist Charles Doolittle Walcott and natural scientist Edward S. Morse. Agassiz had a reputation for being a demanding teacher. He would allegedly \"lock a student up in a room full of turtle-shells, or lobster-shells, or oyster-shells, without a book or a word to help him, and not let him out till he had discovered all the truths which the objects contained.\" Two of Agassiz's most prominent students detailed their personal experiences under his tutelage: Scudder, in a short magazine article for Every Saturday, and Shaler, in his \"Autobiography\". These and other recollections were collected and published by Lane Cooper in 1917, which Ezra Pound was to draw on for his anecdote of Agassiz and the sunfish.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early 1840s, Agassiz named two fossil fish species after Mary Anning \u2014\"Acrodus anningiae\", and \"Belenostomus anningiae\"\u2014 and another after her friend, Elizabeth Philpot. Anning was a paleontologist known around the world for important finds, but, because of her gender, she was often not formal recognized for her work. Agassiz was grateful for the help the women had given him in examining fossil fish specimens during his visit to Lyme Regis in 1834.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz died in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1873 and was buried at Mount Auburn Cemetery, joined later by his wife. His monument is a boulder from a glacial moraine of the Aar near the site of the old , not far from the spot where his hut once stood; his grave is sheltered by pine trees from his old home in Switzerland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Cambridge elementary school north of Harvard University was named in his honor and the surrounding neighborhood became known as \"Agassiz\" as a result. The school's name was changed to the Maria L. Baldwin School on May 21, 2002, due to concerns about Agassiz's alleged racism, and to honor Maria Louise Baldwin the African-American principal of the school who served from 1889 until 1922. The neighborhood, however, continues to be known as Agassiz. An elementary school called the Agassiz Elementary School in Minneapolis, Minnesota existed from 1922\u20131981.", "qas": [{"question": "where did the agassiz school originate from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 22, 3)"}]}, {"context": "An ancient glacial lake that formed in the Great Lakes region of North America, Lake Agassiz, is named after him, as are Mount Agassiz in California's Palisades, Mount Agassiz, in the Uinta Mountains, Agassiz Peak in Arizona and in his native Switzerland, the Agassizhorn in the Bernese Alps. Agassiz Glacier (Montana) and Agassiz Creek in Glacier National Park and Agassiz Glacier (Alaska) in Saint Elias Mountains, Mount Agassiz in Bethlehem, New Hampshire in the White Mountains also bear his name. A crater on Mars \"Crater Agassiz\" and a promontorium on the Moon are also named in his honour. A headland situated in Palmer Land, Antarctica is named in his honor, Cape Agassiz. A main-belt asteroid named 2267 Agassiz is also named in association with Louis Agassiz.", "qas": [{"question": "who named agassiz agassiz ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 23, 4)"}, {"question": "where is mount agassiz located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Several animal species are named in honor of Louis Agassiz, including \"Apistogramma agassizii\" (Agassiz's dwarf cichlid); \"Isocapnia agassizi\" (a stonefly); \"Publius agassizi\" (a passalid beetle); \"Xylocrius agassizi\" (a longhorn beetle); \"Exoprosopa agassizi\" (a bee fly); \"Chelonia agassizii\" (Gal\u00e1pagos green turtle); \"Philodryas agassizii\" (a South American snake); and the most well-known, \"Gopherus agassizii\" (the desert tortoise).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2005 the EGU Division on Cryospheric Sciences established the Louis Agassiz Medal, awarded to individuals in recognition of their outstanding scientific contribution to the study of the cryosphere on Earth or elsewhere in the solar system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz took part in a monthly gathering called the Saturday Club at the Parker House, a meeting of Boston writers and intellectuals. He was therefore mentioned in a stanza of the Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. poem \"\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "After Agassiz came to the United States, he wrote prolifically on polygenism, which holds that animals, plants and humans were all created in \"special provinces\" with distinct populations of species created in and for each province, and that these populations were endowed with unequal attributes. Agassiz denied that migration and adaptation could account for the geographical age or any of the past. Adaptation takes time; in an example, Agassiz questioned how plants or animals could migrate through regions they were not equipped to handle. According to Agassiz the conditions in which particular creatures live \"are the conditions necessary to their maintenance, and what among organized beings is essential to their temporal existence must be at least one of the conditions under which they were created\". Agassiz was opposed to monogenism and evolution, believing that the theory of evolution reduced the wisdom of God to an impersonal materialism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agassiz was influenced by philosophical idealism and the scientific work of Georges Cuvier. Agassiz believed there is one species of humans but many different creations of races. These ideas are now included under the rubric of scientific racism. According to Agassiz, genera and species were ideas in the mind of God; their existence in God's mind prior to their physical creation meant that God could create humans as one species yet in several distinct and geographically separate acts of creation. Agassiz was in modern terms a creationist who believed nature had order because God created it directly. Agassiz viewed his career in science as a search for ideas in the mind of the creator expressed in creation.", "qas": [{"question": "who influenced agassiz ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Agassiz, like other polygenists, believed the Book of Genesis recounted the origin of the white race only and that the animals and plants in the Bible refer only to those species proximate and familiar to Adam and Eve. Agassiz believed that the writers of the Bible only knew of local events, for example Noah's flood was a local event only known to the regions that were populated by ancient Hebrews. Agassiz also believed that the writers of the Bible did not know about any events other than what was going on in their own region and their intermediate neighbors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stephen Jay Gould asserted that Agassiz's observations sprang from racist bias, in particular from his revulsion on first encountering African-Americans in the United States. However, others have asserted that, despite favoring polygenism, Agassiz rejected racism and believed in a spiritualized human unity. Agassiz believed God made all men equal, and that intellectualism and morality, as developed in civilization, make men equal before God. Agassiz never supported slavery, and claimed his views on polygenism had nothing to do with politics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Accusations of racism against Agassiz have prompted the renaming of landmarks, schoolhouses, and other institutions (which abound in Massachusetts) that bear his name. Opinions on these events are often mixed, given his extensive scientific legacy in other areas. In 2007, the Swiss government acknowledged the \"racist thinking\" of Agassiz but declined to rename the Agassizhorn summit. In 2017, the Swiss Alpine Club declined to revoke Agassiz's status as a member of honor, which he received in 1865 for his scientific work, because the club considered this status to have lapsed on Agassiz's death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Li Bai", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Li Bai (701\u2013762), also known as Li Bo, courtesy name Taibai, was a Chinese poet acclaimed from his own day to the present as a genius and a romantic figure who took traditional poetic forms to new heights. He and his friend Du Fu (712\u2013770) were the two most prominent figures in the flourishing of Chinese poetry in the Tang dynasty, which is often called the \"Golden Age of Chinese Poetry\". The expression \"Three Wonders\" denote Li Bai's poetry, Pei Min's swordplay, and Zhang Xu's calligraphy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Around a thousand poems attributed to him are extant. His poems have been collected into the most important Tang dynasty poetry anthology \"Heyue yingling ji\", compiled in 753 by Yin Fan, and thirty-four of his poems are included in the anthology \"Three Hundred Tang Poems\", which was first published in the 18th century. In the same century, translations of his poems began to appear in Europe. The poems were models for celebrating the pleasures of friendship, the depth of nature, solitude, and the joys of drinking wine. Among the most famous are \"Waking from Drunkenness on a Spring Day\", \"The Hard Road to Shu\", and \"Quiet Night Thought\", which still appear in school texts in China. In the West, multilingual translations of Li's poems continue to be made. His life has even taken on a legendary aspect, including tales of drunkenness, chivalry, and the well-known fable that Li drowned when he reached from his boat to grasp the moon\u2019s reflection in the river while drunk.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much of Li's life is reflected in his poetry: places which he visited, friends whom he saw off on journeys to distant locations perhaps never to meet again, his own dream-like imaginations embroidered with shamanic overtones, current events of which he had news, descriptions taken from nature in a timeless moment of poetry, and so on. However, of particular importance are the changes in the times through which he lived. His early poetry took place in the context of a \"golden age\" of internal peace and prosperity in the Chinese empire of the Tang dynasty, under the reign of an emperor who actively promoted and participated in the arts. This all changed suddenly and shockingly, beginning with the rebellion of the general An Lushan, when all of northern China was devastated by war and famine. Li's poetry as well takes on new tones and qualities. Unlike his younger friend Du Fu, Li did not live to see the quelling of these disorders. However, much of Li's poetry has survived, retaining enduring popularity in China and elsewhere.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai, Li Po, Li Bo, Ri Haku have been all used in the West, but are all written with the same characters. His given name, (\u767d), is romanized by variants such as \"Po\", \"Bo\", \"Bai\", \"Pai\". In Hanyu Pinyin, reflecting modern Mandarin Chinese, the main, colloquial equivalent for this character is \"B\u00e1i\"; \"B\u00f3\" is the literary variant and is commonly used. The reconstructed version of how he and others during the Tang dynasty would have pronounced this is \"Bh\u00e6k\". His courtesy name was Taibai (\u592a\u767d), literally \"Great White,\" as the planet Venus was called at the time. Thus, combining the family name with the courtesy name, his name appears in variants such as \"Li Taibo\", \"Li Taibai\", \"Li Tai-po\", among others.", "qas": [{"question": "who has been most of the same characters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the family name of the family name ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 3, 5)"}]}, {"context": "He is also known by his (\"hao\"), or pen-name \"Q\u012bngli\u00e1n J\u016bsh\u00ec\" (\u9752\u84ee\u5c45\u58eb), meaning \"Householder of Azure Lotus\" (that is, Qianlian town), or by nicknames \"Immortal Poet\" (Poet Transcendent; Wine Immortal (), Banished Transcendent (), Poet-Knight-errant (, or \"Poet-Hero\"). The Japanese pronunciation may be romanized as \"Ri Haku\"or \"Ri Taihaku\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The two \"Books of Tang\", \"The Old Book of Tang\" and \"The New Book of Tang\", remain the primary sources of bibliographical material on Li Bai. Other sources include internal evidence from poems by or about Li Bai, and certain other sources, such the preface to his collected poems by his relative and literary executor, Li Yangbin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai is generally considered to have been born in 701, in Suyab (\u788e\u8449) of ancient Chinese Central Asia (present-day Kyrgyzstan), where his family had prospered in business at the frontier. Afterwards, the family under the leadership of his father, Li Ke (\u674e\u5ba2), moved to Jiangyou(\u6c5f\u6cb9), near modern Chengdu, in Sichuan province, when the youngster was perhaps five years old. There is some mystery or uncertainty about the circumstances of the family relocations, at the very least a lack of legal authorization which would have generally been required to move out of the border regions, especially if one's family had been assigned (exiled) there. However, despite much speculation, the facts are scant.\nAlso,most Chinese people believe that Li Bai was actually born in Jiangyou,though that was not true.", "qas": [{"question": "who do most chinese people believe was born in jiangyou ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 6, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Two accounts given by contemporaries Li Yangbing (a family relative) and Fan Chuanzheng state that Li's family was originally from what is now southwestern Jingning County, Gansu. Li's ancestry is traditionally traced back to Li Gao, the noble founder of the state of Western Liang. This provides some support for Li's own claim to be related to the Li dynastic royal family of the Tang dynasty: the Tang emperors also claimed descent from the Li rulers of West Liang. This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage (\u96b4\u897f\u674e\u6c0f). Evidence suggests that during the Sui dynasty, Li's own ancestors, at that time for some reason classified socially as commoners, were forced into a form of exile from their original home (in what is now Gansu) to some location or locations further west. During their exile in the far west, the Li family lived in the ancient Silk Road city of Suiye (Suyab, now an archeological site in present-day Kyrgyzstan, and perhaps also in Tiaozhi (), a state near modern Ghazni, Afghanistan. These areas were on the ancient Silk Road, and the Li family were likely merchants. Their business was quite prosperous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In one hagiographic account, while Li Bai's mother was pregnant with him, she had a dream of a great white star falling from heaven. This seems to have contributed to the idea of his being a banished immortal (one of his nicknames). That the Great White Star was synonymous with Venus helps to explain his courtesy name: \"Tai Bai\", or \"Venus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li is known to have married four times. His first marriage, in 727, was to the granddaughter of a former government minister. In 744, he married for the second time in what now is the Liangyuan District of Henan. This marriage was to another poet, surnamed Zong (\u5b97), with whom he both had children and exchanges of poems, including many expressions of love for her and their children. His wife, Zong, was a granddaughter of Zong Chuke (\u5b97\u695a\u5ba2, died 710), an important government official during the Tang dynasty and the interegnal period of Wu Zetian.", "qas": [{"question": "how many times is li known to have married how many times ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 705, when Li Bai was four years old, his father secretly moved his family to Sichuan, near Chengdu, where he spent his childhood. There is currently a monument commemorating this in Zhongba Town, Jiangyou, Sichuan province (the area of the modern province then being known as Shu, after a former independent state which had been annexed by the Sui dynasty and later incorporated into the Tang dynasty lands). The young Li spent most of his growing years in Qinglian (\u9752\u83b2; lit. \"Blue [also translated as 'green', 'azure', or 'nature-coloured') Lotus\"), a town in Chang-ming County, Sichuan, China. This now nominally corresponds with Qinglian Town (\u9752\u84ee\u93ae) of Jiangyou County-level city, in Sichuan Province.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The young Li read extensively, including Confucian classics such as \"The Classic of Poetry (Shijing)\" and the \"Classic of History (Shujing)\", as well as various astrological and metaphysical materials which Confucians tended to eschew though he disdained to take the literacy exam. Reading the \"Hundred Authors\" was part of the family literary tradition, and he was also able to compose poetry before he was ten. The young Li also engaged in other activities, such as taming wild birds and fencing. His other activities included riding, hunting, traveling, and aiding the poor or oppressed by means of both money and arms. Eventually, the young Li seems to have become quite skilled in swordsmanship; as this autobiographical quote by Li himself both testifies to and also helps to illustrate the wild life that he led in the Sichuan of his youth:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before he was twenty, Li had fought and killed several men, apparently for reasons of chivalry, in accordance with the knight-errant tradition (\"youxia\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 720, he was interviewed by Governor Su Ting, who considered him a genius. Though he expressed the wish to become an official, he never took the civil service examination.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his mid-twenties, about 725, Li Bai left Sichuan, sailing down the Yangzi River through Dongting Lake to Nanjing, beginning his days of wandering. He then went back up-river, to Yunmeng, in what is now Hubei, where his marriage to the granddaughter of a retired prime minister, Xu Yushi, seems to have formed but a brief interlude. During the first year of his trip, he met celebrities and gave away much of his wealth to needy friends.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 730, Li Bai stayed at Zhongnan Mountain near the capital Chang'an (Xi'an), and tried but failed to secure a position. He sailed down the Yellow River, stopped by Luoyang, and visited Taiyuan before going home. In 735, Li Bai was in Shanxi, where he intervened in a court martial against Guo Ziyi, who was later, after becoming one of the top Tang generals, to repay the favour during the An Shi disturbances. By perhaps 740, he had moved to Shandong. It was in Shandong at this time that he became one of the group known as the \"Six Idlers of the Bamboo Brook\", an informal group dedicated to literature and wine. He wandered about the area of Zhejiang and Jiangsu, eventually making friends with a famous Daoist priest, Wu Yun. In 742, Wu Yun was summoned by the Emperor to attend the imperial court, where his praise of Li Bai was great.", "qas": [{"question": "who was appointed to attend the imperial court ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 15, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Wu Yun's praise of Li Bai led Emperor Xuanzong (born Li Longji and also known as Emperor Minghuang) to summon Li to the court in Chang'an. Li's personality fascinated the aristocrats and common people alike, including another Taoist (and poet), He Zhizhang, who bestowed upon him the nickname the \"Immortal Exiled from Heaven\". Indeed, after an initial audience, where Li Bai was questioned about his political views, the Emperor was so impressed that he held a big banquet in his honor. At this banquet, the Emperor was said to show his favor, even to the extent of personally seasoning his soup for him.", "qas": [{"question": "who was emperor xuanzong ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Emperor Xuanzong employed him as a translator, as Li Bai knew at least one non-Chinese language. Ming Huang eventually gave him a post at the Hanlin Academy, which served to provide scholarly expertise and poetry for the Emperor.", "qas": [{"question": "who did emperor xuanzong write as a translator ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When the emperor ordered Li Bai to the palace, he was often drunk, but quite capable of performing on the spot.", "qas": [{"question": "who ordered the emperor to the palace ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Li Bai wrote several poems about the Emperor's beautiful and beloved Yang Guifei, the favorite royal consort. A story, probably apocryphal, circulates about Li Bai during this period. Once, while drunk, Li Bai had gotten his boots muddy, and Gao Lishi, the most politically powerful eunuch in the palace, was asked to assist in the removal of these, in front of the Emperor. Gao took offense at being asked to perform this menial service, and later managed to persuade Yang Guifei to take offense at Li's poems concerning her. At the persuasion of Yang Guifei and Gao Lishi, Xuanzong reluctantly, but politely, and with large gifts of gold and silver, sent Li Bai away from the royal court. After leaving the court, Li Bai formally became a Taoist, making a home in Shandong, but wandering far and wide for the next ten some years, writing poems. Li Bai lived and wrote poems at Bishan (or Bi Mountain (\u78a7\u5c71), today Baizhao Mountain (\u767d\u5146\u5c71)) in Yandian, Hubei. Bi Mountain (\u78a7\u5c71) in the poem \"Question and Answer Amongst the Mountains\" (\u5c71\u4e2d\u95ee\u7b54 Shanzhong Wenda) refers to this mountain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He met Du Fu in the autumn of 744, when they shared a single room and various activities together, such as traveling, hunting, wine, and poetry, thus established a close and lasting friendship. They met again the following year. These were the only occasions on which they met, in person, although they continued to maintain a relationship through poetry. This is reflected in the dozen or so Du Fu poems to or about Li Bai, which survive, and the one from Li Bai directed toward Du Fu which remains.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the directed directed by li ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 20, 3)"}]}, {"context": "At the end of 755, the disorders instigated by the rebel general An Lushan burst across the land. The Emperor eventually fled to Sichuan and abdicated. During the confusion, the Crown Prince opportunely declared himself Emperor and head of the government. The An Shi disturbances continued (as they were later called, since they lasted beyond the death of their instigator, carried on by Shi Siming, and others). Li Bai became a staff adviser to Prince Yong, one of Ming Huang's (Emperor Xuanzong's) sons, who was far from the top of the primogeniture list, yet named to share the imperial power as a general after Xuanzong had abdicated, in 756.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, even before the empire's external enemies were defeated, the two brothers fell to fighting each other with their armies. Upon the defeat of the Prince's forces by his brother the new emperor in 757, Li Bai escaped, but was later captured, imprisoned in Jiujiang, and sentenced to death. The famous and powerful army general Guo Ziyi and others intervened; Guo Ziyi was the very person whom Li Bai had saved from court martial a couple of decades before. His wife, the lady Zong, and others (such as Song Ruosi) wrote petitions for clemency. Upon General Guo Ziyi's offering to exchange his official rank for Li Bai's life, Li Bai's death sentence was commuted to exile: he was consigned to Yelang. Yelang (in what is now Guizhou) was in the remote extreme southwestern part of the empire, and was considered to be outside the main sphere of Chinese civilization and culture. Li Bai headed toward Yelang with little sign of hurry, stopping for prolonged social visits (sometimes for months), and writing poetry along the way, leaving detailed descriptions of his journey for posterity. Notice of an imperial pardon recalling Li Bai reached him before he even got near Yelang. He had only gotten as far as Wushan, when news of his pardon caught up with him in 759.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Li received the news of his imperial reprieve, he returned down the river to Jiangxi, passing on the way through Baidicheng, in Kuizhou Prefecture, still engaging in the pleasures of food, wine, good company, and writing poetry; his poem \"\" records this stage of his travels, as well as poetically mocking his enemies and detractors, implied in his inclusion of imagery of monkeys. Although Li did not cease his wandering lifestyle, he then generally confined his travels to Nanjing and the two Anhui cities of Xuancheng and Li Yang (in modern Zhao County). His poems of this time include nature poems and poems of socio-political protest. Eventually, in 762, Li's relative Li Yangbing became magistrate of Dangtu, and Li Bai went to stay with him there. In the meantime, Suzong and Xuanzong both died within a short period of time, and China had a new emperor. Also, China was involved in renewed efforts to suppress further military disorders stemming from the Anshi rebellions, and Li volunteered to serve on the general staff of the Chinese commander Li Guangbi. However, at age 61, Li became critically ill, and his health would not allow him to fulfill this plan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The new Emperor Daizong named Li Bai the Registrar of the Left Commandant's office in 762. However, by the time that the imperial edict arrived in Dangtu, Anhui, Li Bai was already dead.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the new emperor in 762. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There is a long and sometimes fanciful tradition regarding his death, from uncertain Chinese sources, that Li Bai drowned after falling from his boat one day he had gotten very drunk as he tried to embrace the reflection of the moon in the Yangtze River, something later believed by Herbert Giles. However, the actual cause appears to have been natural enough, although perhaps related to his hard-living lifestyle. Nevertheless, the legend has a place in Chinese culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A memorial of Li Bai lies just west of Ma'anshan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai was also a skilled calligrapher, though there is only one surviving piece of his work in his own handwriting that exists today. The piece is titled \"Shangyangtai\" (\"Going Up To Sun Terrace\"), a long scroll (with later addition of a title written by Emperor Huizong of Song and a postscript added by Qianlong Emperor himself); the calligraphy is housed in the Palace Museum in Beijing, China.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even Li Bai and Du Fu, the two most famous and most comprehensively edited Tang poets, were affected by the destruction of the imperial Tang libraries and the loss of many private collections in the periods of turmoil (An Lushan Rebellion and Huang Chao Rebellion). Although many of Li Bai's poems have survived, even more were lost and there is difficulty regarding variant texts. One of the earliest endeavors at editing Li Bai's work was by his relative Li Yangbing, the magistrate of Dangtu, with whom he stayed in his final years and to whom he entrusted his manuscripts. However, the most reliable texts are not necessarily in the earliest editions. Song dynasty scholars produced various editions of his poetry, but it was not until the Qing dynasty that such collections as the \"Quan Tangshi\" (\"Complete Tang Poems\") made the most comprehensive studies of the then surviving texts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Critics have focused on Li Bai's strong sense of the continuity of poetic tradition, his glorification of alcoholic beverages (and, indeed, frank celebration of drunkenness), his use of persona, the fantastic extremes of some of his imagery, his mastery of formal poetic rules\u2014and his ability to combine all of these with a seemingly effortless virtuosity in order to produce inimitable poetry. Other themes in Li's poetry, noted especially in the 20th century, are sympathy for the common folks and antipathy towards needless wars (even when conducted by the emperor himself).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai had a strong sense of himself as being part of a poetic tradition. The \"genius\" of Li Bai, says one recent account, \"lies at once in his total command of the literary tradition before him and his ingenuity in bending (without breaking) it to discover a uniquely personal idiom...\" Burton Watson, comparing him to Du Fu, says Li's poetry, \"is essentially backward-looking, that it represents more a revival and fulfillment of past promises and glory than a foray into the future.\" Watson adds, as evidence, that of all the poems attributed to Li Bai, about one sixth are in the form of \"yuefu\", or, in other words, reworked lyrics from traditional folk ballads. As further evidence, Watson cites the existence of a fifty-nine poem collection by Li Bai entitled \"Gu Feng\", or \"In the Old Manner\", which is, in part, tribute to the poetry of the Han and Wei dynasties. His admiration for certain particular poets is also shown through specific allusions, for example to Qu Yuan or Tao Yuanming, and occasionally by name, for example Du Fu.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A more general appreciation for history, is shown on the part of Li Bai in his poems of the \"huaigu\" genre, or meditations on the past, wherein following \"one of the perennial themes of Chinese poetry\", \"the poet contemplates the ruins of past glory\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "John C. H. Wu observed that \"while some may have drunk more wine than Li [Bai], no-one has written more poems about wine.\" Classical Chinese poets were often associated with drinking wine, and Li Bai was part of the group of Chinese scholars in Chang'an his fellow poet Du Fu called the \"Eight Immortals of the Wine Cup.\" The Chinese generally did not find the moderate use of alcohol to be immoral or unhealthy. James J.\u00a0Y Liu comments that \"zui\" in poetry \"does not mean quite the same thing as 'drunk', 'intoxicated', or 'inebriated', but rather means being mentally carried away from one's normal preoccupations\u00a0...\" Liu translates \"zui\" as \"rapt with wine\". The \"Eight Immortals\", however, drank to an unusual degree, though they still were viewed as pleasant eccentrics. Burton Watson concluded that \"[n]early all Chinese poets celebrate the joys of wine, but none so tirelessly and with such a note of genuine conviction as Li [Bai]\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of Li Bai's most famous poems is \"Waking From Drunkenness on a Spring Day\" (). Arthur Waley translated it as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "An important characteristic of Li Bai's poetry \"is the fantasy and note of childlike wonder and playfulness that pervade so much of it\". Burton Watson attributes this to a fascination with the Taoist priest, Taoist recluses who practiced alchemy and austerities in the mountains, in the aim of becoming xian, or immortal beings. There is a strong element of Taoism in his works, both in the sentiments they express and in their spontaneous tone, and \"many of his poems deal with mountains, often descriptions of ascents that midway modulate into journeys of the imagination, passing from actual mountain scenery to visions of nature deities, immortals, and 'jade maidens' of Taoist lore\". Watson sees this as another affirmation of Li Bai's affinity with the past, and a continuity with the traditions of the Chuci and the early fu. Watson finds this \"element of fantasy\" to be behind Li Bai's use of hyperbole and the \"playful personifications\" of mountains and celestial objects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The critic James J.Y. Liu notes \u201cChinese poets seem to be perpetually bewailing their exile and longing to return home. This may seem sentimental to Western readers, but one should remember the vastness of China, the difficulties of communication... the sharp contrast between the highly cultured life in the main cities and the harsh conditions in the remoter regions of the country, and the importance of family...\u201d It is hardly surprising, he concludes, that nostalgia should have become a \"constant, and hence conventional, theme in Chinese poetry.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liu gives as a prime example Li's poem \"A Quiet Night Thought\" (also translated as \"Contemplating Moonlight\"), which is often learned by schoolchildren in China. In a mere 20 words, the poem uses the vivid moonlight and frost imagery to convey the feeling of homesickness. There are several editions of the poem. This is translated from a 17th-century Kangxi edition moonlight poem:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following version has been translated by Jarek Zawadzki from the Gujin Tushu Jicheng edition:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This song is among the first classical songs that are taught to children in China, often by their parents. A music sheet book of its Chinese version exists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai also wrote a number of poems from various viewpoints, including the personae of women. For example, he wrote several poems in the \"Zi Ye\", or \"Lady Midnight\" style, as well as Han folk-ballad style poems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai is well known for the technical virtuosity of his poetry and the mastery of his verses. In terms of poetic form, \"critics generally agree that Li [Bai] produced no significant innovations\u00a0... In theme and content also, his poetry is notable less for the new elements it introduces than for the skill with which he brightens the old ones.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Burton Watson comments on Li Bai's famous poem, which he translates \"Bring the Wine\": \"like so much of Li [Bai]'s work, it has a grace and effortless dignity that somehow make it more compelling than earlier treatment of the same.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai's yuefu poems have been called the greatest of all time by Ming-dynasty scholar and writer Hu Yinglin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai especially excelled in the Gushi form, or \"old style\" poems, a type of poetry allowing a great deal of freedom in terms of the form and content of the work. An example is his poem \"\u8700\u9053\u96e3\", translated by Witter Bynner as \"Hard Roads in Shu\". Shu is a poetic term for Sichuan, the destination of refuge that Emperor Xuanzong considered fleeing to escape the approaching forces of the rebel General An Lushan. Watson comments that, this poem, \"employs lines that range in length from four to eleven characters, the form of the lines suggesting by their irregularity the jagged peaks and bumpy mountain roads of Sichuan depicted in the poem.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai was also noted as a master of the Jueju, or cut-verse. Ming-dynasty poet Li Pan Long thought Li Bai was the greatest jueju master of the Tang dynasty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai was noted for his mastery of the L\u00fcshi (poetry), or \"regulated verse\", the formally most demanding verse form of the times. Watson notes, however, that his poem \"Seeing a Friend Off\" was \"unusual in that it violates the rule that the two middle couplets\u00a0... must observe verbal parallelism\", adding that Chinese critics excused this kind of violation in the case of a genius like Li.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai's poetry was immensely influential in his own time, as well as for subsequent generations in China. From early on, he was paired with Du Fu. The recent scholar Paula Varsano observes that \"in the literary imagination they were, and remain, the two greatest poets of the Tang\u2014or even of China\". Yet she notes the persistence of \"what we can rightly call the 'Li-Du debate', the terms of which became so deeply ingrained in the critical discourse surrounding these two poets that almost any characterization of the one implicitly critiqued the other\". Li's influence has also been demonstrated in the immediate geographical area of Chinese cultural influence, being known as Ri Haku in Japan. This influence continues even today. Examples range from poetry to painting and to literature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his own lifetime, during his many wanderings and while he was attending court in Chang'an, he met and parted from various contemporary poets. These meetings and separations were typical occasions for versification in the tradition of the literate Chinese of the time, a prime example being his relationship with Du Fu.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After his lifetime, his influence continued to grow. Some four centuries later, during the Song dynasty, for example, just in the case of his poem that is sometimes translated \"Drinking Alone Beneath the Moon\", the poet Yang Wanli wrote a whole poem alluding to it (and to two other Li Bai poems), in the same \"gushi\", or old-style poetry form.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 20th century, Li Bai even influenced the poetry of Mao Zedong.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In China, his poem \"Quiet Night Thoughts\", reflecting a nostalgia of a traveller away from home, has been widely \"memorized by school children and quoted by adults\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is another musical setting of Li Bai's verse by the American composer Harry Partch, whose \"Seventeen Lyrics by Li Po\" for intoning voice and Adapted Viola (an instrument of Partch's own invention) are based on the texts in \"The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet\" translated by Shigeyoshi Obata. In Brazil, the songwriter Beto Furquim included a musical setting of the poem \"Jing Ye Si\" in his album \"Muito Prazer\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai is influential in the West partly due to Ezra Pound's versions of some of his poems in the collection \"\"Cathay\"\", (Pound transliterating his name according to the Japanese manner as \"Rihaku\"). Li Bai's interactions with nature, friendship, his love of wine and his acute observations of life inform his more popular poems. Some, like \"Changgan xing\" (translated by Ezra Pound as ), record the hardships or emotions of common people. An example of the liberal, but poetically influential, translations, or adaptations, of Japanese versions of his poems made, largely based on the work of Ernest Fenollosa and professors Mori and Ariga.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ideas underlying Li Bai's poetry had a profound impact in shaping American Imagist and Modernist poetry through the 20th century. Also, Gustav Mahler integrated four of Li Bai's works into his symphonic song cycle \"Das Lied von der Erde\". These were derived from free German translations by Hans Bethge, published in an anthology called (\"The Chinese Flute\"), Bethge based his versions on the collection \"Chinesische Lyrik\" by Hans Heilmann (1905). Heilmann worked from pioneering 19th-century translations into French: three by the Marquis d'Hervey-Saint-Denys and one (only distantly related to the Chinese) by Judith Gautier. Mahler freely changed Bethge's text.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai's poetry was introduced to Europe by Jean Joseph Marie Amiot, a Jesuit missionary in Beijing, in his \"Portraits des C\u00e9l\u00e8bres Chinois\", published in the series \"M\u00e9moires concernant l'histoire, les sciences, les arts, les m\u0153urs, les usages, &c. des Chinois, par les missionnaires de Pekin\". (1776\u20131797). Further translations into French were published by Marquis d'Hervey de Saint-Denys in his 1862 \"Po\u00e9sies de l'\u00c9poque des Thang\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Joseph Edkins read a paper, \"On Li Tai-po\", to the Peking Oriental Society in 1888, which was subsequently published in that society's journal. The early sinologist Herbert Allen Giles included translations of Li Bai in his 1898 publication \"Chinese Poetry in English Verse\", and again in his \"History of Chinese Literature\" (1901). The third early translator into English was L. Cranmer-Byng (1872\u20131945). His \"Lute of Jade: Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China\" (1909) and \"A Feast of Lanterns\" (1916) both featured Li's poetry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Renditions of Li Bai's poetry into modernist English poetry were influential through Ezra Pound in \"Cathay\" (1915) and Amy Lowell in \"Fir-Flower Tablets\" (1921). Neither worked directly from the Chinese: Pound relied on more or less literal, word for word, though not terribly accurate, translations of Ernest Fenollosa and what Pound called the \"decipherings\" of professors Mori and Ariga; Lowell on those of Florence Ayscough. Witter Bynner with the help of Kiang Kang-hu included several of Li's poems in \"The Jade Mountain\" (1939). Although Li was not his preferred poet, Arthur Waley translated a few of his poems into English for the \"Asiatic Review\", and included them in his \"More Translations from the Chinese\". Shigeyoshi Obata, in his 1922 \"The Works of Li Po\", claimed he had made \"the first attempt ever made to deal with any single Chinese poet exclusively in one book for the purpose of introducing him to the English-speaking world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Li Bai became a favorite among translators for his straightforward and seemingly simple style. Later translations are too numerous to discuss here, but an extensive selection of Li's poems, translated by various translators, is included in John Minford and Joseph S. M. Lau, \"Classical Chinese Literature\" (2000)", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of Li Bai's best known poems and a good example of his writing is his \"Drinking Alone by Moonlight\" (, pinyin: Yu\u00e8 Xi\u00e0 D\u00fa Zhu\u00f3), which has been translated into English by various authors, including this translation, by Arthur Waley:", "qas": []}, {"context": "To hear the poem read in Chinese and to see another translation, go to Great Tang Poets: Li Bo (701\u2013762) \"Drinking Alone under the Moon\" Asia For Educators (Columbia University)", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nOnline translations (some with original Chinese, pronunciation, and literal translation):", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Longship", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Longships were a type of specialised Viking warships that have a long history in Scandinavia. Their existence being archaeologically proven and documented from at least the fourth century BC. Originally invented and used by the Norsemen (commonly known as the Vikings) for commerce, exploration, and warfare during the Viking Age, many of the longship\u2019s characteristics were adopted by other cultures, like Anglo-Saxons and continued to influence shipbuilding for centuries. The longship's design evolved over many centuries, beginning in the Stone Age with the invention of the umiak and continuing up until the 6th century with clinker-built ships like Nydam and Kvalsund. The longship appeared in its complete form between the 9th and 13th centuries. The character and appearance of these ships have been reflected in Scandinavian boat-building traditions until today. The particular skills and methods employed in making longships are still used worldwide, often with modern adaptations. They were all made out of wood, with cloth sails (woven wool) and had numerous details and carvings on the hull.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The longships were characterized as a graceful, long, narrow and light, with a shallow-draft hull designed for speed. The ship's shallow draft allowed navigation in waters only one meter deep and permitted arbitrary beach landings, while its light weight enabled it to be carried over portages or used bottom-up for shelter in camps. Longships were also double-ended, the symmetrical bow and stern allowing the ship to reverse direction quickly without a turn around; this trait proved particularly useful at northern latitudes, where icebergs and sea ice posed hazards to navigation. Longships were fitted with oars along almost the entire length of the boat itself. Later versions had a rectangular sail on a single mast, which was used to replace or augment the effort of the rowers, particularly during long journeys. The average speed of Viking ships varied from ship to ship, but lay in the range of and the maximum speed of a longship under favourable conditions was around .", "qas": [{"question": "what was the average speed of viking ships ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 1, 5)"}, {"question": "what was the purpose of the longships ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Viking longships were the epitome of naval power in their time and were highly valued possessions. Archaeological finds show that the Viking ships were by no means a standard type vessel. It demonstrated true individual designs with its designers' footprints and often had regional characteristics. For example, the choice of material was mostly dictated by the regional forests, that is pine from Norway and Sweden, and oak from Denmark. Moreover, \u00a0each and every one of these Viking longships had particular features adjusted to the natural conditions, which they were exposed to.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They were often communally owned by coastal farmers and commissioned by kings in times of conflict, in order to quickly assemble a large and powerful naval force. While longships were used by the Norse in warfare, they were mostly used as troop transports, not warships. In the tenth century, longships would sometimes be tied together in offshore battles to form a steady platform for infantry warfare. During the 9th century peak of the Viking expansion, large fleets set out to attack the degrading Frankish empire by attacking up navigable rivers such as the Seine. Rouen was sacked in 841, the year after the death of Louis the Pious, a son of Charlemagne. Quentovic, near modern Etables, was attacked in 842 and 600 Danish ships attacked Hamburg in 845. In the same year, 129 ships returned to attack up the Seine. They were called \"dragonships\" by enemies such as the English because they had a dragon-shaped bow. The Norse had a strong sense of naval architecture, and during the early medieval period they were advanced for their time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Longships can be classified into a number of different types, depending on size, construction details, and prestige. The most common way to classify longships is by the number of rowing positions on board.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Karvi (or \"karve\") is the smallest vessel that is considered a longship. According to the 10th-century Gulating Law, a ship with 13 rowing benches is the smallest ship suitable for military use. A ship with 6 to 16 benches would be classified as a Karvi. These ships were considered to be \"general purpose\" ships, mainly used for fishing and trade, but occasionally commissioned for military use. While most longships held a length to width ratio of 7:1, the Karvi ships were closer to 4.5:1. \nThe Gokstad Ship is a famous Karvi ship, built around the end of the 9th century, excavated in 1880 by Nicolay Nicolaysen. It was approximately long with 16 rowing positions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"\" (or \"snekke\"), meaning \"thin and projecting\", was typically the smallest longship used in warfare and was classified as a ship with at least 20 rowing benches. A typical snekkja might have a length of , a width of , and a draught of only . It would carry a crew of around 41 men (40 oarsmen and one cox).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Snekkjas were one of the most common types of ship. According to Viking lore, Canute the Great used 1,200 in Norway in 1028.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of ship was one of the most common type of ship ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Norwegian snekkjas, designed for deep fjords and Atlantic weather, typically had more draught than the Danish model designed for low coasts and beaches. Snekkjas were so light that they had no need of ports\u2014they could simply be beached, and potentially even carried across a portage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The snekkjas continued to evolve after the end of the Viking age, with later Norwegian examples becoming larger and heavier than Viking age ships. A modern version is still being used in Norway, and are now called \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Skeid\" (\"skei\u00f0\"), meaning \u2018slider\u2019 (referring to a sley, a weavers reed, or to a sheath that a knife slides into) and probably connoting \u2018speeder\u2019 (referring to a running race) (Zoega, Old Icelandic Dictionary). These ships were larger warships, consisting of more than 30 rowing benches. Ships of this classification are some of the largest (see Busse) longships ever discovered. A group of these ships were discovered by Danish archaeologists in Roskilde during development in the harbour-area in 1962 and 1996\u201397. The ship discovered in 1962, \"Skuldelev 2\" is an oak-built Skeid longship. It is believed to have been built in the Dublin area around 1042. \"Skuldelev 2\" could carry a crew of some 70\u201380 and measures just less than in length. They had around 30 rowing chairs. In 1996\u201397 archaeologists discovered the remains of another ship in the harbour. This ship, called the \"Roskilde 6\", at is the longest Viking ship ever discovered and has been dated to around 1025. \"Skuldelev 2\" was replicated as \"Seastallion from Glendalough\" at the Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde and launched in 2004. In 2012, a 35-metre long skeid longship named \"Draken Harald H\u00e5rfagre\" was launched in Norway. It was built from scratch by experts, using original Viking and experimental archaeological methods.\n\"Drakkar\", or \"dreki\" \"\"'dragon' are the type of ship, of thirty rooms and upwards that are only known from historical sources, such as the 13th-century \"G\u00f6ngu-Hr\u00f3lfs saga\" . Here, the ships are described as most unusual, elegant, ornately decorated, and used by those who went raiding and plundering. These ships were likely skeids that differed only in the carvings of menacing beasts, such as dragons and snakes, carried on the prow of the ship. These carvings allegedly protected the ship and crew, and warded off the terrible sea monsters of Norse mythology. It is however likely that the carvings, like those on the Oseberg ship, might have had a ritual purpose, or that the purported effect was to frighten enemies and townspeople.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest mentioned Drakkar was possibly the ship of unstated size owned by Harald Fairhair in the tenth century. The first drakkar ship whose size was mentioned in the source was Olav Tryggvason's thirty-room Tranin, built at Nidaros in apex. 995. By far the most famous in this period was his later ship the Ormrinn Langi ('Long Serpent') of thirty-four rooms, built over the winter of 999 to 1000. No true dragon ship, as defined by the sagas, has been found by archaeological excavation.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of ship is no true dragon ships ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 11, 4)"}]}, {"context": "The visual representation of how the Drakkar ship could have looked can be found on the Bergen seal from 1299 shows a ship with a dragonhead at either end, as do several of the ships on Viking Age.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the ship on the bergen ship ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first longships can trace their origin back to between 500 and 300\u00a0BC, when the Danish Hjortspring boat was built. It was fastened with cord, not nailed, and paddled, not rowed. It had rounded cross sections and although long was only wide. The rounded sections gave maximum displacement for the lowest wetted surface area, similar to a modern narrow rowing skiff, so were very fast but had little carrying capacity. The shape suggests mainly river use. Unlike later boats, it had a low bow and stern. A distinctive feature is the two-prong cutaway bow section.\nThe first true longship that was rowed was the Nydam ship, built in Denmark around 350\u00a0AD. It also had very rounded underwater sections but had more pronounced flare in the topsides, giving it more stability as well as keeping more water out of the boat at speed or in waves. It had no sail. It was of lapstrake construction fastened with iron nails. The bow and stern had slight elevation. The keel was a flattened plank about twice as thick as a normal strake plank but still not strong enough to withstand the downwards thrust of a mast.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Sutton Hoo longship, sometimes referred to as the ghost ship of the Wulflings, is about maximum beam and built about 625\u00a0AD. It is associated with the Saxons. The ship was crushed by the weight of soil when buried but most details have been reconstructed. The ship was similar in hull section to the Nydam ship with flared topsides. Compared to later longships, the oak planks are wide\u2014about including laps, with less taper at bow and stern. Planks were thick. The 26 heavy frames are spaced at in the centre. Each frame tapers from the turn of the bilge to the inwale. This suggests that knees were used to brace the upper two or three topside planks but have rotted away. The hull had a distinctive leaf shape with the bow sections much narrower than the stern quarters. There were nine wide planks per side. The ship had a light keel plank but pronounced stem and stern deadwood. The reconstruction suggests the stern was much lower than the bow. It had a steering oar to starboard braced by an extra frame. The raised prow extended about above the keel and the hull was estimated to draw when lightly laden. Between each futtock the planks were lapped in normal clinker style and fastened with six iron rivets per plank. There is no evidence of a mast, sail, or strengthening of the keel amidships but a half-sized replica, the Soe Wylfing, sailed very well with a modest sail area.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the ghost ship built ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sails started to be used from possibly the 8th century. The earliest had either plaited or chequered pattern, with narrow strips sewn together.", "qas": []}, {"context": "About 700\u00a0AD the Kvalsund ship was built. It is the first with a true keel. Its cross sectional shape was flatter on the bottom with less flare to the topsides. This shape is far more stable and able to handle rougher seas. It had the high prow of the later longships. After several centuries of evolution, the fully developed longship emerged some time in the middle of the ninth century. Its long, graceful, menacing head figure carved in the stern, such as the Oseburg ship, echoed the designs of its predecessors. The mast was now square in section and located toward the middle of the ship, and could be lowered and raised. The hull's sides were fastened together to allow it to flex with the waves, combining lightness and ease of handling on land. The ships were large enough to carry cargo and passengers on long ocean voyages, but still maintained speed and agility, making the longship a versatile warship and cargo carrier.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the ship that was built in the marshall islands ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Viking shipbuilders had no written diagrams or standard written design plan. The shipbuilder pictured the longship before its construction, based on previous builds, and the ship was then built from the keel up. The keel and stems were made first. The shape of the stem was based on segments of circles of varying sizes. The keel was an inverted T shape to accept the garboard planks. In the longships the keel was made up of several sections spliced together and fastened with treenails. The next step was building the strakes\u2014the lines of planks joined endwise from stern to stern. Nearly all longships were clinker (also known as lapstrake) built, meaning that each hull plank overlapped the next. Each plank was hewn from an oak tree so that the finished plank was about thick and tapered along each edge to a thickness of about . The planks were radially hewn so that the grain is approximately at right angles to the surface of the plank. This provides maximum strength, an even bend and an even rate of expansion and contraction in water. This is called in modern terms quartersawn timber, and has the least natural shrinkage of any cut section of wood. The plank above the turn of the bilge, the \"meginhufr\", was about thick on very long ships, but narrower to take the strain of the crossbeams. This was also the area subject to collisions. The planks overlapped by about and were joined by iron rivets. Each overlap was stuffed with wool or animal hair or sometimes hemp soaked in pine tar to ensure water tightness. Amidships, where the planks are straight, the rivets are about apart, but they were closer together as the planks sweep up to the curved bow and stern. There is considerable twist and bend in the end planks. This was achieved by use of both thinner (by 50%) and narrower planks. In more sophisticated builds, forward planks were cut from natural curved trees called reaction wood. Planks were installed unseasoned or wet. Partly worked stems and sterns have been located in bogs. It has been suggested that they were stored there over winter to stop the wood from drying and cracking. The moisture in wet planks allowed the builder to force the planks into a more acute bend, if need be; once dry it would stay in the forced position. At the bow and the stern builders were able to create hollow sections, or compound bends, at the waterline, making the entry point very fine. In less sophisticated ships short and nearly straight planks were used at the bow and stern. Where long timber was not available or the ship was very long, the planks were butt-joined, although overlapping scarf joints fixed with nails were also used.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the ship that was not available in the roman isles ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 17, 26)"}]}, {"context": "As the planks reached the desired height, the interior frame (futtocks) and cross beams were added. Frames were placed close together, which is an enduring feature of thin planked ships, still used today on some lightweight wooden racing craft such as those designed by Bruce Farr. Viking boat builders used a spacing of about . Part of the reason for this spacing was to achieve the correct distance between rowing stations and to create space for the chests used by Norse sailors as thwarts (seats). The bottom futtocks next to the keel were made from natural L-shaped crooks. The upper futtocks were usually not attached to the lower futtocks to allow some hull twist. The parts were held together with iron rivets, hammered in from the outside of the hull and fastened from the inside with a rove (washers). The surplus rivet was then cut off. A ship normally used about of iron nails in a long ship. In some ships the gap between the lower uneven futtock and the lapstrake planks was filled with a spacer block about long. In later ships spruce stringers were fastened lengthwise to the futtocks roughly parallel to the keel. Longships had about five rivets for each yard () of plank. In many early ships treenails (trenails, trunnels) were used to fasten large timbers. First, a hole about wide hole was drilled through two adjoining timbers, a wooden pegs inserted which was split and a thin wedge inserted to expand the peg. Some treenails have been found with traces of linseed oil suggesting that treenails were soaked before the pegs were inserted. When dried the oil would act as a semi-waterproof weak filler/glue.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The longship's narrow deep keel provided strength beneath the waterline. A typical size keel of a longer ship was amidships, tapering in width at the bow and stern. Sometimes there was a false outer keel to take the wear while being dragged up a beach. These large timbers were shaped with both adze and broadaxe. At the bow the cut water was especially strong, as longboats sailed in ice strewn water in spring. Hulls up to wide gave stability, making the longship less likely to tip when sailed. The greater beam provided more moment of leverage by placing the crew or any other mobile weight on the windward side. Oceangoing longships had higher topsides about a high to keep out water. Higher topsides were supported with knees with the long axis fastened to the top of the crossbeams. The hull was waterproofed with animal hair, wool, hemp or moss drenched in pine tar. The ships would be tarred in the autumn and then left in a boathouse over the winter to allow time for the tar to dry. A drain plug hole about was drilled in the garboard plank on one side to allow rain water drainage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The oars did not use rowlocks or thole pins but holes cut below the gunwale line. To keep seawater out, these oar holes were sealed with wooden disks from the inside, when the oars were not in use. The holes were also used for belaying mooring lines and sail sheets. At the bow the forward upper futtock protruded about above the sheerline and was carved to retain anchor or mooring lines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Analysis of timber samples from Viking long boats shows that a variety of timbers were used, but there was strong preference for oak, a tree associated with Thor in Viking mythology. Oak is a heavy, durable timber that can be easily worked by adze and axe when green (wet/unseasoned). Generally large and prestigious ships were made from oak. Other timber used were ash, elm, pine, spruce and larch. Spruce is light and seems to have been more common in later designs for internal hull battens (stringers). Although it is used for spars in modern times there is as yet no evidence the Vikings used spruce for masts. All timber was used unseasoned. The bark was removed by a bark spade. This consisted of a wooden handle with a T crossbar at the upper end, fitted with a broad chisel-like cutting edge of iron. The cutting edge was wide and long with a neck where the handle was inserted. It appears that in cold winters wood work stopped and partly completed timber work was buried in mud to prevent it drying out. Timber was worked with iron adzes and axes. Most of the smoothing was done with a side axe. Other tools used in woodwork were hammers, wedges, drawknives, planes and saws. Iron saws were probably very rare. The Domesday Book in England (1086\u00a0AD) records only 13 saws. Possibly these were pit saws and it is uncertain if they were used in longship construction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even though no longship sail has been found, accounts and depictions verify that longships had square sails. Sails measured perhaps across, and were made of rough wool cloth. Unlike in knarrs, a longship sail was not stitched.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of boat has been found in the abbey ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The sail was held in place by the mast which was up to tall. Its base was about . The mast was supported by a large wooden maststep called a \"kerling\" (\"old woman\" in Old Norse) that was semicircular in shape. (Trent) The kerling was made of oak, and about wide and up to long in the larger ships. It usually heavily tapered into a joint with the internal keelson, although keelsons were by no means universal. The kerling lay across two strong frames that ran width-wise above the keel in the centre of the boat. The kerling also had a companion: the \"mast fish,\" a wooden timber above the kerling just below deck height that provided extra help in keeping the mast erect. It was a large wooden baulk of timber about long with a slot, facing aft to accommodate the mast as it was raised. This acted as a mechanism to catch and secure the mast before the stays were secured. It was an early form of mast partner but was aligned fore and aft. In later longships there is no mast fish-the mast partner is an athwartwise beam similar to more modern construction. Most masts were about half the length of the ship so that it did not project beyond the hull when unstepped. When lowered the mast foot was kept in the base of the mast step and the top of the mast secured in a natural wooden crook about high, on the port side, so that it did not interfere with steering on the starboard side.", "qas": [{"question": "where was the boat held ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There is a suggestion that the rig was sometimes used in a lateen style with the top cross spar dipped at an angle to aid sailing to windward i.e. the spar became the luff. There is little or no evidence to support this theory. No explanation is offered as to how this could be accomplished with a square sail as the lower reefed portion of the sail would be very bulky and would prevent even an approximation of the laminar flow necessary for windward sailing. There is no evidence of any triangular sails in use. Masts were held erect by side stays and possibly fore and aft stays. Each side stay was fitted at it lower end with a toggle. There were no chain plates. The lower part of the side stay consisted of ropes looped under the end of a knee of upper futtock which had a hole underneath. The lower part of the stay was about long and attached to a combined flat wooden turnblock and multi V jamb cleat called an angel (maiden, virgin). About four turns of rope went between the angel and the toggle to give the mechanical advantage to tighten the side stays. At each turn the v-shape at the bottom of the angels \"wings\" jambed the stay preventing slippage and movement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Early long boats used some form of steering oar but by the 10th century the side rudder (called a steerboard, the source for the etymology for the word starboard itself) was well established. It consisted of a length of timber about long. The upper section was rounded to a diameter of about . The lower blade was about . The steerboard on the Gokstad ship in the Viking Ship Museum in Oslo, Norway, is about wide, completely flat inboard and with about a maximum width at the center of the foil. The head of the rudder shaft had two square holes about apart. When the rudder was in its normal position the tiller was inserted in the upper hole so that the tiller faced athwartwise. The shaft was attached to the gunwale by a U shaped joint. Near the stern, about halfway down the starboard topsides, was a rounded wooden block about in diameter and high, with a central hole for a rope. This corresponded to a hole in the midsection of the rudder blade. From the outside the rope ran through the blade, through the round block and topsides and was fastened inside the hull. The flexibility of the hemp rope allowed the blade to pivot. When beached or in shallow water the tiller was moved to the lower hole, the blade rope was slackened and the rudder head pulled up so the rudder could operate in shallow waters. Modern facsimiles are reported to steer quite well but require a very large amount of physical effort compared to the modern fore and aft tiller.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Longships for the most part used two different kinds of anchors. The most common was a natural wood yoke formed from a tree branch. The weight was supplied by a stone passing laterally through the U of the yoke. The top of the yoke was closed by either a length of hardwood or a curved iron head, which kept the stone in place. One side of the head stuck out so it could dig into mud or sand. In the Ladby ship burial in Denmark, a unique iron anchor has been found, resembling the modern fisherman's anchor but without the crossbar. The cross bar may have rusted away. This anchor\u2014made of Norwegian iron\u2014has a long iron chain to which the hemp warp was attached. This construction has several advantages when anchored in deep waters or in rough seas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the height of Viking expansion into Dublin and Jorvik 875\u2013954 AD the longship reached a peak of development such as the Gokstad ship 890. Archaeological discoveries from this period at Coppergate, York, show the shipwright had a large range of sophisticated woodwork tools. As well as the heavy adze, broad axe, wooden mallets and wedges, the craftsman had steel tools such as anvils, files, snips, awls, augers, gouges, draw knife, knives, including folding knives, chisels and small long bow saws with antler handles. Edged tools were kept sharp with sharpening stones from Norway. One of the most sophisticated tools was a diameter twist drill bit, perfect for drilling holes for treenails. Simple mechanical pole wood lathes were used to make cups and bowls.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the peak of the viking ship ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since the discovery of the original longships in the 1800s, many boat builders have built Viking ship replicas. However, most have not been able to resist the temptation to use more modern techniques and tools in the construction process. In 1892\u201393, a full-size near-replica of the Gokstad ship, the Viking, was built by the Norwegian Magnus Andersen in Bergen. It was used to sail the Atlantic. It had a deeper keel with draught to stiffen the hull and a range of non-authentic triangular sails to help performance and big fenders on each gunwale filled with reindeer hair to give extra buoyancy in case of swamping. The skipper recorded that the keel bowed upwards as much as and the gunwale flexed inwards as much as in heavy seas. A half-size replica of the Sutton Hoo longship has been equipped with a substantial sail, despite the original having oar power only. They took a year to make", "qas": [{"question": "when was the discovery of the original longships discovered ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the Viking Age (900-1200 AD) Vikings were the dominant seafarers of the North Atlantic. One of the keys to their success was the able to navigate skillfully across the open waters.The Vikings were experts in judging speed and wind direction, and in knowing the current and when to expect high and low tides. Viking navigational techniques are not well understood, but historians postulate that the Vikings probably had some sort of primitive astrolabe and used the stars to plot their course.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Viking Sundial", "qas": []}, {"context": "During an excavation of a Viking Age farm in \u201csouthern Greenland\u201d part of a circular disk with carvings was recovered which could be just such shadow curves. The discovery of the so-called Viking Sundial suggested a hypothesis that it was used as a compass. Archaeologists found a piece of stone and a fragment of wooden disk both featuring straight and hyperbolic carvings. It turned out that the two items had been parts of sundials used by the Vikings as a compass during their sea-crossings along latitude 61 degrees North.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Archaeologists have found two devices which they interpret as navigation instruments. Both appear to be sundials with gnomon curves etched on a flat surface. The devices are small enough to be held flat in the hand at diameter. A wooden version dated to about 1000\u00a0AD was found in Greenland. A stone version was also found at Vatnahverfi, Greenland. By looking at the place where the shadow from the rod falls on a carved curve, a navigator is able to sail along a line of latitude. Both gnomon curve devices show the curve for 61\u00b0 north very prominently. This was the approximate latitude that the Vikings would have sailed along to get to Greenland from Scandinavia. The wooden device also has north marked and had 32 arrow heads around the edge that may be the points of a compass. Other lines are interpreted as the solstice and equinox curves. The device was tested successfully, as a sun compass, during a 1984 reenactment when a longship sailed across the North Atlantic. It was accurate to within \u00b1 5\u00b0.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hypothesis", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Danish archaeologist Thorkild Ramskou suggested in 1967 that the \"sun-stones\" referred to in some sagas might have been natural crystals capable of polarizing skylight. The mineral cordierite occurring in Norway has the local name \"Viking's Compass.\" Its changes in colour would allow determining the sun's position (azimuth) even through an overcast or foggy horizon. The sunstones are doubly refracting, meaning that objects viewed through them can be seen as double because of positively charged calcium ions and negatively charged carbonate ions. When looking at the sun the stone, it will project two overlapping shadows on the crystal. The opacities of these shadows will vary depending on the sunstone's direction to the sun. When the two projected shapes have exactly the same opacity, it means the stone's long side is facing directly toward the sun. Since the stone uses light polarization, it works the best when the sun is at lower altitudes, or closer to the horizon. It makes sense that Norsemen were able to make use of sunstones, since much of the area they travelled and explored was near polar, where the sun is very close to the horizon for a good amount of the year. For example, in the Vinland sagas we see long voyages to North America, the majority sailed at over 61 degrees north.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An ingenious navigation method is detailed in \"Viking Navigation Using the Sunstone, Polarized Light and the Horizon Board\" by Leif K. Karlsen. To derive a course to steer relative to the sun direction, he uses a sun-stone (solarsteinn) made of Iceland spar (optical calcite or silfurberg), and a \"horizon-board.\" The author constructed the latter from an Icelandic saga source, and describes an experiment performed to determine its accuracy. Karlsen also discusses why on North Atlantic trips the Vikings might have preferred to navigate by the sun rather than by stars, as at high latitudes in summer the days are long and the nights short.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Viking named Stjerner Oddi compiled a chart showing the direction of sunrise and sunset, which enabled navigators to sail longships from place to place with ease. Almgren, an earlier Viking, told of another method: \"All the measurements of angles were made with what was called a 'half wheel' (a kind of half sun-diameter which corresponds to about sixteen minutes of arc). This was something that was known to every skipper at that time, or to the long-voyage pilot or \"kendtmand\" ('man who knows the way') who sometimes went along on voyages\u00a0... When the sun was in the sky, it was not, therefore, difficult to find the four points of the compass, and determining latitude did not cause any problems either.\" (Almgrem)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Birds provided a helpful guide to finding land. A Viking legend states that Vikings used to take caged crows aboard ships and let them loose if they got lost. The crows would instinctively head for land, giving the sailors a course to steer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "What if there was no sun to use the sundial? According to a widespread hypothesis, when the Sun was covered by fog or clouds the Vikings might have navigated by skylight polarization detected with an enigmatic birefringent crystal (sunstone).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The longships had two methods of propulsion: oars and sail. At sea, the sail enabled longships to travel faster than by oar and to cover long distances overseas with far less manual effort. Sails could be raised or lowered quickly. In a modern facsimile the mast can be lowered in 90 seconds. Oars were used when near the coast or in a river, to gain speed quickly, and when there was an adverse (or insufficient) wind. In combat, the variability of wind power made rowing the chief means of propulsion. The ship was steered by a vertical flat blade with a short round handle, at right angles, mounted over the starboard side of the aft gunwale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Longships were not fitted with benches. When rowing, the crew sat on sea chests (chests containing their personal possessions) that would otherwise take up space. The chests were made the same size and were the perfect height for a Viking to sit on and row. Longships had hooks for oars to fit into, but smaller oars were also used, with crooks or bends to be used as oarlocks. If there were no holes then a loop of rope kept the oars in place.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An innovation that improved the sail's performance was the beitass, or stretching pole\u2014a wooden spar stiffening the sail. The windward performance of the ship was poor by modern standards as there was no centreboard, deep keel or leeboard. To assist in tacking the beitass kept the luff taut. Bracing lines were attached to the luff and led through holes on the forward gunwale. Such holes were often reinforced with short sections of timber about long on the outside of the hull.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Vikings were major contributors to the shipbuilding technology of their day. Their shipbuilding methods spread through extensive contact with other cultures, and ships from the 11th and 12th centuries are known to borrow many of the longships' design features, despite the passing of many centuries. The Lancha Poveira, a boat from P\u00f3voa de Varzim, Portugal is one of the last remnants from the longship, keeping all the longboat features but without a long stern and bow, and with a lateen sail. It was used until the 1950s. Today there is just one boat: \"F\u00e9 em Deus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many historians, archaeologists and adventurers have reconstructed longships in an attempt to understand how they worked. These re-creators have been able to identify many of the advances that the Vikings implemented in order to make the longship a superior vessel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The longship was a master of all trades. It was wide and stable, yet light, fast, and nimble. With all these qualities combined in one ship, the longship was unrivalled for centuries, until the arrival of the great cog.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Scandinavia, the longship was the usual vessel for war even with the introduction of cogs in the 12th\u201313th centuries. Leidang fleet-levy laws remained in place for most of the Middle Ages, demanding that the freemen should build, man and furnish ships for war if demanded by the king\u2014ships with at least 20 or 25 oar-pairs (40\u201350+ rowers). However, by the late 14th century, these low-boarded vessels were at a disadvantage against newer, taller vessels\u2014when the Victual Brothers, in the employ of the Hansa, attacked Bergen in the autumn of 1393, the \"great ships\" of the pirates could not be boarded by the Norwegian levy ships called out by Margaret I of Denmark, and the raiders were able to sack the town with impunity. While earlier times had seen larger and taller longships in service, by this time the authorities had also gone over to other types of ships for warfare. The last Viking longship was defeated in 1429.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several of the original longships built in the Viking Age have been excavated by archaeologists. A selection of vessels that has been particularly important to our understanding of the longships design and construction, comprise the following:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nA selection of important longships known only from written sources includes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThere are many replicas of Viking ships - including longships - in existence. Some are just inspired by the longship design in general, while others are intricate works of experimental archaeology, trying to replicate the originals as accurately as possible. Replicas important to our understanding of the original longships design and construction include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Luigi Alamanni", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Luigi Alamanni (sometimes spelt Alemanni) (6 March 149518 April 1556) was an Italian poet and statesman. He was regarded as a prolific and versatile poet. He was credited with introducing the epigram into Italian poetry.", "qas": [{"question": "who was an italian poet and philospher ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Alamanni was born in Florence. His father was a devoted adherent of the Medici party, but Luigi, smarting under a supposed injustice, joined with others in an unsuccessful conspiracy against Giulio de' Medici, afterwards Pope Clement VII. He was obliged in consequence to take refuge in Venice, and, on the accession of Clement, to flee to France. When Florence shook off the papal yoke in 1527, Alamanni returned, and took a prominent part in the management of the affairs of the republic.", "qas": [{"question": "where was alamanni born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On the restoration of the Medici in 1530, he had again to take refuge in France, where he composed the greater part of his works. He was a favourite with Francis I, who sent him as ambassador to Charles V after the Peace of Crepy in 1544.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As an instance of his tact in this capacity, it is related that when Charles interrupted a complimentary address by quoting from a satirical poem of Alamanni's the words:\"\"l'aquila grifagna, Che per piu devorar, duoi rostri porta\"\" (\"\"Two crooked bills the ravenous eagle bears, The better to devour\"\"), the latter at once replied that he spoke them as a poet, who was permitted to use fictions, but that he spoke now as an ambassador, who was obliged to tell the truth. The ready reply pleased Charles, who added some complimentary words.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the death of Francis, Alamanni enjoyed the confidence of his successor Henry II, and in 1551 was sent by him as his ambassador to Genoa. He died at Amboise on 18 April 1556.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the successor to the genoa ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He wrote a large number of poems, distinguished by the purity and excellence of their style. The best is a didactic poem, \"La Coltivazione\" (Paris, 1546; see 1546 in poetry), written in imitation of Virgil's Georgics. His \"Opere Toscane\" (Lyon, 1532) consists of satirical pieces written in blank verse. His use of Horatian epistolary satire is important and his tenth satire was used as a model by Sir Thomas Wyatt in his poem 'Mine own John Poyntz' which introduced the form into English literature. An unfinished poem, \"Avarchide\", in imitation of the Iliad, was the work of his old age and has little merit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It has been said by some that Alamanni was the first to use blank verse in Italian poetry, but that distinction belongs rather to his contemporary Giangiorgio Trissino.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Isabella di Morra dedicated a sonnet to Alamanni called \"Non sol il ciel vi fu largo e cortese\" (\"\"Not only was heaven generous and courteous to you\"\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alamanni is a minor speaker in Machiavelli's \"The Art of War\", a book structured as a dialogue between real people known to Machiavelli, and set in the gardens of Cosimo Ruccelai. In this book, Alamanni is present as a loyal friend of the host, and is mentioned to be the youngest of Ruccelai's friends present.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of alamanni 's book ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 8, 1)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Louis Aleman", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Blessed Louis Aleman (16 September 1450) was a French Roman Catholic cardinal and a professed member of the now-suppressed Canons Regular of Saint John Baptist. He served as the Archbishop of Arles from 1423 until his resignation in 1440 when he had resigned from the cardinalate. But he was later reinstated as a cardinal on 19 December 1449 at which point he served as the Protopriest and also reclaimed his titular church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aleman served as the Bishop of Maguelonne from 1418 until his archepiscopal elevation at which point he was later named a cardinal. Aleman once led opposition to Pope Eugene IV while pledging allegiance to an antipope which led to Eugene IV stripping Aleman of all ecclesiastical dignities that he had been entitled to. But he later convinced the antipope to abdicate as a means of ending the Western Schism at which stage Aleman was restored to the cardinalate and returned to full communion with the Roman see under Pope Nicholas V. He has often been dubbed as the \"Cardinal of Arles\".", "qas": [{"question": "who was the bishop of maguelonne ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "His beatification received approval on 9 April 1527 from Pope Clement VII.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis Aleman was born to nobles circa 1390 at the castle in Arbent to Jean Aleman and Marie de Ch\u00e2tillon de Michaille. His archbishop grand-uncle was Fran\u00e7ois de Conzie (c.1356-31.12.1431/2).", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was present at the Council of Pisa in 1409. He studied canon law and graduated in that area with a doctorate in 1414 at the college in Avignon. In 1417 he was made the abbot commendatario of Saint-Pierre de la Tour.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aleman served as the Governor of the Romagna since 1424 and had to face the ongoing struggles between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines in Bologna. One of the Guelph families - the Canetols - even imprisoned Aleman for several weeks but Aleman was later released and moved to Rome to serve in the court of Pope Martin V. Aleman served as a noted advisor to the pope and also served as a courtier while in the papal court. He had served in the papal court for Martin V since July 1417.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 22 June 1418 he was appointed as the Bishop of Maguelonne and he was installed into his new see on 17 May 1419. The pope himself granted episcopal consecration to Aleman in Mantua. He later became a diplomat to Siena in 1422. Aleman was later promoted as the newest Archbishop of Arles on 3 December 1423 and was installed in that see on 16 May 1424. Martin V named him a cardinal on 24 May 1426 as the Cardinal-Priest of Santa Cecilia - he received that title on 27 May. From 1427 until 1431 he served as the Camerlengo for the College of Cardinals. He served as a legate to Bologna from 1426 to 1428 and did not participate in the conclave of 1431.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was a prominent member of the Council of Basel since 1432 and together with Cardinal Julian Cesarini led the forces that maintained the power of the general councils over the pope's own control of the Church. It was while the council was proceeding that he tended to victims of the plague. He later led opposition to the pope but Cesarini was reconciled with Pope Eugene IV and had a prominent part in the pope's convoked Council of Florence. In 1439 he led the effort to depose Eugene IV and the election of a successor. In 1440 he placed the tiara upon Antipope Felix V and consecrated him as a bishop. This was a misguided attempt at reforming the Church which Aleman believed was vital. Eugene IV was responded to this and excommunicated the antipope while also depriving Aleman of all his ecclesiastical dignities. This also meant that Aleman could no longer be considered a cardinal and he was deprived of the dignities that came with the cardinalate. This occurred on 11 April 1440: he was stripped of Arles as his archdiocese and was stripped of his titular church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antipope Felix V made him the legate to the Diet of Frankfurt to the court of Emperor Friedrich IV. He was further involved in the unsuccessful efforts to win over Europe's princes to Basel's antipope. In order to make an end of the schism the former cardinal advised Felix V to abdicate at which stage Pope Nicholas V restored the cardinal to all his honors and appointed him as a papal legate to the German kingdom] in 1449; his full restoration was on 19 December 1449. He was granted back his titular church as well and from that moment until his death served as the Protopriest of the College of Cardinals. It was due to his estrangement to the Roman see that he was not permitted to participate in the conclave of 1447. He returned to his former archdiocese where he dedicated himself with great zeal to the catechetical formation of the people.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He died on 16 September 1450 at the Franciscan convent in Salon at Arles. Aleman's remains are housed in Saint-Trophine d'Arles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His beatification was approved and celebrated on 9 April 1527 after Pope Clement VII confirmed that there had been a longstanding and popular cultus (otherwise known as an enduring public veneration) aimed at the late cardinal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Attribution:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}], "version": 1.0}