{"data": [{"title": "Hair", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hair is a protein filament that grows from follicles found in the dermis. Hair is one of the defining characteristics of mammals.\nThe human body, apart from areas of glabrous skin, is covered in follicles which produce thick terminal and fine vellus hair. Most common interest in hair is focused on hair growth, hair types, and hair care, but hair is also an important biomaterial primarily composed of protein, notably alpha-keratin.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most common interest in hair ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 0, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Attitudes towards different forms of hair, such as hairstyles and hair removal, vary widely across different cultures and historical periods, but it is often used to indicate a person's personal beliefs or social position, such as their age, sex, or religion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word \"hair\" usually refers to two distinct structures:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair fibers have a structure consisting of several layers, starting from the outside:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each strand of hair is made up of the medulla, cortex, and cuticle. The innermost region, the medulla, is not always present and is an open, unstructured region. The highly structural and organized cortex, or second of three layers of the hair, is the primary source of mechanical strength and water uptake. The cortex contains melanin, which colors the fiber based on the number, distribution and types of melanin granules. The shape of the follicle determines the shape of the cortex, and the shape of the fiber is related to how straight or curly the hair is. People with straight hair have round hair fibers. Oval and other shaped fibers are generally more wavy or curly. The cuticle is the outer covering. Its complex structure slides as the hair swells and is covered with a single molecular layer of lipid that makes the hair repel water. The diameter of human hair varies from . There are two million small, tubular glands and sweat glands that produce watery fluids that cool the body by evaporation. The glands at the opening of the hair produce a fatty secretion that lubricates the hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair growth begins inside the hair follicle. The only \"living\" portion of the hair is found in the follicle. The hair that is visible is the hair shaft, which exhibits no biochemical activity and is considered \"dead\". The base of a hair's root (the \"bulb\") contains the cells that produce the hair shaft. Other structures of the hair follicle include the oil producing sebaceous gland which lubricates the hair and the arrector pili muscles, which are responsible for causing hairs to stand up. In humans with little body hair, the effect results in goose bumps.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"root of the hair\" ends in an enlargement, the \"hair bulb\", which is whiter in color and softer in texture than the shaft, and is lodged in a follicular involution of the epidermis called the hair follicle. Bulb of hair layers consist of fibrous connective tissue, glassy membrane, external root sheath, internal root sheath composed of epithelium stratum (Henle's layer) and granular stratum (Huxley's layer), cuticle, cortex and medulla of hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All natural hair colors are the result of two types of hair pigments. Both of these pigments are melanin types, produced inside the hair follicle and packed into granules found in the fibers. Eumelanin is the dominant pigment in brown hair and black hair, while pheomelanin is dominant in red hair. Blond hair is the result of having little pigmentation in the hair strand. Gray hair occurs when melanin production decreases or stops, while poliosis is hair (and often the skin to which the hair is attached), typically in spots, that never possessed melanin at all in the first place, or ceased for natural genetic reasons, generally, in the first years of life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair grows everywhere on the external body except for mucus membranes and glabrous skin, such as that found on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and lips.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair follows a specific growth cycle with three distinct and concurrent phases: anagen, catagen, and telogen phases; all three occur simultaneously - while one strand of hair may be in the anagen phase, another may be in the telogen phase. Each has specific characteristics that determine the length of the hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The body has different types of hair, including vellus hair and androgenic hair, each with its own type of cellular construction. The different construction gives the hair unique characteristics, serving specific purposes, mainly, warmth and protection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair exists in a variety of textures. Three main aspects of hair texture are the curl pattern, volume, and consistency. The derivations of hair texture are not fully understood. All mammalian hair is composed of keratin, so the make-up of hair follicles is not the source of varying hair patterns. There are a range of theories pertaining to the curl patterns of hair. Scientists have come to believe that the shape of the hair shaft has an effect on the curliness of the individual's hair. A very round shaft allows for fewer disulfide bonds to be present in the hair strand. This means the bonds present are directly in line with one another, resulting in straight hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The flatter the hair shaft becomes, the curlier hair gets, because the shape allows more cysteines to become compacted together resulting in a bent shape that, with every additional disulfide bond, becomes curlier in form. As the hair follicle shape determines curl pattern, the hair follicle size determines thickness. While the circumference of the hair follicle expands, so does the thickness of the hair follicle. An individual's hair volume, as a result, can be thin, normal, or thick. The consistency of hair can almost always be grouped into three categories: fine, medium, and coarse. This trait is determined by the hair follicle volume and the condition of the strand. Fine hair has the smallest circumference, coarse hair has the largest circumference, and medium hair is anywhere between the other two. Coarse hair has a more open cuticle than thin or medium hair causing it to be the most porous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are various systems that people use to classify their curl patterns. Being knowledgeable of an individual's hair type is a good start to knowing how to take care of one's hair. There is not just one method to discovering one's hair type. Additionally it is possible, and quite normal to have more than one kind of hair type, for instance having a mixture of both type 3a & 3b curls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Andre Walker Hair Typing System is the most widely used system to classify hair. The system was created by the hairstylist of Oprah Winfrey, Andre Walker. According to this system there are four types of hair: straight, wavy, curly, kinky.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThis is a method which classifies the hair by curl pattern, hair-strand thickness and overall hair volume.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many mammals have fur and other hairs that serve different functions. Hair provides thermal regulation and camouflage for many animals; for others it provides signals to other animals such as warnings, mating, or other communicative displays; and for some animals hair provides defensive functions and, rarely, even offensive protection. Hair also has a sensory function, extending the sense of touch beyond the surface of the skin. Guard hairs give warnings that may trigger a recoiling reaction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While humans have developed clothing and other means of keeping warm, the hair found on the head serves primarily as a source of heat insulation and cooling (when sweat evaporates from soaked hair) as well as protection from ultra-violet radiation exposure. The function of hair in other locations is debated. Hats and coats are still required while doing outdoor activities in cold weather to prevent frostbite and hypothermia, but the hair on the human body does help to keep the internal temperature regulated. When the body is too cold, the arrector pili muscles found attached to hair follicles stand up, causing the hair in these follicles to do the same. These hairs then form a heat-trapping layer above the epidermis. This process is formally called piloerection, derived from the Latin words 'pilus' ('hair') and 'erectio' ('rising up'), but is more commonly known as 'having goose bumps' in English. This is more effective in other mammals whose fur fluffs up to create air pockets between hairs that insulate the body from the cold. The opposite actions occur when the body is too warm; the arrector muscles make the hair lie flat on the skin which allows heat to leave.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In some mammals, such as hedgehogs and porcupines, the hairs have been modified into hard spines or quills. These are covered with thick plates of keratin and serve as protection against predators. Thick hair such as that of the lion's mane and grizzly bear's fur do offer some protection from physical damages such as bites and scratches.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Displacement and vibration of hair shafts are detected by hair follicle nerve receptors and nerve receptors within the skin. Hairs can sense movements of air as well as touch by physical objects and they provide sensory awareness of the presence of ectoparasites. Some hairs, such as eyelashes, are especially sensitive to the presence of potentially harmful matter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The eyebrows provide moderate protection to the eyes from dirt, sweat and rain. They also play a key role in non-verbal communication by displaying emotions such as sadness, anger, surprise and excitement. In many other mammals, they contain much longer, whisker-like hairs that act as tactile sensors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The eyelash grows at the edges of the eyelid and protects the eye from dirt. The eyelash is to humans, camels, horses, ostriches etc., what whiskers are to cats; they are used to sense when dirt, dust, or any other potentially harmful object is too close to the eye. The eye reflexively closes as a result of this sensation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair has its origins in the common ancestor of mammals, the synapsids, about 300 million years ago. It is currently unknown at what stage the synapsids acquired mammalian characteristics such as body hair and mammary glands, as the fossils only rarely provide direct evidence for soft tissues. Skin impression of the belly and lower tail of a pelycosaur, possibly \"Haptodus\" shows the basal synapsid stock bore transverse rows of rectangular scutes, similar to those of a modern crocodile. An exceptionally well-preserved skull of \"Estemmenosuchus\", a therapsid from the Upper Permian, shows smooth, hairless skin with what appears to be glandular depressions, though as a semi-aquatic species it might not have been particularly useful to determine the integument of terrestrial species. The oldest undisputed known fossils showing unambiguous imprints of hair are the Callovian (late middle Jurassic) \"Castorocauda\" and several contemporary haramiyidans, both near-mammal cynodonts. More recently, studies on terminal Permian Russian coprolites may suggest that non-mammalian synapsids from that era had fur. If this is the case, these are the oldest hair remnants known, showcasing that fur occurred as far back as the latest Paleozoic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some modern mammals have a special gland in front of each orbit used to preen the fur, called the harderian gland. Imprints of this structure are found in the skull of the small early mammals like \"Morganucodon\", but not in their cynodont ancestors like \"Thrinaxodon\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The hairs of the fur in modern animals are all connected to nerves, and so the fur also serves as a transmitter for sensory input. Fur could have evolved from sensory hair (whiskers). The signals from this sensory apparatus is interpreted in the neocortex, a chapter of the brain that expanded markedly in animals like \"Morganucodon\" and \"Hadrocodium\". The more advanced therapsids could have had a combination of naked skin, whiskers, and scutes. A full pelage likely did not evolve until the therapsid-mammal transition. The more advanced, smaller therapsids could have had a combination of hair and scutes, a combination still found in some modern mammals, such as rodents and the opossum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In varying degrees most mammals have some skin areas without natural hair. On the human body, glabrous skin is found on the ventral portion of the fingers, palms, soles of feet and lips, which are all parts of the body most closely associated with interacting with the world around us, as are the labia minora and glans penis. There are four main types of mechanoreceptors in the glabrous skin of humans: Pacinian corpuscles, Meissner's corpuscles, Merkel's discs, and Ruffini corpuscles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Naked mole-rat (\"Heterocephalus glaber\") has evolved skin lacking in general, pelagic hair covering, yet has retained long, very sparsely scattered tactile hairs over its body. Glabrousness is a trait that may be associated with neoteny.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The general hairlessness of humans in comparison to related species may be due to loss of functionality in the pseudogene KRTHAP1 (which helps produce keratin) in the human lineage about 240,000 years ago. On an individual basis, mutations in the gene HR can lead to complete hair loss, though this is not typical in humans. Humans may also lose their hair as a result of hormonal imbalance due to drugs or pregnancy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In order to comprehend why humans are essentially hairless, it is essential to understand that mammalian body hair is not merely an aesthetic characteristic; it protects the skin from wounds, bites, heat, cold, and UV radiation. Additionally, it can be used as a communication tool and as a camouflage. To this end, it can be concluded that benefits stemming from the loss of human body hair must be great enough to outweigh the loss of these protective functions by nakedness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Humans are the only primate species that have undergone significant hair loss and of the approximately 5000 extant species of mammal, only a handful are effectively hairless. This list includes elephants, rhinoceroses, hippopotamuses, walruses, some species of pigs, whales and other cetaceans, and naked mole rats. Most mammals have light skin that is covered by fur, and biologists believe that early human ancestors started out this way also. Dark skin probably evolved after humans lost their body fur, because the naked skin was vulnerable to the strong UV radiation as explained in the Out of Africa hypothesis. Therefore, evidence of the time when human skin darkened has been used to date the loss of human body hair, assuming that the dark skin was needed after the fur was gone.\nIt was expected that dating the split of the ancestral human louse into two species, the head louse and the pubic louse, would date the loss of body hair in human ancestors. However, it turned out that the human pubic louse does not descend from the ancestral human louse, but from the gorilla louse, diverging 3.3 million years ago. This suggests that humans had lost body hair (but retained head hair) and developed thick pubic hair prior to this date, were living in or close to the forest where gorillas lived, and acquired pubic lice from butchering gorillas or sleeping in their nests.\nThe evolution of the body louse from the head louse, on the other hand, places the date of clothing much later, some 100,000 years ago.\nThe sweat glands in humans could have evolved to spread from the hands and feet as the body hair changed, or the hair change could have occurred to facilitate sweating. Horses and humans are two of the few animals capable of sweating on most of their body, yet horses are larger and still have fully developed fur. In humans, the skin hairs lie flat in hot conditions, as the arrector pili muscles relax, preventing heat from being trapped by a layer of still air between the hairs, and increasing heat loss by convection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another hypothesis for the thick body hair on humans proposes that Fisherian runaway sexual selection played a role (as well as in the selection of long head hair), (see types of hair and vellus hair), as well as a much larger role of testosterone in men. Sexual selection is the only theory thus far that explains the sexual dimorphism seen in the hair patterns of men and women. On average, men have more body hair than women. Males have more terminal hair, especially on the face, chest, abdomen, and back, and females have more vellus hair, which is less visible. The halting of hair development at a juvenile stage, vellus hair, would also be consistent with the neoteny evident in humans, especially in females, and thus they could have occurred at the same time. This theory, however, has significant holdings in today's cultural norms. There is no evidence that sexual selection would proceed to such a drastic extent over a million years ago when a full, lush coat of hair would most likely indicate health and would therefore be more likely to be selected \"for\", not against, and not all human populations today have sexual dimorphism in body hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A further hypothesis is that human hair was reduced in response to ectoparasites. The \"ectoparasite\" explanation of modern human nakedness is based on the principle that a hairless primate would harbor fewer parasites. When our ancestors adopted group-dwelling social arrangements roughly 1.8 mya, ectoparasite loads increased dramatically. Early humans became the only one of the 193 primate species to have fleas, which can be attributed to the close living arrangements of large groups of individuals. While primate species have communal sleeping arrangements, these groups are always on the move and thus are less likely to harbor ectoparasites. Because of this, selection pressure for early humans would favor decreasing body hair because those with thick coats would have more lethal-disease-carrying ectoparasites and would thereby have lower fitness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another view is proposed by James Giles, who attempts to explain hairlessness as evolved from the relationship between mother and child, and as a consequence of bipedalism. Giles also connects romantic love to hairlessness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another hypothesis is that humans' use of fire caused or initiated the reduction in human hair.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Evolutionary biologists suggest that the genus \"Homo\" arose in East Africa approximately 2.5 million years ago. They devised new hunting techniques. The higher protein diet led to the evolution of larger body and brain sizes. Jablonski postulates that increasing body size, in conjunction with intensified hunting during the day at the equator, gave rise to a greater need to rapidly expel heat. As a result, humans evolved the ability to sweat: a process which was facilitated by the loss of body hair. A major problem with this theory, however, is that it does not explain why males are larger, hairier, and were more active in hunting than females. The female-male size differential among other closely associated primates is much greater than among humans, and therefore it was reduced during human evolution.\nOther primates have sweat gland in their armpits that function as those of humans, and thus it is probable that human sweat glands evolved from a similar distribution, spreading to more areas of the body, rather than occurring through evolution of a new trait. It is not known whether the increased distribution of sweat glands occurred before, during, or after, the change in body hair, or even whether the two are related developments. Horses also sweat, and they are larger, hairier, and expend more energy running than human males, so there may not be any connection between the ability to sweat and the apparent hairlessness of humans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another factor in human evolution that also occurred in the prehistoric past was a preferential selection for neoteny, particularly in females. The idea that adult humans exhibit certain neotenous (juvenile) features, not evinced in the great apes, is about a century old. Louis Bolk made a long list of such traits, and Stephen Jay Gould published a short list in \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\". In addition, paedomorphic characteristics in women are often acknowledged as desirable by men in developed countries. For instance, vellus hair is a juvenile characteristic. However, while men develop longer, coarser, thicker, and darker terminal hair through sexual differentiation, women do not, leaving their vellus hair visible.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jablonski asserts head hair was evolutionarily advantageous for pre-humans to retain because it protected the scalp as they walked upright in the intense African (equatorial) UV light. While some might argue that, by this logic, humans should also express hairy shoulders because these body parts would putatively be exposed to similar conditions, the protection of the head, the seat of the brain that enabled humanity to become one of the most successful species on the planet (and which also is very vulnerable at birth) was arguably a more urgent issue (axillary hair in the underarms and groin were also retained as signs of sexual maturity). Sometime during the gradual process by which \"Homo erectus\" began a transition from furry skin to the naked skin expressed by Homo sapiens, hair texture putatively gradually changed from straight hair (the condition of most mammals, including humanity's closest cousins\u2014chimpanzees) to Afro-textured hair or 'kinky' (i.e. tightly coiled). This argument assumes that curly hair better impedes the passage of UV light into the body relative to straight hair (thus curly or coiled hair would be particularly advantageous for light-skinned hominids living at the equator).", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is substantiated by Iyengar's (1998) findings that UV light can enter into straight human hair roots (and thus into the body through the skin) via the hair shaft. Specifically, the results of that study suggest that this phenomenon resembles the passage of light through fiber optic tubes (which do not function as effectively when kinked or sharply curved or coiled). In this sense, when hominids (i.e. Homo Erectus) were gradually losing their straight body hair and thereby exposing the initially pale skin underneath their fur to the sun, straight hair would have been an adaptive liability. By inverse logic, later, as humans traveled farther from Africa and/or the equator, straight hair may have (initially) evolved to aid the entry of UV light into the body during the transition from dark, UV-protected skin to paler skin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some conversely believe that tightly coiled hair that grows into a typical Afro-like formation would have greatly reduced the ability of the head and brain to cool because although African people's hair is much less dense than its European counterpart's, in the intense sun the effective 'woolly hat' that such hair produced would have been a disadvantage. However, such anthropologists as Nina Jablonski oppositely argue about this hair texture. Specifically, Jablonski's assertions suggest that the adjective \"woolly\" in reference to Afro-hair is a misnomer in connoting the high heat insulation derivable from the true wool of sheep. Instead, the relatively sparse density of Afro-hair, combined with its springy coils actually results in an airy, almost sponge-like structure that in turn, Jablonski argues, more likely facilitates an increase in the circulation of cool air onto the scalp. Further, wet Afro-hair does not stick to the neck and scalp unless totally drenched and instead tends to retain its basic springy puffiness because it less easily responds to moisture and sweat than straight hair does. In this sense, the trait may enhance comfort levels in intense equatorial climates more than straight hair (which, on the other hand, tends to naturally fall over the ears and neck to a degree that provides slightly enhanced comfort levels in cold climates relative to tightly coiled hair).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Furthermore, some interpret the ideas of Charles Darwin as suggesting that some traits, such as hair texture, were so arbitrary to human survival that the role natural selection played was trivial. Hence, they argue in favor of his suggestion that sexual selection may be responsible for such traits. However, inclinations towards deeming hair texture \"adaptively trivial\" may root in certain cultural value judgments more than objective logic. In this sense the possibility that hair \"texture\" may have played an adaptively significant role cannot be completely eliminated from consideration. In fact, while the sexual selection hypothesis cannot be ruled out, the asymmetrical distribution of this trait vouches for environmental influence. Specifically, if hair texture were simply the result of adaptively arbitrary human aesthetic preferences, one would expect that the global distribution of the various hair textures would be fairly random. Instead, the distribution of Afro-hair is strongly skewed toward the equator.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further, it is notable that the most pervasive expression of this hair texture can be found in sub-Saharan Africa; a region of the world that abundant genetic and paleo-anthropological evidence suggests, was the relatively recent (\u2248200,000-year-old) point of origin for modern humanity. In fact, although genetic findings (Tishkoff, 2009) suggest that sub-Saharan Africans are the most genetically diverse continental group on Earth, Afro-textured hair approaches ubiquity in this region. This points to a strong, long-term selective pressure that, in stark contrast to most other regions of the genomes of sub-Saharan groups, left little room for genetic variation at the determining loci. Such a pattern, again, does not seem to support human sexual aesthetics as being the sole or primary cause of this distribution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A group of studies have recently shown that genetic patterns at the EDAR locus, a region of the modern human genome that contributes to hair texture variation among most individuals of East Asian descent, support the hypothesis that (East Asian) straight hair likely developed in this branch of the modern human lineage subsequent to the original expression of tightly coiled natural afro-hair. Specifically, the relevant findings indicate that the EDAR mutation coding for the predominant East Asian 'coarse' or thick, straight hair texture arose within the past \u224865,000 years, which is a time frame that covers from the earliest of the 'Out of Africa' migrations up to now.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ringworm is a fungal disease that targets hairy skin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Premature greying of hair is another condition that results in greying before the age of 20 years in Whites, before 25 years in Asians, and before 30 years in Africans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair care involves the hygiene and cosmetology of hair including hair on the scalp, facial, pubic and other body hair. Hair care routines differ according to an individual's culture and the physical characteristics of one's hair. Hair may be colored, trimmed, shaved, plucked, or otherwise removed with treatments such as waxing, sugaring, and threading.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Depilation is the removal of hair from the surface of the skin. This can be achieved through methods such as shaving. Epilation is the removal of the entire hair strand, including the part of the hair that has not yet left the follicle. A popular way to epilate hair is through waxing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shaving is accomplished with bladed instruments, such as razors. The blade is brought close to the skin and stroked over the hair in the desired area to cut the terminal hairs and leave the skin feeling smooth. Depending upon the rate of growth, one can begin to feel the hair growing back within hours of shaving. This is especially evident in men who develop a five o'clock shadow after having shaved their faces. This new growth is called stubble. Stubble typically appears to grow back thicker because the shaved hairs are blunted instead of tapered off at the end, although the hair never actually grows back thicker.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Waxing involves using a sticky wax and strip of paper or cloth to pull hair from the root. Waxing is the ideal hair removal technique to keep an area hair-free for long periods of time. It can take three to five weeks for waxed hair to begin to resurface again. Hair in areas that have been waxed consistently is known to grow back finer and thinner, especially compared to hair that has been shaved with a razor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Laser hair removal is a cosmetic method where a small laser beam pulses selective heat on dark target matter in the area that causes hair growth without harming the skin tissue. This process is repeated several times over the course of many months to a couple of years with hair regrowing less frequently until it finally stops; this is used as a more permanent solution to waxing or shaving. Laser removal is practiced in many clinics along with many at-home products.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because the hair on one's head is normally longer than other types of body hair, it is cut with scissors or clippers. People with longer hair will most often use scissors to cut their hair, whereas shorter hair is maintained using a trimmer. Depending on the desired length and overall health of the hair, periods without cutting or trimming the hair can vary.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cut hair may be used in wigs. Global imports of hair in 2010 was worth $US 1.24 billion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hair has great social significance for human beings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The world's longest documented hair belongs to Xie Qiuping (China), at 5.627 m (18\u00a0ft 5.54 in) when measured on 8 May 2004. She has been growing her hair since 1973, from the age of 13.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Healthy hair indicates health and youth (important in evolutionary biology). Hair color and texture can be a sign of ethnic ancestry. Facial hair is a sign of puberty in men. White hair is a sign of age or genetics, which may be concealed with hair dye (not easily for some), although many prefer to assume it (especially if it is a poliosis characteristic of the person since childhood). Male pattern baldness is a sign of age, which may be concealed with a toupee, hats, or religious and cultural adornments. Although drugs and medical procedures exist for the treatment of baldness, many balding men simply shave their heads. In early modern China, the queue was a male hairstyle worn by the Manchus from central Manchuria and the Han Chinese during the Qing dynasty; hair on the front of the head was shaved off above the temples every ten days, mimicking male-pattern baldness, and the rest of the hair braided into a long pigtail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hairstyle may be an indicator of group membership. During the English Civil War, the followers of Oliver Cromwell decided to crop their hair close to their head, as an act of defiance to the curls and ringlets of the king's men. This led to the Parliamentary faction being nicknamed Roundheads. Recent isotopic analysis of hair is helping to shed further light on sociocultural interaction, giving information on food procurement and consumption in the 19th century\n. Having bobbed hair was popular among the flappers in the 1920s as a sign of rebellion against traditional roles for women. Female art students known as the \"cropheads\" also adopted the style, notably at the Slade School in London, England. Regional variations in hirsutism cause practices regarding hair on the arms and legs to differ. Some religious groups may follow certain rules regarding hair as part of religious observance. The rules often differ for men and women.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many subcultures have hairstyles which may indicate an unofficial membership. Many hippies, metalheads and Indian sadhus have long hair, as well many older indie kids. Many punks wear a hairstyle known as a mohawk or other spiked and dyed hairstyles; skinheads have short-cropped or completely shaved heads. Long stylized bangs were very common for emos, scene kids and younger indie kids in the 2000s and early 2010s, among people of both genders.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Heads were shaved in concentration camps, and head-shaving has been used as punishment, especially for women with long hair. The shaven head is common in military haircuts, while Western monks are known for the tonsure. By contrast, among some Indian holy men, the hair is worn extremely long.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the time of Confucius (5th century BCE), the Chinese grew out their hair and often tied it, as a symbol of filial piety.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regular hairdressing in some cultures is considered a sign of wealth or status. The dreadlocks of the Rastafari movement were despised early in the movement's history. In some cultures, having one's hair cut can symbolize a liberation from one's past, usually after a trying time in one's life. Cutting the hair also may be a sign of mourning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tightly coiled hair in its natural state may be worn in an Afro. This hairstyle was once worn among African Americans as a symbol of racial pride. Given that the coiled texture is the natural state of some African Americans' hair, or perceived as being more \"African\", this simple style is now often seen as a sign of self-acceptance and an affirmation that the beauty norms of the (eurocentric) dominant culture are not absolute. It is important to note that African Americans as a whole have a variety of hair textures, as they are not an ethnically homogeneous group, but an ad-hoc of different racial admixtures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film \"Easy Rider\" (1969) includes the assumption that the two main characters could have their long hairs forcibly shaved with a rusty razor when jailed, symbolizing the intolerance of some conservative groups toward members of the counterculture. At the conclusion of the Oz obscenity trials in the UK in 1971, the defendants had their heads shaved by the police, causing public outcry. During the appeal trial, they appeared in the dock wearing wigs. A case where a 14-year-old student was expelled from school in Brazil in the mid-2000s, allegedly because of his fauxhawk haircut, sparked national debate and legal action resulting in compensation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Women's hair may be hidden using headscarves, a common part of the \"hijab\" in Islam and a symbol of modesty required for certain religious rituals in Eastern Orthodoxy. Russian Orthodox Church requires all married women to wear headscarves inside the church; this tradition is often extended to all women, regardless of marital status. Orthodox Judaism also commands the use of scarves and other head coverings for married women for modesty reasons. Certain Hindu sects also wear head scarves for religious reasons. Sikhs have an obligation not to cut hair (a Sikh cutting hair becomes 'apostate' which means fallen from religion) and men keep it tied in a bun on the head, which is then covered appropriately using a turban. Multiple religions, both ancient and contemporary, require or advise one to allow their hair to become dreadlocks, though people also wear them for fashion. For men, Islam, Orthodox Judaism, Orthodox Christianity, Roman Catholicism, and other religious groups have at various times recommended or required the covering of the head and sections of the hair of men, and some have dictates relating to the cutting of men's facial and head hair. Some Christian sects throughout history and up to modern times have also religiously proscribed the cutting of women's hair. For some Sunni madhabs, the donning of a kufi or topi is a form of sunnah.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hawker Siddeley Harrier", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Hawker Siddeley Harrier, developed in the 1960s, is the first of the Harrier Jump Jet series of aircraft. It was the first operational close-support and reconnaissance fighter aircraft with vertical/short takeoff and landing (V/STOL) capabilities and the only truly successful V/STOL design of the many that arose in that era. The Harrier was developed directly from the Hawker Siddeley Kestrel prototype aircraft, following the cancellation of a more advanced supersonic aircraft, the Hawker Siddeley P.1154. The British Royal Air Force (RAF) ordered the Harrier GR.1 and GR.3 variants in the late 1960s. It was exported to the United States as the AV-8A, for use by the US Marine Corps (USMC), in the 1970s.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the hawker siddeley harrier developed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the Harrier's service the RAF positioned the bulk of the aircraft in West Germany to defend against a potential invasion of Western Europe by the Warsaw Pact forces; the unique abilities of the Harrier allowed the RAF to disperse their forces away from vulnerable airbases. The USMC used their Harriers primarily for close air support, operating from amphibious assault ships, and, if needed, forward operating bases. Harrier squadrons saw several deployments overseas. The Harrier's ability to operate with minimal ground facilities and very short runways allowed it to be used at locations unavailable to other fixed-wing aircraft. The Harrier received criticism for having a high accident rate and for a time-consuming maintenance process.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1970s the British Aerospace Sea Harrier was developed from the Harrier for use by the Royal Navy (RN) on s. The Sea Harrier and the Harrier fought in the 1982 Falklands War, in which the aircraft proved to be crucial and versatile. The RN Sea Harriers provided fixed-wing air defence while the RAF Harriers focused on ground-attack missions in support of the advancing British land force. The Harrier was also extensively redesigned as the AV-8B Harrier II and British Aerospace Harrier II by the team of McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace. The innovative Harrier family and its Rolls-Royce Pegasus engines with thrust vectoring nozzles have generated long-term interest in V/STOL aircraft. Similar V/STOL operational aircraft include the contemporary Soviet Yakovlev Yak-38. The F-35B V/STOL variant of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II is under development.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the british petroleum sea formed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Harrier's design was derived from the Hawker P.1127. Prior to developing the P.1127 Hawker Aircraft had been working on a replacement for the Hawker Hunter, the Hawker P.1121. The P.1121 was cancelled after the release of the British Government's 1957 Defence White Paper, which advocated a policy shift away from manned aircraft and towards missiles. This policy resulted in the termination of the majority of aircraft development projects then underway for the British military. Hawker sought to quickly move on to a new project and became interested in Vertical Take Off/Landing (VTOL) aircraft, which did not need runways. According to Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick Hine this interest may have been stimulated by the presence of Air Staff Requirement 345, which sought a V/STOL ground attack fighter for the Royal Air Force.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the harrier's design derived from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Design work on the P.1127 was formally started in 1957 by Sir Sydney Camm, Ralph Hooper of Hawker Aircraft, and Stanley Hooker (later Sir Stanley Hooker) of the Bristol Engine Company. The close cooperation between Hawker, the airframe company, and Bristol, the engine company, was viewed by project engineer Gordon Lewis as one of the key factors that allowed the development of the Harrier to continue in spite of technical obstacles and political setbacks. Rather than using rotors or a direct jet thrust, the P.1127 had an innovative vectored thrust turbofan engine, the Pegasus. The Pegasus I was rated at of thrust and first ran in September 1959. A contract for two development prototypes was signed in June 1960 and the first flight followed in October 1960. Of the six prototypes built three crashed\u2014including one during an air display at the 1963 Paris Air Show.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1961 the United Kingdom, United States and West Germany jointly agreed to purchase nine aircraft developed from the P.1127, for the evaluation of the performance and potential of V/STOL aircraft. These aircraft were built by Hawker Siddeley and were designated \"Kestrel FGA.1\" by the UK. The Kestrel was strictly an evaluation aircraft and to save money the Pegasus 5 engine was not fully developed as intended, only having of thrust instead of the projected . The Tripartite Evaluation Squadron numbered ten pilots; four each from the UK and US and two from West Germany. The Kestrel's first flight took place on 7 March 1964.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A total of 960 sorties had been made during the trials, including 1,366 takeoffs and landings, by the end of evaluations in November 1965. One aircraft was destroyed in an accident and six others were transferred to the United States, assigned the US designation \"XV-6A Kestrel\", and underwent further testing. The two remaining British-based Kestrels were assigned to further trials and experimentation at RAE Bedford with one being modified to use the uprated Pegasus 6 engine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the time of the development of the P.1127 Hawker and Bristol had also undertaken considerable development work on a supersonic version, the Hawker Siddeley P.1154, to meet a North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) requirement issued for such an aircraft. The design used a single Bristol Siddeley BS100 engine with four swivelling nozzles, in a fashion similar to the P.1127, and required the use of plenum chamber burning (PCB) to achieve supersonic speeds. The P.1154 won the competition to meet the requirement against strong competition from other aircraft manufacturers such as Dassault Aviation's Mirage IIIV. The French government did not accept the decision and withdrew; the NATO requirement was cancelled shortly after in 1965.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy planned to develop and introduce the supersonic P.1154 independently of the cancelled NATO requirement. This ambition was complicated by the conflicting requirements between the two services\u2014while the RAF wanted a low-level supersonic strike aircraft, the Navy sought a twin-engine air defence fighter. Following the election of the Labour Government of 1964 the P.1154 was cancelled, as the Royal Navy had already begun procurement of the McDonnell Douglas Phantom II and the RAF placed a greater importance on the BAC TSR-2's ongoing development. Work continued on elements of the project, such as a supersonic PCB-equipped Pegasus engine, with the intention of developing a future Harrier variant for the decades following cancellation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the collapse of the P.1154's development the RAF began considering a simple upgrade of the existing subsonic Kestrel and issued Requirement ASR 384 for a V/STOL ground attack jet. Hawker Siddeley received an order for six pre-production aircraft in 1965, designated \"P.1127 (RAF)\", of which the first made its maiden flight on 31 August 1966. An order for 60 production aircraft, designated as Harrier GR.1, was received in early 1967. The aircraft was named after the Harrier, a small bird of prey.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the aircraft named after ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 9, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Harrier GR.1 made its first flight on 28 December 1967. It officially entered service with the RAF on 18 April 1969 when the Harrier Conversion Unit at RAF Wittering received its first aircraft. The aircraft were built in two factories\u2014one in Kingston upon Thames, southwest London, and the other at Dunsfold Aerodrome, Surrey\u2014and underwent initial testing at Dunsfold. The ski-jump technique for launching Harriers from Royal Navy aircraft carriers was extensively trialled at RNAS Yeovilton from 1977. Following these tests ski-jumps were added to the flight decks of all RN carriers from 1979 onwards, in preparation for the new variant for the navy, the Sea Harrier.", "qas": [{"question": "on what date was the first flight on tuvalu ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the late 1960s the British and American governments held talks on producing Harriers in the United States. Hawker Siddeley and McDonnell Douglas formed a partnership in 1969 in preparation for American production, but Congressman Mendel Rivers and the House Appropriations Committee held that it would be cheaper to produce the AV-8A on the pre-existing production lines in the United Kingdom\u2014hence all AV-8A Harriers were purchased from Hawker Siddeley. Improved Harrier versions with better sensors and more powerful engines were developed in later years. The USMC received 102 AV-8A and 8 TAV-8A Harriers between 1971 and 1976.", "qas": [{"question": "the usmc received how many tav-8a ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 11, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Harrier was typically used as a ground attack aircraft, though its manoeuvrability also allows it to effectively engage other aircraft at short ranges. The Harrier is powered by a single Pegasus turbofan engine mounted in the fuselage. The engine is fitted with two air intakes and four vectoring nozzles for directing the thrust generated: two for the bypass flow and two for the jet exhaust. Several small reaction nozzles are also fitted, in the nose, tail and wingtips, for the purpose of balancing during vertical flight. It has two landing gear units on the fuselage and two outrigger landing gear units, one near each wing tip. The Harrier is equipped with four wing and three fuselage pylons for carrying a variety of weapons and external fuel tanks.\nThe Kestrel and the Harrier were similar in appearance, though approximately 90 per cent of the Kestrel's airframe was redesigned for the Harrier. The Harrier was powered by the more powerful Pegasus 6 engine; new air intakes with auxiliary blow-in doors were added to produce the required airflow at low speed. Its wing was modified to increase area and the landing gear was strengthened. Several hardpoints were installed, two under each wing and one underneath the fuselage; two ADEN cannon gun pods could also be fitted to the underside of the fuselage. The Harrier was outfitted with updated avionics to replace the basic systems used in the Kestrel; a navigational-attack system incorporating an inertial navigation system, originally for the P.1154, was installed and information was presented to the pilot by a head-up display and a moving map display.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the harrier usually used as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Harrier's VTOL abilities allowed it to be deployed from very small prepared clearings or helipads as well as normal airfields. It was believed that, in a high-intensity conflict, air bases would be vulnerable and likely to be quickly knocked out. The capability to scatter Harrier squadrons to dozens of small \"alert pads\" on the front lines was highly prized by military strategists and the USMC procured the aircraft because of this ability. Hawker Siddeley noted that STOL operation provided additional benefits over VTOL operation, saving fuel and allowing the aircraft to carry more ordnance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"I still don't believe the Harrier. Think of the millions that have been spent on VTO in America and Russia, and quite a bit in Europe, and yet the only vertical take-off aircraft which you can call a success is the Harrier. When I saw the Harrier hovering and flying backwards under control, I reckoned I'd seen everything. And it's not difficult to fly.\" -Thomas Sopwith", "qas": [{"question": "what does ''i mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Harrier, while serving for many decades in various forms, has been criticised on multiple issues; in particular a high accident rate, though Nordeen notes that several conventional single-engine strike aircraft like the Douglas A-4 Skyhawk and LTV A-7 Corsair II had worse accident rates. The \"Los Angeles Times\" reported in 2003 that the Harrier \"...has amassed the highest major accident rate of any military plane now in service. Forty-five Marines have died in 148 noncombat accidents\". Colonel Lee Buland of the USMC declared the maintenance of a Harrier to be a \"challenge\"; the need to remove the wings before performing most work upon the engine, including engine replacements, meant the Harrier required considerable man-hours in maintenance, more than most aircraft. Buland noted however that the maintenance difficulties were unavoidable in order to create a V/STOL aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Pegasus turbofan jet engine, developed in tandem with the P.1127 then the Harrier, was designed specifically for V/STOL manoeuvring. Bristol Siddeley developed it from their earlier conventional Orpheus turbofan engine as the core with Olympus compressor blades for the fan. The engine's thrust is directed through the four rotatable nozzles. The engine is equipped for water injection to increase thrust and takeoff performance in hot and high altitude conditions; in normal V/STOL operations the system would be used in landing vertically with a heavy weapons load. The water injection function had originally been added following the input of US Air Force Colonel Bill Chapman, who worked for the Mutual Weapons Development Team. Water injection was necessary in order to generate maximum thrust, if only for a limited time, and was typically used during landing, especially in high ambient temperatures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The aircraft was initially powered by the Pegasus 6 engine which was replaced by the more powerful Pegasus 11 during the Harrier GR.1 to GR.3 upgrade process. The primary focus throughout the engine's development was on achieving high performance with as little weight as possible, tempered by the amount of funding that was available. Following the Harrier's entry to service the focus switched to improving reliability and extending engine life; a formal joint US\u2013UK Pegasus Support Program operated for many years and spent a \u00a33-million annual budget to develop engine improvements. Several variants have been released; the latest is the Pegasus 11\u201361 (Mk 107), which provides 23,800\u00a0lbf (106\u00a0kN) thrust, more than any previous engine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Harrier has been described by pilots as \"unforgiving\". The aircraft is capable of both forward flight (where it behaves in the manner of a typical fixed-wing aircraft above its stall speed), as well as VTOL and STOL manoeuvres (where the traditional lift and control surfaces are useless) requiring skills and technical knowledge usually associated with helicopters. Most services demand great aptitude and extensive training for Harrier pilots, as well as experience in piloting both types of aircraft. Trainee pilots are often drawn from highly experienced and skilled helicopter pilots.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the harrier described by ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In addition to normal flight controls, the Harrier has a lever for controlling the direction of the four vectoring nozzles. It is viewed by senior RAF officers as a significant design success, that to enable and control the aircraft's vertical flight required only a single lever added in the cockpit. For horizontal flight, the nozzles are directed rearwards by shifting the lever to the forward position; for short or vertical takeoffs and landings, the lever is pulled back to point the nozzles downwards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Harrier has two control elements not found in conventional fixed-wing aircraft: the thrust vector and the reaction control system. The thrust vector refers to the slant of the four engine nozzles and can be set between 0\u00b0 (horizontal, pointing directly backwards) and 98\u00b0 (pointing down and slightly forwards). The 90\u00b0 vector is normally deployed for VTOL manoeuvring. The reaction control is achieved by manipulating the control stick and is similar in action to the cyclic control of a helicopter. While irrelevant during forward flight mode, these controls are essential during VTOL and STOL manoeuvres.", "qas": [{"question": "how many control elements does the harrier have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The wind direction is a critical factor in VTOL manoeuvres. The procedure for vertical takeoff involves facing the aircraft into the wind. The thrust vector is set to 90\u00b0 and the throttle is brought up to maximum, at which point the aircraft leaves the ground. The throttle is trimmed until a hover state is achieved at the desired altitude. The short-takeoff procedure involves proceeding with normal takeoff and then applying a thrust vector (less than 90\u00b0) at a runway speed below normal takeoff speed; usually the point of application is around . For lower takeoff speeds the thrust vector is greater. The reaction control system involves a thrusters at key points in the aircraft's fuselage and nose, also the wingtips. Thrust from the engine can be temporarily syphoned to control and correct the aircraft's pitch and roll during vertical flight.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rotating the vectored thrust nozzles into a forward-facing position during normal flight is called vectoring in forward flight, or \"VIFFing\". This is a dog-fighting tactic, allowing for more sudden braking and higher turn rates. Braking could cause a chasing aircraft to overshoot and present itself as a target for the Harrier it was chasing, a combat technique formally developed by the USMC for the Harrier in the early 1970s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The two largest users of the Harrier were the Royal Air Force and the United States Marine Corps (USMC). The exported model of the aircraft operated by the USMC was designated the AV-8A Harrier, which was broadly similar to the RAF's Harrier GR.1. Changes included the removal of all magnesium components, which corroded quickly at sea, and the integration of American radios and Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) systems; furthermore the outer pylons, unlike the RAF aircraft, were designed from delivery to be equipped with self-defence AIM-9 Sidewinder heat-seeking air-to-air missiles. Most of the AV-8As had been delivered with the more powerful Pegasus engine used in the GR.3 instead of the one used in the earlier GR.1. Two-seat Harriers were operated for training purposes; the body was stretched and a taller tail fin added. The RAF trained in the T.2 and T.4 versions, while T.4N and T.8 were training versions the Navy's Sea Harrier, with appropriate fittings. The US and Spain flew the TAV-8A and TAV-8S, respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All RAF GR.1s and the initial AV-8As were fitted with the Ferranti FE541 inertial navigation/attack suite, but these were replaced in the USMC Harriers by a simpler Interface/Weapon Aiming Computer to aid quick turnaround between missions. The Martin-Baker ejection seats were also replaced by the Stencel SEU-3A in the American aircraft. The RAF had their GR.1 aircraft upgraded to the GR.3 standard, which featured improved sensors, a nose-mounted laser tracker, the integration of electronic countermeasure (ECM) systems and a further upgraded Pegasus Mk 103. The USMC upgraded their AV-8As to the AV-8C configuration; this programme involved the installation of ECM equipment and adding a new inertial navigation system to the aircraft's avionics. Substantial changes were the Lift Improvement Devices, to increase VTOL performance; at the same time several airframe components were restored or replaced to extend the life of the aircraft. Spain's Harriers, designated AV-8S or VA.1 Matador for the single-seater and TAV-8S or VAE.1 for the two-seater, were almost identical to USMC Harriers differing only in the radios fitted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm (FAA) operated a substantially modified variant of the Harrier, the British Aerospace Sea Harrier. The Sea Harrier was not intended for ground-attack duties and, unlike the standard Harrier, was equipped with radar and Sidewinder missiles for air combat duties and fleet air defence. The Sea Harrier was also fitted with navigational aids for carrier landings, modifications to reduce corrosion and a raised bubble-canopy for greater visibility. The aircraft were later equipped to use AIM-120 AMRAAM beyond-visual-range anti-aircraft missiles and the more advanced Blue Vixen radar for longer range air-to-air combat, as well as Sea Eagle missiles for conducting anti-ship missions.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the acronym faa stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II is the latest Harrier variant, a second-generation series to replace the first generation of Harrier jets already in service; all the above variants of the Harrier have mainly been retired with the Harrier II taking their place in the RAF, USMC and FAA. In the 1970s the United Kingdom considered two options for replacing their existing Harriers: joining McDonnell Douglas (MDD) in developing the BAE Harrier II, or the independent development of a \"Big Wing\" Harrier. This proposal would have increased the wing area from , allowing for significant increases in weapons load and internal fuel reserves. The option of cooperation with MDD was chosen in 1982 over the more risky isolated approach.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the latest harrier variant ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first RAF squadron to be equipped with the Harrier GR.1, No. 1 Squadron, started to convert to the aircraft at RAF Wittering in April 1969. An early demonstration of the Harrier's capabilities was the participation of two aircraft in the \"Daily Mail\" Transatlantic Air Race in May 1969, flying between St Pancras railway station, London and downtown Manhattan with the use of aerial refuelling. The Harrier completed the journey in 6 hours 11 minutes. Two Harrier squadrons were established in 1970 at the RAF's air base in Wildenrath to be part of its air force in Germany; another squadron was formed there two years later. In 1977, these three squadrons were moved forward to the air base at G\u00fctersloh, closer to the prospective front line in the event of an outbreak of a European war. One of the squadrons was disbanded and its aircraft distributed between the other two.\nIn RAF service, the Harrier was used in close air support (CAS), reconnaissance, and other ground-attack roles. The flexibility of the Harrier led to a long-term heavy deployment in West Germany as a conventional deterrent and potential strike weapon against Soviet aggression; from camouflaged rough bases the Harrier was expected to launch attacks on advancing armour columns from East Germany. Harriers were also deployed to bases in Norway and Belize, a former British colony. No. 1 Squadron was specifically earmarked for Norwegian operations in the event of war, operating as part of Allied Forces Northern Europe. The Harrier's capabilities were necessary in the Belize deployment, as it was the only RAF combat aircraft capable of safely operating from the airport's short runway; British forces had been stationed in Belize for several years due to tensions over a Guatemalan claim to Belizean territory; the forces were withdrawn in 1993, two years after Guatemala recognized the independence of Belize.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first raf squadron to be mounted with the harrier gr ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the Falklands War in 1982, 10 Harrier GR.3s of No. 1 Squadron operated from the aircraft carrier . As the RAF Harrier GR.3 had not been designed for naval service, the 10 aircraft had to be rapidly modified prior to the departure of the task force. Special sealants against corrosion were applied and a new deck-based inertial guidance aid was devised to allow the RAF Harrier to land on a carrier as easily as the Sea Harrier. Transponders to guide aircraft back to the carriers during night-time operations were also installed, along with flares and chaff dispensers.", "qas": [{"question": "in what country did the falklands war take place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As there was little space on the carriers, two requisitioned merchant container ships, and , were modified with temporary flight decks and used to carry Harriers and helicopters to the South Atlantic. The Harrier GR.3s focused on providing close air support to the ground forces on the Falklands and attacking Argentine positions; suppressing enemy artillery was often a high priority. Sea Harriers were also used in the war, primarily conducting fleet air defence and combat air patrols against the threat of attacking Argentine fighters. However, both Sea Harriers and Harrier GR.3s were used in ground-attack missions against the main airfield and runway at Stanley.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of missions were used in airfields against the airfield ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 29, 3)"}]}, {"context": "If most of the Sea Harriers had been lost, the GR.3s would have replaced them in air patrol duties, even though the Harrier GR.3 was not designed for air defence operations; as such the GR.3s quickly had their outboard weapons pylons modified to take air-to-air Sidewinder missiles. From 10 to 24 May 1982, prior to British forces landing in the Falklands, a detachment of three GR.3s provided air defence for Ascension Island until three F-4 Phantom IIs arrived to take on this responsibility. During the Falklands War, the greatest threats to the Harriers were deemed to be surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and small arms fire from the ground. In total, four Harrier GR.3s and six Sea Harriers were lost to ground fire, accidents, or mechanical failure. More than 2,000 Harrier sorties were conducted during the conflict\u2014equivalent to six sorties per day per aircraft.\nFollowing the Falklands war, British Aerospace explored the Skyhook, a new technique to operate Harriers from smaller ships. Skyhook would have allowed the launching and landing of Harriers from smaller ships by holding the aircraft in midair by a crane; secondary cranes were to hold weapons for rapid re-arming. This would potentially have saved fuel and allowed for operations in rougher seas. The system was marketed to foreign customers, and it was speculated that Skyhook could be applied to large submarines such as the Russian , but the system attracted no interest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first generation of Harriers did not see further combat with the RAF after the Falklands War, although they continued to serve for years afterwards. As a deterrent against further Argentine invasion attempts, No. 1453 Flight RAF was deployed to the Falkland Islands from August 1983 to June 1985. However the second generation Harrier IIs saw action in Bosnia, Iraq, and Afghanistan. The first generation Hawker Siddeley airframes were replaced by the improved Harrier II, which had been developed jointly between McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The United States Marine Corps began showing a significant interest in the aircraft around the time the first RAF Harrier squadron was established in 1969, and this motivated Hawker Siddeley to further develop the aircraft to encourage a purchase. Although there were concerns in Congress about multiple coinciding projects in the close air support role, the Marine Corps were enthusiastic about the Harrier and managed to overcome efforts to obstruct its procurement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AV-8A entered service with the Marine Corps in 1971, replacing other aircraft in the Marines' attack squadrons. The service became interested in performing ship-borne operations with the Harrier. Admiral Elmo Zumwalt promoted the concept of a Sea Control Ship, a 15,000-ton light carrier equipped with Harriers and helicopters, to supplement the larger aircraft carriers of the US Navy. An amphibious assault ship, , was converted into the \"Interim Sea Control Ship\" and operated as such between 1971 and 1973 with the purpose of studying the limits and possible obstacles for operating such a vessel. Since then the Sea Control Ship concept has been subject to periodic re-examinations and studies, often in the light of budget cuts and questions over the use of supercarriers.\nOther exercises were performed to demonstrate the AV-8A's suitability for operating from various amphibious assault ships and aircraft carriers, including a deployment of 14 Harriers aboard for six months in 1976. The tests showed, amongst other things, that the Harrier was capable of performing in weather where conventional carrier aircraft could not. In support of naval operations, the USMC devised and studied several methods to further integrate the Harrier. One result was \"Arapaho\", a stand-by system to rapidly convert civilian cargo ships into seagoing platforms for operating and maintaining a handful of Harriers, to be used to augment the number of available ships to deploy upon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When the reactivation of the s was under consideration, a radical design for a battleship-carrier hybrid emerged that would have replaced the ship's rear turret with a flight deck, complete with a hangar and two ski jumps, for operating several Harriers. However, the USMC considered the need for naval gunfire support to be a greater priority than additional platforms for carrier operations, while the cost and delay associated with such elaborate conversions was significant, and the concept was dropped.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Marines Corps' concept for deploying the Harriers in a land-based expeditionary role focused on aggressive speed. Harrier forward bases and light maintenance facilities were to be set up in under 24 hours on any prospective battle area. The forward bases, containing one to four aircraft, were to be located from the forward edge of battle (FEBA), while a more established permanent airbase would be located around from the FEBA. The close proximity of forward bases allowed for a far greater sortie rate and reduced fuel consumption.\nThe AV-8A's abilities in air-to-air combat were tested by the Marine Corps by conducting mock dogfights with McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom IIs; these exercises trained pilots to use the vectoring-in-forward-flight (VIFF) capability to outmanoeuvre their opponents and showed that the Harriers could act as effective air-to-air fighters at close range. The success of Harrier operations countered scepticism of V/STOL aircraft, which had been judged to be expensive failures in the past. Marine Corps officers became convinced of the military advantages of the Harrier and pursued extensive development of the aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Starting in 1979, the USMC began upgrading their AV-8As to the AV-8C configuration\u2014the work focused mainly on extending useful service lives and improving VTOL performance. The AV-8C and the remaining AV-8A Harriers were retired by 1987. These were replaced by the Harrier II, designated as the AV-8B, which was introduced into service in 1985. The performance of the Harrier in USMC service led to calls for the United States Air Force to procure Harrier IIs in addition to the USMC's own plans, but these never resulted in Air Force orders. Since the late 1990s, the AV-8B has been slated to be replaced by the F-35B variant of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II, a more modern V/STOL jet aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like the next generation AV-8Bs, nevertheless, the AV-8A/C Harriers suffered many accidents, with around 40 aircraft lost and some 30 pilots killed during the 1970s and 1980s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to the Harrier's unique characteristics it attracted a large amount of interest from other nations, often as attempts to make their own V/STOL jets were unsuccessful, such as in the cases of the American XV-4 Hummingbird and the German VFW VAK 191B. Operations by the USMC aboard in 1981 and by British Harriers and Sea Harriers in the Falklands War proved that the aircraft were highly effective in combat. These operations also demonstrated that \"Harrier Carriers\" provided a powerful presence at sea without the expense of big deck carriers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the display of Harrier operations from small carriers, the navies of Spain and later Thailand bought the Harrier for use as their main carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft. Spain's purchase of Harriers was complicated by long-standing political friction between the British and Spanish governments of the era; even though the Harriers were manufactured in the UK they were sold to Spain with the US acting as an intermediary. During tests in November 1972, the British pilot John Farley showed that the wooden deck of \"Daedalus\" was able to withstand the temperature of the gases generated by the Harrier. Since 1976, the Spanish Navy operated the AV-8S Matador from their aircraft carrier (formerly the ); the aircraft provided both air defence and strike capabilities for the Spanish fleet. Spain later purchased five Harriers directly from the British government to replace losses.\nHawker Siddeley aggressively marketed the Harrier for export. At one point the company was holding talks with Australia, Brazil, Switzerland, India and Japan. Of these only India became a customer, purchasing the Sea Harrier. At one point China came very close to becoming an operator of the first generation Harrier. Following an overture by the UK in the early 1970s, when relations with the West were warming, China became interested in the aircraft as it sought to modernise its armed forces; British Prime Minister James Callaghan noted significant hostility from the USSR over the sales bid. The deal was later cancelled by the UK as part of a diplomatic backlash after China invaded Vietnam in 1979.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the main purpose of the harrier ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 39, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Spanish Navy, Thai Navy, Royal Air Force, and U.S. Marine Corps have all retired their first-generation Harriers. Spain sold seven single-seat and two twin-seat Harriers to Thailand in 1998. The Royal Thai Navy's AV-8S Matadors were delivered as part of the air wing deployed on the new light aircraft carrier . The Thai Navy had from the start significant logistical problems keeping the Harriers operational due to a shortage of funds for spare parts and equipment, leaving only a few Harriers serviceable at a time. In 1999, two years after being delivered, only one airframe was in airworthy condition. Around 2003, Thailand considered acquiring former Royal Navy Sea Harriers, which were more suitable for maritime operations and better equipped for air defence, to replace their AV-8S Harriers; this investigation did not progress to a purchase. The last first-generation Harriers were retired by Thailand in 2006.", "qas": [{"question": "where were the last first-generation harriers retired ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 40, 6)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hawker Harrier", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Hawker Harrier was an experimental biplane torpedo bomber aircraft built by Hawker Aircraft to a specification issued in the 1920s for the RAF.", "qas": [{"question": "who built the experimental harrier ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In , the British Air Ministry laid down specifications for a high altitude bomber to replace the Hawker Horsley and for a coastal torpedo bomber (Specifications 23/25 and 24/25). As these specifications were similar, the Air Ministry announced that a single competition would be held to study aircraft submitted for both specifications.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the british air ministry replace ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sydney Camm of Hawker Aircraft designed the Harrier to meet the requirements of Specification 23/25, with the prototype (\"J8325\") first flying in February , the first of the competitors for the two specifications to fly. The Harrier was a two-seat biplane with single-bay wings powered by a geared Bristol Jupiter VIII radial engine. It was armed with one .303\u00a0in (7.7\u00a0mm) Vickers machine gun and one .303\u00a0in (7.7\u00a0mm) Lewis gun carrying a maximum of 1,000\u00a0lb (454\u00a0kg) of bombs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The prototype Harrier was tested at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment (A & AEE) at Martlesham Heath in November 1927, where, while it met the requirements of Specification 23/25 and had satisfactory handling, the geared engine meant that it was underpowered, and it had an inferior bombload to the Hawker Horsley, the aircraft it was meant to replace. It was therefore modified to carry a torpedo. On testing the modified aircraft, however, it was found to still be underpowered, being incapable of taking off with a torpedo, gunner and full fuel load. It was therefore not considered further, the competition ultimately being won by the Vickers Vildebeest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The prototype was used by Bristol as an engine testbed, flying with the 870\u00a0hp (649\u00a0kW) Bristol Hydra and the Bristol Orion engines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Herg\u00e9", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Georges Prosper Remi (; 22 May 1907\u00a0\u2013 3 March 1983), known by the pen name Herg\u00e9 (; ), was a Belgian cartoonist. He is best known for creating \"The Adventures of Tintin\", the series of comic albums which are considered one of the most popular European comics of the 20th century. He was also responsible for two other well-known series, \"Quick & Flupke\" (1930\u201340) and \"The Adventures of Jo, Zette and Jocko\" (1936\u201357). His works were executed in his distinct \"ligne claire\" drawing style.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the pen that was created by the pen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Born to a lower middle-class family in Etterbeek, Brussels, Herg\u00e9 began his career by contributing illustrations to Scouting magazines, developing his first comic series, \"The Adventures of Totor\", for \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\" in 1926. Working for the conservative Catholic newspaper \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\", he created \"The Adventures of Tintin\" in 1929 on the advice of its editor Norbert Wallez. Revolving around the actions of boy reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy, the series' early installments \u2013 \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\", \"Tintin in the Congo\", and \"Tintin in America\" \u2013 were designed as conservative propaganda for children. Domestically successful, after serialisation the stories were published in book form, with Herg\u00e9 continuing the series and also developing both the \"Quick & Flupke\" and \"Jo, Zette and Jocko\" series for \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\". Influenced by his friend Zhang Chongren, from 1934 Herg\u00e9 placed far greater emphasis on conducting background research for his stories, resulting in increased realism from \"The Blue Lotus\" onward. Following the German occupation of Belgium in 1940, \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" was closed but Herg\u00e9 continued his series in \"Le Soir\", a popular newspaper controlled by the Nazi administration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the Allied liberation of Belgium in 1944, \"Le Soir\" was shut down and its staff \u2013 including Herg\u00e9 \u2013 accused of having been collaborators. An official investigation was launched, and while no charges were brought against Herg\u00e9, in subsequent years he repeatedly faced accusations of having been a traitor and collaborator. With Raymond Leblanc he established \"Tintin\" magazine in 1946, through which he serialised new \"Adventures of Tintin\" stories. As the magazine's artistic director, he also oversaw the publication of other successful comics series, such as Edgar P. Jacobs' \"Blake and Mortimer\". In 1950 he established Studios Herg\u00e9 as a team to aid him in his ongoing projects; prominent staff members Jacques Martin and Bob de Moor greatly contributed to subsequent volumes of \"The Adventures of Tintin\". Amid personal turmoil following the collapse of his first marriage, he produced \"Tintin in Tibet\", his personal favourite of his works. In later years he became less prolific, and unsuccessfully attempted to establish himself as an abstract artist.", "qas": [{"question": "after the allied liberation of austria , who was the leader of austria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9's works have been widely acclaimed for their clarity of draughtsmanship and meticulous, well-researched plots. They have been the source of a wide range of adaptations, in theatre, radio, television, cinema, and computer gaming. He remains a strong influence on the comic book medium, particularly in Europe. Widely celebrated in Belgium, a Herg\u00e9 Museum was established in Louvain-la-Neuve in 2009.", "qas": [{"question": "where is a herg\u00e9 museum located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 3, 3)"}, {"question": "what has been widely known for their perception of draughtsmanship and meticulous ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Georges Prosper Remi was born on 22 May 1907 in his parental home in Etterbeek, Brussels, a central suburb in the capital city of Belgium. His was a lower middle-class family. His Walloon father, Alexis Remi, worked in a confectionery factory, whilst his Flemish mother, Elisabeth Dufour, was a housewife. Married on 18 January 1905, they moved into a house at 25 rue Cranz (now 33 rue Philippe Baucq), where Herg\u00e9 was born, although a year later they moved to a house at 34 rue de Theux. His primary language was his father's French, but growing up in the bilingual Brussels, he also learned Dutch, developing a Marollien accent from his maternal grandmother. A younger brother, Paul, was born five years after Herg\u00e9. Like most Belgians, his family belonged to the Roman Catholic Church, though they were not particularly devout. He later characterised his life in Etterbeek as dominated by a monochrome grey, considering it extremely boring. Biographer Beno\u00eet Peeters suggested that this childhood melancholy might have been exacerbated through being sexually abused by a maternal uncle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Remi developed a love of cinema, favouring Winsor McCay's \"Gertie the Dinosaur\" and the films of Charlie Chaplin, Harry Langdon and Buster Keaton; his later work in the comic strip medium displayed an obvious influence from them in style and content. Although not a keen reader, he enjoyed the novels of British and American authors, such as \"Huckleberry Finn\", \"Treasure Island\", \"Robinson Crusoe\" and \"The Pickwick Papers\", as well as the novels of Frenchman Alexandre Dumas. Drawing as a hobby, he sketched out scenes from daily life along the edges of his school books. Some of these illustrations were of German soldiers, because his four years of primary schooling at the Ixelles Municipal School No. 3 coincided with the First World War, during which Brussels was occupied by the German army. In 1919, his secondary education began at the secular Place de Londres in Ixelles, but in 1920 he was moved to Saint-Boniface School, an institution controlled by the archbishop where the teachers were Roman Catholic priests. Remi proved a successful student, being awarded prizes for excellence. He completed his secondary education in July 1925 as the top of his class.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aged 12, Remi joined the Boy Scout brigade attached to Saint-Boniface School, becoming troop leader of the Squirrel Patrol and earning the name \"Curious Fox\" (\"Renard curieux\"). With the Scouts, he travelled to summer camps in Italy, Switzerland, Austria and Spain, and in the summer of 1923 his troop hiked 200 miles across the Pyrenees. His experiences with Scouting would have a significant influence on the rest of his life, sparking his love of camping and the natural world, and providing him with a moral compass that stressed personal loyalty and keeping one's promises.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His Scoutmaster, Rene Weverbergh, encouraged his artistic ability, and published one of Remi's drawings in the newsletter of the Saint-Boniface Scouts, \"Jamais Assez\" (\"Never Enough\"): his first published work. When Weverbergh became involved in the publication of \"Boy-Scout\", the newsletter of the Federation of Scouts, he published more of Remi's illustrations, the first of which appeared in the fifth issue, from 1922. Remi continued publishing cartoons, drawings and woodcuts in subsequent issues of the newsletter, which was soon renamed \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\" (\"The Belgian Boy Scout\"). During this time, he experimented with different pseudonyms, using \"J\u00e9r\u00e9mie\" and \"J\u00e9r\u00e9miades\" before settling on \"Herg\u00e9\", the French pronunciation of his reversed initials (R.G.) His work was first published under this name in December 1924.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alongside his stand-alone illustrations, in July 1926 Herg\u00e9 began production of a comic strip for \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\", \"Les Aventures de Totor\" (\"The Adventures of Totor\"), which continued intermittent publication until 1929. Revolving around the adventures of a Boy Scout patrol leader, the comic initially featured written captions underneath the scenes, but Herg\u00e9 began to experiment with other forms of conveying information, including speech bubbles. Illustrations were also published in \"Le Bl\u00e9 qui l\u00e8ve\" (\"The Wheat That Grows\") and other publications of the Catholic Association of Belgian Young People, and Herg\u00e9 produced a book jacket for Weverbergh's novel, \"The Soul of the Sea\". Being young and inexperienced, still learning his craft, Herg\u00e9 sought guidance from an older cartoonist, Pierre Ickx, and together they founded the short-lived \"Atelier de la Fleur de Lys\" (AFL), an organisation for Christian cartoonists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After graduating from secondary school in 1925, Herg\u00e9 enrolled in the \u00c9cole Saint-Luc art school, but finding the teaching boring, he left after one lesson. He hoped for a job as an illustrator alongside Ickx at \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" (\"The Twentieth Century\")\u2014a conservative \"Catholic Newspaper of Doctrine and Information\"\u2014but no positions were available. Instead he got a job in the paper's subscriptions department, starting in September 1925. Despising the boredom of this position, he enlisted for military service before he was called up, and in August 1926 was assigned to the Dailly barracks at Schaerbeek. Joining the first infantry regiment, he was also bored by his military training, but continued sketching and producing episodes of \"Totor\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Toward the end of his military service, in August 1927, Herg\u00e9 met the editor of \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\", the Abb\u00e9 Norbert Wallez, a vocal fascist who kept a signed photograph of the Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini on his desk. Impressed by Herg\u00e9's repertoire, Wallez agreed to give him a job as a photographic reporter and cartoonist for the paper, something for which Herg\u00e9 always remained grateful, coming to view the Abb\u00e9 as a father figure. Supplemented by commissions for other publications, Herg\u00e9 illustrated a number of texts for \"The Children's Corner\" and the literary pages; the illustrations of this period show his interest in woodcuts and the early prototype of his \"ligne claire\" style.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning a series of newspaper supplements in late 1928, Wallez founded a supplement for children, \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" (\"The Little Twentieth\"), which subsequently appeared in \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" every Thursday. Carrying strong Catholic and fascist messages, many of its passages were explicitly anti-semitic. For this new venture, Herg\u00e9 illustrated \"L'Extraordinaire Aventure de Flup, N\u00e9nesse, Poussette et Cochonnet\" (\"The Extraordinary Adventure of Flup, N\u00e9nesse, Poussette and Cochonnet\"), a comic strip authored by one of the paper's sport columnists, which told the story of two boys, one of their little sisters, and her inflatable rubber pig. Herg\u00e9 was unsatisfied, and eager to write and draw a comic strip of his own. He was fascinated by new techniques in the medium\u2014such as the systematic use of speech bubbles\u2014found in such American comics as George McManus' \"Bringing Up Father\", George Herriman's \"Krazy Kat\" and Rudolph Dirks's \"The Katzenjammer Kids\", copies of which had been sent to him from Mexico by the paper's reporter L\u00e9on Degrelle, stationed there to report on the Cristero War.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 developed a character named Tintin as a Belgian boy reporter who could travel the world with his fox terrier, Snowy\u2014\"Milou\" in the original French\u2014basing him in large part on his earlier character of Totor and also on his own brother, Paul. Degrelle later falsely claimed that Tintin had been based on him, while he and Herg\u00e9 fell out when Degrelle used one of his designs without permission; they settled out-of-court. Although Herg\u00e9 wanted to send his character to the United States, Wallez instead ordered him to set his adventure in the Soviet Union, acting as a work of anti-socialist propaganda for children. The result, \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\", began serialisation in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" on 10 January 1929, and ran until 8 May 1930. Popular in Francophone Belgium, Wallez organized a publicity stunt at the Gare de Nord station, following which he organized the publication of the story in book form. The popularity of the story led to an increase in sales, and so Wallez granted Herg\u00e9 two assistants, Eug\u00e8ne Van Nyverseel and Paul \"Jam\" Jamin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In January 1930, Herg\u00e9 introduced \"Quick & Flupke\" (\"Quick et Flupke\"), a new comic strip about two street kids from Brussels, in the pages of \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\". At Wallez's direction, in June he began serialisation of the second Tintin adventure, \"Tintin in the Congo\", designed to encourage colonial sentiment towards the Belgian Congo. Authored in a paternalistic style that depicted the Congolese as childlike idiots, in later decades it would be accused of racism; however, at the time it was un-controversial and popular, with further publicity stunts held to increase sales. For the third adventure, \"Tintin in America\", serialised from September 1931 to October 1932, Herg\u00e9 finally got to deal with a scenario of his own choice, although he used the work to push an anti-capitalist, anti-consumerist agenda in keeping with the paper's ultra-conservative ideology. Although the \"Adventures of Tintin\" had been serialised in the French Catholic \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\" (\"Brave Hearts\") since 1930, he was soon receiving syndication requests from Swiss and Portuguese newspapers too. Though wealthier than most Belgians at his age, and despite increasing success, he remained an unfazed \"conservative young man\" dedicated to his work.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 sought work elsewhere too, creating \"The Lovable Mr. Mops\" cartoon for the Bon March\u00e9 department store, and \"The Adventures of Tim the Squirrel Out West\" for the rival L'Innovation department store. On 20 July 1932 he married Germaine Kieckens, who was Wallez's secretary; although neither of them were entirely happy with the union, they had been encouraged to do so by Wallez, who demanded that all his staff married and who personally carried out the wedding ceremony at the Saint-Roch Church in Laeken. Spending their honeymoon in Vianden, Luxembourg, the couple moved into an apartment in the rue Knapen, Schaerbeek. After Wallez was removed from the paper's editorship in August 1933 following a scandal, Herg\u00e9 became despondent; in March 1934 he tried to resign, but was encouraged to stay after his monthly salary was increased from 2000 to 3000 francs and his workload was reduced, with Jamin taking responsibility for the day-to-day running of \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 1932 Herg\u00e9 announced that the following month he would send Tintin on an adventure to Asia. Although initially titled \"The Adventures of Tintin, Reporter, in the Orient\", it would later be renamed \"Cigars of the Pharaoh\". A mystery story, the plot began in Egypt before proceeding to Arabia and India, during which the recurring characters of Thomson and Thompson and Rastapopoulos were introduced. Through his friend Charles Lesne, Herg\u00e9 was hired to produce illustrations for the company Casterman, and in late 1933 they proposed taking over the publication of both \"The Adventures of Tintin\" and \"Quick and Flupke\" in book form, to which Herg\u00e9 agreed; the first Casterman book was the collected volume of \"Cigars\". Continuing to subsidise his comic work with commercial advertising, in January 1934 he also founded the \"Atelier Herg\u00e9\" advertising company with two partners, but it was liquidated after six months. From February to August 1934 Herg\u00e9 serialised \"Popol Out West\" in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\", a story using animal characters that was a development of the earlier \"Tim the Squirrel\" comic.", "qas": [{"question": "when did montini announce tintin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From August 1934 to October 1935, \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" serialised Tintin's next adventure, \"The Blue Lotus\", which was set in China and dealt with the recent Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Herg\u00e9 had been greatly influenced in the production of the work by his friend Zhang Chongren, a Catholic Chinese student studying at Brussels' Acad\u00e9mie Royale des Beaux-Arts, to whom he had been introduced in May 1934. Zhang gave him lessons in Taoist philosophy, Chinese art and Chinese calligraphy, influencing not only his artistic style but also his general outlook on life. As a token of appreciation Herg\u00e9 added a fictional \"Chang Chong-Chen\" to \"The Blue Lotus\", a young Chinese boy who meets and befriends Tintin. For \"The Blue Lotus\", Herg\u00e9 devoted far more attention to accuracy, resulting in a largely realistic portrayal of China. As a result, \"The Blue Lotus\" has been widely hailed as \"Herg\u00e9's first masterpiece\" and a benchmark in the series' development. Casterman published it in book form, also insisting that Herg\u00e9 include colour plates in both the volume and in reprints of \"America\" and \"Cigars\". In 1936, they also began production of Tintin merchandise, something Herg\u00e9 supported, having ideas of an entire shop devoted to \"The Adventures of Tintin\", something that would come to fruition 50 years later. Nevertheless, while his serialised comics proved lucrative, the collected volumes sold less well, something Herg\u00e9 blamed on Casterman, urging them to do more to market his books.\nHerg\u00e9's next Tintin story, \"The Broken Ear\" (1935\u201337), was the first for which the plot synopsis had been outlined from the start, being a detective story that took Tintin to South America. It introduced the character of General Alcazar, and also saw Herg\u00e9 introduce the first fictional countries into the series, San Theodoros and Nuevo Rico, two republics based largely on Bolivia and Paraguay.\nThe violent elements within \"The Broken Ear\" upset the publishers of \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\", who asked Herg\u00e9 to create a more child-appropriate story for them. The result was \"The Adventures of Jo, Zette, and Jocko\", a series about a young brother and sister and their pet monkey. The series began with \"The Secret Ray\", which was serialised in \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\" and then \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\", and continued with \"The Stratoship H-22\". Herg\u00e9 nevertheless disliked the series, commenting that the characters \"bored me terribly.\" Now writing three series simultaneously, Herg\u00e9 was working every day of the year, and felt stressed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The next Tintin adventure was \"The Black Island\" (1937\u201338), which saw the character travel to Britain to battle counterfeiters and introduced a new antagonist, the German Dr. M\u00fcller. Herg\u00e9 followed this with \"King Ottokar's Sceptre\" (1938\u201339), in which Tintin saves the fictional Eastern European country of Syldavia from being invaded by its expansionist neighbour, Borduria; the event was an anti-fascist satire of Nazi Germany's expansion into Austria and Czechoslovakia. In May 1939, Herg\u00e9 moved to a new house in Watermael-Boitsfort, although following the German invasion of Poland, he was conscripted into the Belgian army and temporarily stationed in Herenthout. Demobbed within the month, he returned to Brussels and adopted a more explicit anti-German stance when beginning his next Tintin adventure, \"Land of Black Gold\", which was set in the Middle East and featured Dr. M\u00fcller sabotaging oil lines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During this period, Herg\u00e9 also contributed to \"L'Ouest\" (\"The West\"), a newspaper run by his friend Raymond De Becker. \"L'Ouest\" urged Belgium to remain neutral in World War II, a stance Herg\u00e9 supported, creating the \"Mr Bellum\" strip to argue this position. Herg\u00e9 was invited to visit China by Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek, who had enjoyed \"The Blue Lotus\", although due to the political situation in Europe, this was not possible. He was re-mobilized in December, and stationed in Antwerp, from where he continued to send the Tintin strip to \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\". However, he fell ill with sinusitis and boils and was declared unfit for military service in May 1940. That same day, Germany invaded Belgium. \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" was shut down, part way through the serialisation of \"Land of Black Gold\".", "qas": [{"question": "who was the author of the newspaper ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As the Belgian army clashed with the invading Germans, Herg\u00e9 and his wife fled by car to France along with tens of thousands of other Belgians, first staying in Paris and then heading south to Puy-de-D\u00f4me, where they remained for six weeks. On 28 May, Belgian King Leopold III surrendered the country to the German army to prevent further killing; a move that Herg\u00e9 supported. He followed the king's request that all of those Belgians who had fled the country return, arriving back in Brussels on 30 June. There, he found that his house had been occupied as an office for the German army's \"Propagandastaffel\", and also faced financial trouble, as he owed back taxes yet was unable to access his financial reserves. All Belgian publications were now under the control of the German occupying force, who refused permission to continue publication. Instead, Herg\u00e9 was offered employment as a cartoonist for by its editor, the Rexist Victor Matthys; however, Herg\u00e9 perceived as an explicitly political publication, and thus declined the position.\nInstead, he took up a position with , Belgium's largest Francophone daily newspaper. Confiscated from its original owners, the German authorities had permitted \"Le Soir\" to be re-opened under the directorship of De Doncker, although it remained firmly under Nazi control, supporting the German war effort and espousing anti-Semitism. After joining the \"Le Soir\" team on 15 October, Herg\u00e9 was involved in the creation of a children's supplement, \"Soir-Jeunesse\", aided by Jamin and Jacques Van Melkebeke. He relaunched \"The Adventures of Tintin\" with a new story, \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\", in which Tintin pursued drug smugglers in North Africa; the story was a turning point in the series for its introduction of Captain Haddock, who would become a major character in the rest of the \"Adventures\". This story, like the subsequent \"Adventures of Tintin\" published in \"Le Soir\", would reject the political themes present in earlier stories, instead remaining firmly neutral. Herg\u00e9 also included new \"Quick & Flupke\" gags in the supplement, as well as illustrations for serialised stories by Edgar Allan Poe and the Brothers Grimm.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In May 1941, a paper shortage led to the \"Soir-Jeunesse\" being reduced to four pages, with the length of the Tintin strip being cut by two thirds. Several weeks later the supplement disappeared altogether, with \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\" being moved into \"Le Soir\" itself, where it became a daily strip. While some Belgians were upset that Herg\u00e9 was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the occupying Nazi administration, he was heavily enticed by the size of 's readership, which reached 600,000.\nWith Van Melkebeke, Herg\u00e9 put together two Tintin plays. The first, \"Tintin in the Indies\", appeared at Brussels' Theatre des Galeries in April 1941, while the second, \"Mr Boullock's Disappearance\", was performed there in December. From October 1941 to May 1942, \"Le Soir\" serialised Herg\u00e9's next Tintin adventure, \"The Shooting Star\", followed by publication as a single volume by Casterman. In keeping with \"Le Soir\"'s editorial standpoint, \"The Shooting Star\" espoused an anti-Semitic and anti-American attitude, with the antagonist being a wealthy Jewish American businessman; it would thus prove particularly controversial in the post-war period, although Herg\u00e9 denied any malicious anti-Semitic intention.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Casterman felt that the black-and-white volumes of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" were not selling as well as colour comic books, and thus that the series should be produced in colour. At the same time, Belgium was facing a paper-shortage, with Casterman wishing to cut down the volumes from 120-pages in length to 62. Herg\u00e9 was initially sceptical, but ultimately agreed to their demands in February 1942. For these new editions, Casterman introduced a four-colour system, although Herg\u00e9 insisted that colour should remain secondary to line, and that it would not be used for shading.\nTo cope with this additional workload, Herg\u00e9 approached a friend whom he had met through Van Melkebeke, Edgar P. Jacobs, to aid him as a cartoonist and colourist. Jacobs could only work on the project part time, and so in March 1942 Herg\u00e9 also employed a woman named Alice Devos to aid him. In July 1942, Herg\u00e9 then procured an agent, Bernard Thi\u00e8ry, who took 40% of his commissions; their working relationship would be strained. With their assistance, from 1942 to 1947, Herg\u00e9 adapted most of his previous \"Adventures of Tintin\" into 62-page colour versions.", "qas": [{"question": "what was 1947, 's nickname ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 21, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9's next \"Adventure of Tintin\" would be \"The Secret of the Unicorn\", serialised in \"Le Soir\" from June 1942. He had collaborated closely with Van Melkebeke on this project, who had introduced many elements from the work of Jules Verne into the detective story, in which Tintin and Haddock searched for parchments revealing the location of hidden pirate treasure. \"The Secret of the Unicorn\" marked the first half of a story arc that was completed in \"Red Rackham's Treasure\", serialised in \"Le Soir\" from February 1943; in this story, Tintin and Haddock search for the pirate's treasure in the Caribbean, with the character of Professor Calculus being introduced to the series. Following \"Red Rackham's Treasure\", Herg\u00e9 drew illustrations for a serialised story titled \"Dupont et Dupond, d\u00e9tectives\" (\"Thomson and Thompson, Detectives\"), authored by the newspaper's crime editor, Paul Kinnet.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the `` mystery of tintin '' called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In September 1943, De Becker was removed as editor of \"Le Soir\" for stating that although the Nazis were motivated \"by undoubted good will, [they were also] extremely out of touch with reality\"; although Herg\u00e9 was close to De Becker, he decided to remain at the newspaper, which came under the editorship of Max Hodeige.\nIn autumn 1943, Herg\u00e9 had decided that he wanted Jacobs to collaborate with him on \"The Adventures of Tintin\". Although initially hesitant, Jacobs eventually agreed, adopting the paid position in January 1944. Jacobs and Herg\u00e9 became close collaborators and greatly influenced each other, while together they developed the plot for the next \"Adventure of Tintin\", \"The Seven Crystal Balls\", which began serialisation in \"Le Soir\" in December 1943.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the Allied troops liberated Brussels from German occupation, \"Le Soir\" ceased publication on 2 September 1944, partway through its serialisation of \"The Seven Crystal Balls\". Herg\u00e9 was arrested on 3 September, having been named as a collaborator in a Resistance document known as the \"Gallery of Traitors\". This would be the first of four incidents in which Herg\u00e9 was arrested \u2013 by the State Security, the Judiciary Police, the Belgian National Movement, and the Front for Independence respectively \u2013 during the course of which he spent one night in jail. On 5 September the entire staff of \"Le Soir\" were fired and a new editorial team introduced, while on 8 September the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) issued a proclamation announcing that \"any journalist who had helped produce a newspaper during the occupation was for the time being barred from practising his profession.\" Blacklisted, Herg\u00e9 was now unemployed. Further, he was publicly lampooned as a collaborator by a newspaper closely associated with the Belgian Resistance, \"La Patrie\", which issued a satirical strip titled \"The Adventures of Tintin in the Land of the Nazis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The period witnessed widespread recriminations against accused collaborators, with military courts condemning 30,000 on minor charges and 25,000 on more serious charges; of those, 5,500 were sentenced to life imprisonment or capital punishment. A judiciary inquiry into Herg\u00e9's case was launched by the deputy public prosecutor, Mr Vin\u00e7otte, although in his report he urged lenience, stating that \"I am inclined to close the case. I believe it would bring ridicule on the judicial system to go after an inoffensive children's book author and illustrator. On the other hand, Herg\u00e9 worked for \"Le Soir\" during the war, and his illustrations are what made people buy the newspaper.\" Although unable to work for the press, Herg\u00e9 continued to re-draw and colour the older \"Adventures of Tintin\" for publication in book form by Casterman, completing the second version of \"Tintin in the Congo\" and starting on \"King Ottokar's Sceptre\". Casterman supported Herg\u00e9 throughout his ordeal, for which he always remained grateful. Attempting to circumvent his blacklisting, with Jacobs he began producing comics under the anonymous pseudonym of \"Olav\", but upon sending them to publishers found none who would accept them. Although this period allowed him an escape from the pressure of daily production which had affected most of his working life, he also had family problems to deal with; his brother Paul returned to Brussels from a German prisoner of war camp, although their mother had become highly delusional and was moved to a psychiatric hospital.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In October 1945, Herg\u00e9 was approached by Raymond Leblanc, a former member of a conservative Resistance group, the National Royalist Movement, and his associates Andr\u00e9 Sinave and Albert Debaty. The trio were planning on launching a weekly magazine for children, and Leblanc \u2013 who had fond childhood memories of \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\" \u2013 thought Herg\u00e9 would be ideal for it. Herg\u00e9 agreed, and Leblanc obtained clearance papers for him, allowing him to work. Concerned about the judicial investigation into Herg\u00e9's wartime affiliations, Leblanc convinced William Ugeux, a leader of the Belgian Resistance who was now in charge of censorship and certificates of good citizenship, to look into the comic creator's file. Ugeux concluded that Herg\u00e9 had been \"a blunderer rather than a traitor\" for his work at \"Le Soir\". The decision as to whether Herg\u00e9 would stand trial belonged to the general auditor of the Military Tribunal, Walter Jean Ganshof van der Meersch. He closed the case on 22 December 1945, declaring that \"in regard to the particularly inoffensive character of the drawings published by Remi, bringing him before a war tribunal would be inappropriate and risky\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Now free from threat of prosecution, Herg\u00e9 continued to support his colleagues at \"Le Soir\" who were being charged as collaborators; six of them were sentenced to death, and others to lengthy prison sentences. Among those sentenced to death was Herg\u00e9's friend, Jamin, although his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. In May 1946, Herg\u00e9 was issued a certificate of good citizenship, which became largely necessary to obtain employment in post-war Belgium. Celebrations were marred by his mother's death in April 1946; she was aged 60.\nHarry Thompson has described this post-war period as the \"greatest upheaval\" of Herg\u00e9's life. Herg\u00e9 later described it as \"an experience of absolute intolerance. It was horrible, horrible!\" He considered the post-war trials of alleged collaborators a great injustice inflicted upon many innocent people, and never forgave Belgian society for the way that he had been treated, although he hid this from his public persona.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sinave devised the idea of naming their new magazine \"Tintin\", believing that this would attract a wide audience. The Dutch-language edition produced for release in Belgium's Flemish north was titled \"Kuifje\" after the character's Dutch-language name. Adopting the slogan of \"The Newspaper for the Young Aged 7 to 77\", the magazine also used a logo featuring the Tintin character himself.\nThe capital for the project had been put up by those involved: as executive director, Leblanc provided 50%, while its managing director Georges Lallemand provided 40% and Herg\u00e9, its artistic director, provided 10%. Herg\u00e9 assembled a group of associates to aid him, including Van Melkebeke, Jacobs, Paul Cuvelier, and Jacques Laudy.\nVan Melkebeke was initially appointed editor-in-chief, although he was arrested for having worked for the collaborationist \"Le Nouveau journal\" shortly after, with his involvement in the project thus being kept secret so as to avoid further controversy. Van Melkebeke continued to provide work for the magazine under pseudonyms, although this ceased during his imprisonment from December 1947 to October 1949.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first issue of \"Tintin\" magazine was published on 26 September 1946. Herg\u00e9 was assigned to produce a two-page spread each week, and began by concluding \"The Seven Crystal Balls\" before embarking on its successor story, \"Prisoners of the Sun\". Alongside Herg\u00e9's \"Adventures of Tintin\", the magazine also included Laudy's \"The Legend of the Four Aymon Brothers\" and Jacobs' \"The Secret of the Swordfish\", the first in his new \"Blake and Mortimer\" series. While the magazine was in competition with a number of rivals, most notably \"Spirou\", famous for serialising the \"Lucky Luke\" and \"Buck Danny\" comics, it proved an immediate success, with 60,000 copies being sold in three days of its release. Its publication resulted in a massive boost to Herg\u00e9's book sales too.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the original name of the publication published by the publication of the publication published ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 29, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In 1947 a Belgian film adaptation of \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\" was produced, and believing that cinematic adaptations were a good way to proceed, Herg\u00e9 contacted Disney Studios in the United States; they declined his offer to adapt \"The Adventures of Tintin\" for the silver screen.\nIn May 1947 the artistic collaboration between Herg\u00e9 and Jacobs ended after an argument. Herg\u00e9 had been jealous of the immediate success of Jacobs' \"Blake and Mortimer\" series, and had turned down Jacobs' request that he be credited as co-creator of the new \"Adventures of Tintin\". That same month, Herg\u00e9 broke from his manager, Thiery, after discovering that the latter had been siphoning off money for himself.", "qas": [{"question": "how long did herg\u00e9 break his manager ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 30, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Many Belgians were highly critical of the magazine due to its connections with Herg\u00e9, who was still deemed a collaborator and traitor by many; \"La Soir\" and \"La Cit\u00e9\" publicly criticised the decision without referring to him by name while \"Le Quotidien\" and \"Le Drapeau Rouge\" specifically singled him out for denunciation. Herg\u00e9 believed that the children's author Jeanne Cappe was behind many of these accusations, and threatened her with a lawsuit. Unhappy with life in Belgium, Herg\u00e9 made plans to emigrate to Argentina, a nation that was welcoming many Europeans who had supported the defeated Axis powers and which had a thriving comic book scene. Ultimately, he changed his mind, for reasons that have remained unknown; it is possible that he was unable to secure any promise of work in the South American country.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In May, Herg\u00e9 and Germaine holidayed near to Gland on Lake Geneva, Switzerland, where they were accompanied by a friend of theirs, a young woman named Rosane. During the holiday, Herg\u00e9 and Rosane embarked on an extra-marital affair. He felt guilty, and returned to Brussels in June. Privately, he expressed the view that he had been led to commit such an act, which he viewed as immoral, through the influence of \"amoral friends\" that he was associating with. Hoping to reignite the passion and stability of his marriage, he arranged for him and Germaine to return to Switzerland soon after; here they argued, and embarked on a temporary separation. Remaining in Switzerland, he visited King Leopold III, who was then holidaying in Pr\u00e9gny, before briefly returning to Brussels in July. Back in Switzerland, he embarked on an affair with a married woman, although again informed Germaine before setting off to spend time in Ardenne. In August, the couple sought to reunite by holidaying together in Brittany, but there they broke up again and Herg\u00e9 returned to his lover in Switzerland. In September he finally returned to Brussels, but with his close friend Marcel Dehaye then spent time in a retreat at the Abbey of Notre-Dame-de-Scourmont. That month, he revived \"Land of Black Gold\" \u2013 the \"Adventure of Tintin\" that had been interrupted by the German invasion of 1940 \u2013 and began serialising it in \"Tintin\" magazine. However, the story was again interrupted, this time for twelve weeks as Herg\u00e9 took a further unannounced holiday to Gland, greatly annoying many of his colleagues.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although they retained respect for each other, Herg\u00e9's repeated absences had created a tense situation between himself and Leblanc. After a lengthy search, Leblanc had found a publisher willing to produce an edition of \"Tintin\" magazine in France: Georges Dargaud's Le Lombard, which began production of a French edition in October 1948. However, Herg\u00e9 was unhappy that Leblanc had appointed Andr\u00e9 Frenez as Van Melkebeke's replacement as editor-in-chief, describing Frenez as \"a cold functionary\". Herg\u00e9 was stubborn and uncompromising as the magazine's artistic director, known for strongly criticising the work of old friends like Pierre Ickx if he felt that they did not meet his exacting standards. He was particularly critical of the work of two of the newly hired staff at \"Tintin\" and \"Kuifje\", Jacques Martin and Willy Vandersteen, encouraging them to change their artistic style to better reflect his own preferences. To Leblanc, he expressed the concern that most of those working at \"Tintin\" were better illustrators than storytellers. He also opined that \"Tintin\" was not keeping up with the times and what he perceived as the increased maturity of children, encouraging the magazine to better reflect current events and scientific developments.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the relationship between himself and leblanc ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 33, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 6 April 1950 Herg\u00e9 established Studios Herg\u00e9 as a public company. The Studios were based in his Avenue Delleur house in Brussels, with Herg\u00e9 making a newly purchased country house in C\u00e9roux-Mousty his and Germaine's main abode.\nThe Studios would provide both personal support to Herg\u00e9 and technical support for his ongoing work.\nInitially with only three employees, this would rise to fifteen, with all working on Herg\u00e9's projects. He hired Bob de Moor as his primary apprentice at the Studios in March 1951. Impressed by Jacques Martin's work on \"The Golden Sphinx\", Herg\u00e9 persuaded Martin to join the Studios in January 1954; Martin insisted on bringing with him his own two assistants, Roger Leloup and Michel Demaurets.\nDuring the early 1950s, a number of those convicted for collaborating with the Nazi occupiers were freed from prison. Sympathetic to their plight, Herg\u00e9 lent money to some and aided others in getting jobs at \"Tintin\" magazine, much to Leblanc's annoyance. For instance, as well as lending him money, Herg\u00e9 used his connections to secure Raymond de Becker a job in Switzerland as a book shop sales inspector. He also hired those associated with collaboration for his Studios; his new colourist, Josette Baujot, was the wife of a recently assassinated member of the Walloon Legion, and his new secretary, Baudouin van der Branden de Reeth, had served a prison sentence for working at \"Le Nouveau Journal\" during the occupation.", "qas": [{"question": "on what date was universal abbreviated as a public company ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 had developed the idea of setting an \"Adventure of Tintin\" on the moon while producing \"Prisoners of the Sun\". He began serialisation of \"Destination Moon\", the first of a two part arc followed by \"Explorers on the Moon\", in \"Tintin\" magazine in March 1950. In September 1950, Herg\u00e9 broke off the story, feeling the need for a break from work, having fallen back into clinical depression. He and Germaine went on holiday to Gland before returning to Brussels in late September. Many readers sent letters to \"Tintin\" asking why \"Explorers on the Moon\" was no longer being serialised, with a rumour emerging that Herg\u00e9 had died. \"Explorers of the Moon\" would resume after an eighteen month hiatus, returning in April 1952.\nAlongside his work on the new stories, Herg\u00e9 also made use of the Studios in revising more of his early works.", "qas": [{"question": "what did herg\u00e9 develop on the moon ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 35, 0)"}, {"question": "what did bell use in his early works ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 35, 6)"}]}, {"context": "In February 1952, Herg\u00e9 was involved in a car crash in which Germaine's leg was shattered; she had to have a steel rod implanted in it, and was confined to a wheelchair for several months. Their relationship was further strained when they received news of Wallez's death in September 1952. His friendship with Van Melkebeke also broke apart in this period, in part due to advice gained from an alleged clairvoyant, Bertje Janueneau, whom both Herg\u00e9 and Germaine were increasingly relying upon for guidance. In January 1955 a young woman named Fanny Vlamynck was hired as a colourist at the Studios. Herg\u00e9 embarked on an extra-marital affair with her in November 1956, with the rest of the studio staff soon finding out. Germaine grew suspicious of her husband's affections for Fanny, but was also experiencing a strong romantic attraction to her ballroom dance partner. Herg\u00e9 and Germaine went on a cruise for the former's fiftieth birthday in May 1957, in which they visited Casablanca, Rabat, Palermo, and Rome, and in October went on a second holiday, this time to Ostend. Following this, he revealed his affair with Fanny to Germaine.\nHe began experiencing traumatic dreams dominated by the colour white, and seeking to explain them he visited Franz Ricklin, a psychoanalyst who was a student of Carl Jung in Zurich in May 1959. In February 1960 he returned to Switzerland, and upon its arrival back in Brussels he began renting an apartment in Uccle, away from Germaine. His relationship with Germaine had ended, although due to restrictions under Belgian law he was unable to obtain a divorce until seventeen years later.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In September 1958, \"Tintin\" magazine moved its headquarters to a newly constructed building near the Gare du Midi. Herg\u00e9 continued to feud with Leblanc over the direction of the magazine; his constant absences had led to him being replaced as artistic director, and he demanded that he be reinstated. Leblanc relented in early 1965, although Herg\u00e9 soon departed to Sardinia for six weeks. In October 1965 Leblanc appointed the cartoonist Greg to be editor-in-chief of the magazine, believing him capable of reforming the paper to remain relevant to the youth of the day. By this point, \"Tintin\" magazine was at its commercial peak, with sales of 600,000 a week, although Herg\u00e9 had lost much of his interest in it.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the newspaper that was lost at its commercial peak ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 37, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9's book sales were higher than ever, and translations were being produced for the British, Spanish, and Scandinavian markets. He was receiving international press attention, with articles on his work appearing in \"France-Observateur\", \"The Listener\", and \"Times Literary Supplement\". Paul Vandromme authored an un-critical book on Herg\u00e9, \"Le Monde de Tintin\" (\"The World of Tintin\"), published by Gallimard; Herg\u00e9 vetoed the inclusion of a proposed preface by Roger Nimier after finding its praise for his own work too embarrassing. Radio adaptations of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" were produced, as was an animated cartoon series produced by Belvision, \"Herg\u00e9's Adventures of Tintin\". Two live-action films were also produced, \"Tintin and the Golden Fleece\" (1961) and \"Tintin and the Blue Oranges\" (1964), the former of which Herg\u00e9 had been closely involved with.", "qas": [{"question": "when was `` tintin and the blue oranges '' released ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 38, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Developing an interest in modern art, in the early 1960s Herg\u00e9 befriended the art dealer Marcel Stal, owner of the Carrefour gallery in Brussels. He was a particular fan of the work of Constant Permeke, Jakob Smits, Lucio Fontana, and Jean-Pierre Raynaurd, as well as the pop art movement, in particular the work of Roy Lichtenstein. He built up his own personal collection, which consisted of both modern paintings as well as African art and Chinese ceramics.\nIn 1962, Herg\u00e9 decided he wanted to paint. He chose Louis Van Lint, one of the most respected Belgian abstract painters at the time, whose work he liked a lot, to be his private teacher.\nHerg\u00e9 took up painting as a hobby, producing abstract art works which were influenced by the styles of Joan Mir\u00f3 and Serge Poliakoff. He showed his work to the art historian L\u00e9o Van Puyvelde, who was the chief conservator of the Mus\u00e9es des Beaux-Arts, who believed that they showed promise but that Herg\u00e9's real talent lay with cartoon drawing. Herg\u00e9 abandoned painting shortly after, having produced 37 paintings in all.\nSpending less time on new \"Adventures of Tintin\", from June to December 1965 \"Tintin\" magazine serialised a redrawn and newly coloured version of \"The Black Island\" prepared by staff at Studios Herg\u00e9. Supported by his studio, Herg\u00e9 produced \"The Calculus Affair\" between 1954 until 1956 which was followed by \"The Red Sea Sharks\" in 1956 to 1957.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1960s, Herg\u00e9 became increasingly annoyed at the success of Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and Albert Uderzo's \"Asterix\" comic book series, which various commentators had described as eclipsing \"The Adventures of Tintin\" as the foremost comic in the Franco-Belgian tradition. Hoping to imitate the success of the recent animated films \"Asterix the Gaul\" (1967) and \"Asterix and Cleopatra\" (1968), Herg\u00e9 agreed to the production of two animated Belvision films based on the \"Adventures of Tintin\". The first, \"Tintin and the Temple of the Sun\" (1969), was based on pre-existing comics, whereas the second, \"Tintin and the Lake of Sharks\" (1972) was an original story written by Greg. In 1982 the American filmmaker Steven Spielberg requested the film rights for a live-action adaptation of one of \"The Adventures of Tintin\", a prospect that excited Herg\u00e9, but the project never came to fruition at the time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In October 1971, the journalist Numa Sadoul conducted a wide-ranging interview with Herg\u00e9, in which the latter opened up about many of the problems he had experienced in his personal life. Sadoul planned to publish the interview as a book, but Herg\u00e9 made many alterations to the transcript, both to improve its prose and to remove sections which cast him in a negative light. Editors at Casterman then removed even further sections, particularly those in which Herg\u00e9 expressed a negative view of Catholicism. The interview was published as \"Tintin et moi\" (\"Tintin and I\") in 1975. Herg\u00e9 followed this by agreeing to be the subject of a documentary film produced by Henri Roane, \"Moi, Tintin\" (\"I, Tintin\"), which premiered in 1975.\nIn January 1977 he attended an early comic book convention at Angoul\u00eame, where he was widely heralded as one of the masters of the discipline. To mark the fiftieth anniversary of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" in 1979, a celebratory event was held at Brussels' Hilton hotel, while an exhibit on \"Le Mus\u00e9e imaginaire de Tintin\" (\"The Imaginary Museum of Tintin\") was held at the Palais de Beaux-Arts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In April 1971 Herg\u00e9 visited the United States for the first time, primarily to visit a liver specialist in Rochester, Minnesota, but on the trip he also visited a Sioux reservation in South Dakota, but was shocked at the conditions in which their inhabitants' lived. On this visit he also spent time in Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Kansas City. \nIn April 1973, Herg\u00e9 took up an invite to visit Taiwan by the nation's government, in recognition of his promotion of Chinese culture in \"The Blue Lotus\". During the visit he also spent time in Thailand and Bali.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 had long sought to regain contact with his old friend Zhang Chongren, with whom he had lost contact. He regularly asked any Chinese people that he met if they knew of Zhang, and in 1979 had some success when a staff member in a Brussels Chinese restaurant revealed that he was Zhang's godson. Herg\u00e9 was thus able to re-establish contact with his old friend. The journalist G\u00e9rard Valet organised for Zhang to visit Brussels so that he and Herg\u00e9 could be re-united. The event took place in March 1981, and was heavily publicised; Herg\u00e9 however found the situation difficult, disliking the press attention and finding that he and Zhang had grown distant during the intervening years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In June 1970, Herg\u00e9's father died, and after the funeral he holidayed near Lake Geneva.\nIn 1974, his assistant Branden suffered a stroke and was left unable to write, with Herg\u00e9 replacing him with a young man, Alain Baran, who Herg\u00e9 biographer Pierre Assouline later termed Herg\u00e9's \"surrogate son\". In March 1977, Herg\u00e9's divorce with Germaine was finalised; although Herg\u00e9 continued to visit her and financially support her, Germaine took the divorce badly, viewing it as a further betrayal. Herg\u00e9 was then able to marry Fanny several weeks later, in a low-key ceremony on 20 May; he was 70 years old and she 42.", "qas": [{"question": "when did broz die ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 44, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1979, Herg\u00e9 was diagnosed with osteomyelofibrosis, necessitating a complete blood transfusion. His need for blood transfusions had increased, as he came to require them every two weeks, and then every week.", "qas": [{"question": "who was diagnosed with osteomyelofibrosis ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 45, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 25 February 1983, Herg\u00e9 entered cardiac arrest and was hospitalised in intensive care at Brussels' Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc. He died there on 3 March. His death received front page coverage in numerous francophone newspapers, including \"Lib\u00e9ration\" and \"Le Monde\". In his will, he had left Fanny as his sole heir.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 1986, Fanny closed Studios Herg\u00e9, replacing it with the Herg\u00e9 Foundation.", "qas": [{"question": "when did fanny open studios ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 47, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1988, \"Tintin\" magazine itself was discontinued.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 was a highly private person, being described by biographer Harry Thompson as \"reserved [and] unostentatious\". According to his biographer Pierre Sterckx, Herg\u00e9 appeared \"very conventional\" in public but in reality was \"extremely erudite, with an insatiable curiosity, constantly on the watch\". He greatly enjoyed walking in the countryside, gardening, and art collecting, and he was a fan of jazz music. Although he disliked making public or press appearances, Herg\u00e9 insisted on personally responding to all fan mail received, which took up a considerable part of his time. He stated that \"not replying to children's letters would be to betray their dreams.\" Friends described him as a humorous man, known particularly for his self-deprecating jokes. Colleagues described Herg\u00e9 as egocentric, an assessment he agreed with. He was known to be authoritarian in dealing with his assistants and refused to share credit with them for their part in his work. Sterckx noted that \"on the one hand he could be distant, even frosty, but on the other he was affectionate\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Throughout his first marriage he had a number of affairs with other women. He had no children, having been rendered sterile by radiation treatment, but in the 1950s offered to adopt his brother Paul's two children, Denise and George, when their parents were experiencing trouble in their relationship. Paul declined the offer, with Denise and George later noting that they had no great affection for Herg\u00e9, deeming him awkward around children. Herg\u00e9 was raised as a Catholic although was never a devout practitioner of the religion. His adherence to Catholicism declined in later life as he developed a keen interest in Taoism, and became an agnostic. He was a fan of the \"Tao Te Ching\" and Arnaud Desjardins' \"The Path to Wisdom\", as well as Fritjof Capra's \"The Tao of Physics\" and the work of Jean-\u00c9mile Charon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Politically, Herg\u00e9 was a fervent royalist, and remained so throughout his life, also believing in the unity of Belgium.\nIn his early life, Herg\u00e9 was \"close to the traditional right-wing\" of Belgian society, with Sterckx noting that through his work he was \"plunged into rightist, even extreme right-wing circles\". According to Harry Thompson, such political ideas were not unusual in middle-class circles in Belgium of the 1920s and early 1930s, where \"patriotism, Catholicism, strict morality, discipline and naivety were so inextricably bound together in everyone's lives that right-wing politics were an almost inevitable by-product. It was a world view shared by everyone, distinguished principally by its complete ignorance of the world.\" When Herg\u00e9 took responsibility for , he followed Wallez's instruction and allowed the newspaper to contain explicitly pro-fascist and anti-semitic sentiment. Literary critic Jean-Marie Apostolid\u00e8s noted that the character of Tintin was a personification of the \"New Youth\" concept which was promoted by the European far right. Under Wallez's guidance, the early \"Adventures of Tintin\" contained explicit political messages for its young readership. \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\" was a work of anti-socialist propaganda, while \"Tintin in the Congo\" was designed to encourage colonialist sentiment toward the Belgian Congo, and \"Tintin in America\" was designed as a work of anti-Americanism heavily critical of capitalism, commercialism, and industrialisation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In contrast to Herg\u00e9's involvement in Belgium's right-wing, Sterckx thought the cartoonist to have been \"a liberal and independent spirit\", someone who was \"the very opposite of a conservative [or] a reactionary of the right\". Michael Farr asserted that Herg\u00e9 had \"an acute political conscience\" during his earlier days, as exemplified by his condemnation of racism in the United States evident in \"Tintin in America\". Literary critic Tom McCarthy went further, remarking that \"Tintin in America\" represented the emergence of a \"left-wing counter tendency\" in Herg\u00e9's work that rebelled against his right-wing milieu and which was particularly critical of wealthy capitalists and industrialists. This was furthered in \"The Blue Lotus\", in which Herg\u00e9 rejected his \"classically right-wing\" ideas to embrace an anti-imperialist stance, and in a contemporary \"Quick & Flupke\" strip in which he lampooned the far right leaders of Germany and Italy, Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini. Although many of his friends and colleagues did so in the mid-1930s, Herg\u00e9 did not join the far-right Rexist Party, later asserting that he \"had always had an aversion to it\" and commenting that \"to throw my heart and soul into an ideology is the opposite of who I am.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 has faced repeated accusations of racism due to his portrayal of various ethnic groups throughout \"The Adventures of Tintin\". According to McCarthy, in \"Tintin in the Congo\" Herg\u00e9 represented the Congolese as \"good at heart but backwards and lazy, in need of European mastery\". Thompson argued that Herg\u00e9 had not written the book to be \"deliberately racist\" and that it reflected the average early 20th-century Belgian view of the Congolese, which was more patronising than malevolent. The book provoked no controversy at the time, only coming to be perceived as racist in the latter 20th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the following adventure, \"Tintin in America\", Herg\u00e9 depicted members of the Blackfoot tribe of Native Americans as \"gullible, even naive\", though it was nevertheless \"broadly sympathetic\" to their culture and plight, depicting their oppression at the hands of the United States army. In \"The Blue Lotus\", he depicted the Japanese as militaristic and buck-toothed, which has also drawn accusations of racism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Herg\u00e9 has also been accused of utilising anti-semitic stereotypes. The character of Rastapopoulos has been claimed to be based on anti-semitic stereotypes, despite Herg\u00e9's protestations that the character was Greek, and not Jewish.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From his early years, Herg\u00e9 was openly critical of racism. He lambasted the pervasive racism of United States society in a prelude comment to \"Tintin in America\" published in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" on 20 August 1931, and ridiculed racist attitudes toward the Chinese in \"The Blue Lotus\". Peeters asserted that \"Herg\u00e9 was no more racist than the next man\", an assessment shared by Farr, who after meeting Herg\u00e9 in the 1980s commented that \"you couldn't have met someone who was more open and less racist\". In contrast, President of the International \"Bande Dessin\u00e9e\" Society Laurence Grove opined that Herg\u00e9 adhered to prevailing societal trends in his work, and that \"When it was fashionable to be a Nazi, he was a Nazi. When it was fashionable to be a colonial racist, that's what he was.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assouline described Herg\u00e9 as \"the personification of Belgium\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAccording to the UNESCO's Index Translationum, Herg\u00e9 is the ninth-most-often-translated French-language author, the second-most-often-translated Belgian author after Georges Simenon, and the second-most-often-translated French-language comics author behind Ren\u00e9 Goscinny. He also had an asteroid, 1652 Herg\u00e9, within the main belt, named after him in 1953.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A cartoon version of Herg\u00e9 makes a number of cameo appearances in Ellipse-Nelvana's \"The Adventures of Tintin\" TV cartoon series. An animated version of Herg\u00e9 also makes a cameo appearance at the start of the 2011 performance capture film, \"\", directed by Steven Spielberg and produced by Peter Jackson, where he is depicted as a street cartoonist drawing a portrait of Tintin at the start of the film.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Mus\u00e9e Herg\u00e9 is located in the centre of Louvain-la-Neuve, a city to the south of Brussels. This location was originally chosen for the Museum in 2001. The futuristic building was designed by Pritzker Prize-winning French architect Christian de Portzamparc and cost \u20ac15 million to build. On the centenary of the birth of Herg\u00e9, 22 May 2007, the museum's first stone was laid. The museum opened its doors in June 2009.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The idea of a museum dedicated to the work of Herg\u00e9 can be traced back to the end of the 1970s, when Herg\u00e9 was still alive. After his death in 1983, Herg\u00e9's widow, Fanny, led the efforts, undertaken at first by the Herg\u00e9 Foundation and then by the new Studios Herg\u00e9, to catalogue and choose the artwork and elements that would become part of the Museum's exhibitions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Herg\u00e9 Museum contains eight permanent galleries displaying original artwork by Herg\u00e9, and telling the story of his life and career which had not previously been visible to the public. The Museum also houses a temporary exhibition gallery. Although Tintin features prominently in the museum, Herg\u00e9's other comic strip characters, such as Jo, Zette and Jocko, and Quick and Flupke, as well as his work as a graphic designer, are also present.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Horned God", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Horned God is one of the two primary deities found in Wicca and some related forms of Neopaganism. \nThe term \"Horned God\" itself predates Wicca, and is an early 20th-century syncretic term for a horned or antlered anthropomorphic god with partly pseudohistorical origins, partly based on historical horned deities.", "qas": [{"question": "what is one of the main deities in wicca ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what does the term `` horned god '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The Horned God represents the male part of the religion's duotheistic theological system, the consort of the female Triple Goddess of the Moon or other Mother Goddess. \nIn common Wiccan belief, he is associated with nature, wilderness, sexuality, hunting, and the life cycle. Whilst depictions of the deity vary, he is always shown with either horns or antlers upon his head, often depicted as being theriocephalic (having a beast's head), in this way emphasizing \"the union of the divine and the animal\", the latter of which includes humanity.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the horned duotheistic represent ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In traditional Wicca (British Traditional Wicca), he is generally regarded as a dualistic god of twofold aspects: bright and dark, night and day, summer and winter, the Oak King and the Holly King. In this dualistic view, his two horns symbolize, in part, his dual nature. (The use of horns to symbolize duality is also reflected in the phrase \"on the horns of a dilemma.\") The three aspects of the Goddess and the two aspects of the Horned God are sometimes mapped on to the five points of the Pentagram, although which points correspond to which deity aspects varies. In some other systems, he is represented as a triune god, split into three aspects that reflect those of the Triple Goddess: the Youth (Warrior), the Father, and the Sage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Horned God has been explored within several psychological theories and has become a recurrent theme in fantasy literature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In traditional and mainstream Wicca, the Horned God is viewed as the divine male principality, being both equal and opposite to the Goddess. The Wiccan god himself can be represented in many forms, including as the Sun God, the Sacrificed God and the Vegetation God, although the Horned God is the most popular representation. The pioneers of the various Wiccan or Witchcraft traditions, such as Gerald Gardner, Doreen Valiente and Robert Cochrane, all claimed that their religion was a continuation of the pagan religion of the Witch-Cult following historians who had purported the Witch-Cult's existence, such as Jules Michelet and Margaret Murray.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the goddess god viewed as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "For Wiccans, the Horned God is \"the personification of the life force energy in animals and the wild\" and is associated with the wilderness, virility and the hunt. Doreen Valiente writes that the Horned God also carries the souls of the dead to the underworld.", "qas": [{"question": "what does valiente valiente mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 5, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Wiccans generally, as well as some other neopagans, tend to conceive of the universe as polarized into gender opposites of male and female energies. In traditional Wicca, the Horned God and the Goddess are seen as equal and opposite in gender polarity. However, in some of the newer traditions of Wicca, and especially those influenced by feminist ideology, there is more emphasis on the Goddess, and consequently the symbolism of the Horned God is less developed than that of the Goddess.\nIn Wicca the cycle of the seasons is celebrated during eight sabbats called The Wheel of the Year. The seasonal cycle is imagined to follow the relationship between the Horned God and the Goddess. The Horned God is born in winter, impregnates the Goddess and then dies during the autumn and winter months and is then reborn by the Goddess at Yule. The different relationships throughout the year are sometimes distinguished by splitting the god into aspects, the Oak King and the Holly King. The relationships between the Goddess and the Horned God are mirrored by Wiccans in seasonal rituals. There is some variation between Wiccan groups as to which sabbat corresponds to which part of the cycle. Some Wiccans regard the Horned God as dying at Lammas, August 1; also known as Lughnasadh, which is the first harvest sabbat. Others may see him dying at Mabon, the autumn equinox, or the second harvest festival. Still other Wiccans conceive of the Horned God dying on October 31, which Wiccans call Samhain, the ritual of which is focused on death. He is then reborn on Winter Solstice, December 21.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other important dates for the Horned God include Imbolc when, according to Valiente, he leads a wild hunt. In Gardnerian Wicca, the Dryghten prayer is recited at the end of every ritual meeting contains the lines referring to the Horned God:", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Sabina Magliocco, Gerald Gardner says (in 1959's \"The Meaning of Witchcraft\") that The Horned God is an Under-god, a mediator between an unknowable supreme deity and the people. (In Wiccan liturgy in the Book of Shadows, this conception of an unknowable supreme deity is referred to as \"Dryghtyn.\" It is not a personal god, but rather an impersonal divinity similar to the Tao of Taoism.)", "qas": [{"question": "what is the personal of buddhism ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Whilst the Horned God is the most common depiction of masculine divinity in Wicca, he is not the only representation. Other examples include the Green Man and the Sun God. In traditional Wicca, however, these other representations of the Wiccan god are subsumed or amalgamated into the Horned God, as aspects or expressions of him. Sometimes this is shown by adding horns or antlers to the iconography. The Green Man, for example, may be shown with branches resembling antlers; and the Sun God may be depicted with a crown or halo of solar rays, that may resemble horns. These other conceptions of the Wiccan god should not be regarded as displacing the Horned God, but rather as elaborating on various facets of his nature. Doreen Valiente has called the Horned God \"the eldest of gods\" in both The Witches Creed and also in her Invocation To The Horned God.", "qas": [{"question": "what does doreen stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 9, 6)"}, {"question": "what is the most common depiction of orthodox divinity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Wiccans believe that The Horned God, as Lord of Death, is their \"comforter and consoler\" after death and before reincarnation; and that he rules the Underworld or Summerland where the souls of the dead reside as they await rebirth. Some, such as Joanne Pearson, believe that this is based on the Mesopotamian myth of Inanna's descent into the underworld, though this has not been confirmed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Doreen Valiente, a former High Priestess of the Gardnerian tradition, claimed that Gerald Gardner's Bricket Wood coven referred to the god as Cernunnos, or Kernunno, which is a Latin word, discovered on a stone carving found in France, meaning \"the Horned One\". Valiente claimed that the coven also referred to the god as Janicot, which she theorised was of Basque origin, and Gardner also used this name in his novel \"High Magic's Aid\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stewart Farrar, a High Priest of the Alexandrian tradition referred to the Horned God as Karnayna, which he believed was a corruption of the word Cernunnos. The historian Ronald Hutton has suggested that it instead came from the Arabic term Dhul-Qarnayn which meant \"Horned One\". This term had been used in the Qur'an to refer to Cyrus the Great or alternatively Alexander the Great, who considered himself the son of the horned deity Ammon-Zeus, and wore horns as a part of his regalia. Margaret Murray had mentioned this information in her 1933 book \"The God of the Witches\", and Hutton theorised that Alex Sanders had taken it from there, enjoying the fact that he shared his name with the ancient Macedonian emperor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the writings of Charles Cardell and Raymond Howard, the god was referred to as Atho. Howard had a wooden statue of Atho's head which he claimed was 2200 years old, but the statue was stolen in April 1967. Howard's son later admitted that his father had carved the statue himself.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the god called in charles cardell ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In Cochrane's Craft, which was founded by Robert Cochrane, the Horned God was often referred to by a Biblical name; Tubal-cain, who, according to the Bible was the first blacksmith. In this neopagan concept, the god is also referred to as Br\u00e2n, a Welsh mythological figure, Wayland, the smith in Germanic mythology, and Herne, a horned figure from English folklore.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the neopagan tradition of Stregheria, founded by Raven Grimassi and loosely inspired by the works of Charles Godfrey Leland, the Horned God goes by several names, including Dianus, Faunus, Cern, and Actaeon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Hinduism, the Horned God is referred to Pashupati, See Pashupati seal.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the horned ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sherry Salman considers the image of the Horned God in Jungian terms, as an archetypal protector and mediator of the outside world to the objective psyche. In her theory the male psyche's 'Horned God' frequently compensates for inadequate fathering.", "qas": [{"question": "what does her mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "When first encountered, the figure is a dangerous, 'hairy chthonic wildman' possessed of kindness and intelligence. If repressed, later in life The Horned God appears as the lord of the Otherworld, or Hades. If split off entirely, he leads to violence, substance abuse and sexual perversion. When integrated he gives the male an ego 'in possession of its own destructiveness' and for the female psyche gives an effective animus relating to both the physical body and the psyche.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In considering the Horned God as a symbol recurring in women's literature, Richard Sugg suggests the Horned God represents the 'natural Eros', a masculine lover subjugating the social-conformist nature of the female shadow, thus encompassing a combination of the shadow and animus. One such example is Heathcliff from Emily Bront\u00eb's \"Wuthering Heights\". Sugg goes on to note that female characters who are paired with this character usually end up socially ostracised, or worse \u2013 in an inverted ending to the male hero-story.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the work of Robert Bly in the Mythopoetic men's movement, John Rowan proposes the Horned God as a \"Wild Man\" be used as a fantasy image or \"sub-personality\" helpful to men in humanistic psychology, and escaping from \"narrow societal images of masculinity\" encompassing excessive deference to women and paraphillia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many horned deities are known to have been worshipped in various cultures throughout history. Evidence for horned gods appear very early in the human record. The so-called Sorcerer dates from perhaps 13,000 BCE. Twenty-one red deer headdresses, made from the skulls of the red deer and likely fitted with leather laces, have been uncovered at the Mesolithic site of Star Carr. They are thought to date from roughly 9,000 BCE. Several theories have been created to establish historical roots for modern Neopagan worship of a Horned God.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of worship have been created to establish historical roots ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 21, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Following the writings of suffragist Matilda Joslyn Gage and others, Margaret Murray, in her 1921 book \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\", proposed the theory that the witches of the early-modern period were remnants of a pagan cult and that the Christian Church had declared the god of the witches was in fact the Devil. Without recourse to any specific representation of this deity, Murray speculates that the head coverings common in inquisition-derived descriptions of the devil \"may throw light on one of the possible origins of the cult.\"\nIn 1931 Murray published a sequel, \"The God of the Witches\", which tries to gather evidence in support of her witch-cult theory. In Chapter 1 \"The Horned God\". Murray claims that various depictions of humans with horns from European and Indian sources, ranging from the paleolithic French cave painting of \"The Sorcerer\" to the Indic Pashupati to the modern English Dorset Ooser, are evidence for an unbroken, Europe-wide tradition of worship of a singular Horned God. Murray derived this model of a horned god cult from James Frazer and Jules Michelet.", "qas": [{"question": "who came up with the model of a mythological god cult ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 22, 5)"}]}, {"context": "In dealing with \"The Sorcerer\", the earliest evidence claimed, Murray based her observations on a drawing by Henri Breuil, which some modern scholars such as Ronald Hutton claim is inaccurate. Hutton states that modern photographs show the original cave art lacks horns, a human torso or any other significant detail on its upper half. However, others, such as celebrated prehistorian Jean Clottes, assert that Breuil's sketch is indeed accurate. Clottes stated that \"I have seen it myself perhaps 20 times over the years\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Breuil considered his drawing to represent a shaman or magician - an interpretation which gives the image its name. Murray having seen the drawing called Breuil's image \"the first depiction of a deity\", an idea which Breuil and others later adopted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Murray also used an inaccurate drawing of a mesolithic rock-painting at Cogul in northeast Spain as evidence of group religious ceremony of the cult, although the central male figure is not horned. The illustration she used of the Cogul painting leaves out a number of figures, human and animal, and the original is more likely a sequence of superimposed but unrelated illustrations, rather than a depiction of a single scene.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite widespread criticism of Murray's scholarship some minor aspects of her work continued to have supporters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The popular image of the Greek god Pan was removed from its classical context in the writings of the Romantics of the 18th century and connected with their ideals of a pastoral England. This, along with the general public's increasing lack of familiarity of Greek mythology at the time led to the figure of Pan becoming generalised as a 'horned god', and applying connotations to the character, such as benevolence that were not evident in the original Greek myths which in turn gave rise to the popular acceptance of Murray's hypothetical horned god of the witches.\nThe reception of \"Aradia\" amongst Neopagans has not been entirely positive. Clifton suggests that modern claims of revealing an Italian pagan witchcraft tradition, for example those of Leo Martello and Raven Grimassi, must be \"match[ed] against\", and compared with the claims in \"Aradia\". He further suggests that a lack of comfort with \"Aradia\" may be due to an \"insecurity\" within Neopaganism about the movement's claim to authenticity as a religious revival.\nValiente offers another explanation for the negative reaction of some neopagans; that the identification of Lucifer as the god of the witches in \"Aradia\" was \"too strong meat\" for Wiccans who were used to the gentler, romantic paganism of Gerald Gardner and were especially quick to reject any relationship between witchcraft and Satanism.\nIn 1985 Classical historian Georg Luck, in his \"Arcana Mundi: Magic and the Occult in the Greek and Roman Worlds\", theorised that the origins of the Witch-cult may have appeared in late antiquity as a faith primarily designed to worship the Horned God, stemming from the merging of Cernunnos, a horned god of the Celts, with the Greco-Roman Pan/Faunus, a combination of gods which he posits created a new deity, around which the remaining pagans, those refusing to convert to Christianity, rallied and that this deity provided the prototype for later Christian conceptions of the Devil, and his worshippers were cast by the Church as witches.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eliphas Levi's image of \"Baphomet\" serves as an example of the transformation of the Devil into a benevolent fertility deity and provided the prototype for Murray's horned god. Murray's central thesis that images of the Devil were actually of deities and that Christianity had demonised these worshippers as following Satan, is first recorded in the work of Levi in the fashionable 19th-century Occultist circles of England and France. Levi created his image of Baphomet, published in his \"Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie\" (1855), by combining symbolism from diverse traditions, including the \"Diable\" card of the 16th and 17th century Tarot of Marseille. L\u00e9vi called his image \"The Goat of Mendes\", possibly following Herodotus' account that the god of Mendes\u2014the Greek name for Djedet, Egypt\u2014was depicted with a goat's face and legs. Herodotus relates how all male goats were held in great reverence by the Mendesians, and how in his time a woman publicly copulated with a goat. E. A. Wallis Budge writes,", "qas": []}, {"context": "Margaret Murray's theory of the historical origins of the Horned God has been used by Wiccans to create a myth of historical origins for their religion. There is no verifiable evidence to support claims that the religion originates earlier than the mid-20th century.\nModern scholarship has disproved Margaret Murray's theory, however various horned gods and mother goddesses were indeed worshipped in the British Isles during the ancient and early Medieval periods.", "qas": [{"question": "what theory is the historical origin of the horned ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"father of Wicca\", Gerald Gardner, who adopted Margaret Murray's thesis, claimed Wicca was a modern survival of an ancient pan-European pagan religion. Gardner states that he had reconstructed elements of the religion from fragments, incorporating elements from Freemasonry, the Occult, and Theosophy, which came together in the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, where Gardner met Aleister Crowley, whose influence became the basis for Wiccan magical practices. \nGerald Gardner was initiated into the O.T.O. by Aleister Crowley and subsequently went on to found the Neopagan religion of Wicca. Various scholars on early Wiccan history, such as Ronald Hutton, Philip Heselton, and Leo Ruickbie concur that witchcraft's early rituals, as devised by Gardner, contained much from Crowley's writings such as the Gnostic Mass. The third degree initiation ceremony in Gardnerian Wicca (including the Great Rite) is derived almost completely from the Gnostic Mass.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Georg Luck, repeats part of Murray's theory, stating that the Horned God may have appeared in late antiquity, stemming from the merging of Cernunnos, an antlered god of the Continental Celts, with the Greco-Roman Pan/Faunus, a combination of gods which he posits created a new deity, around which the remaining pagans, those refusing to convert to Christianity, rallied and that this deity provided the prototype for later Christian conceptions of the devil, and his worshippers were cast by the Church as witches.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1908's \"The Wind in the Willows\" by Kenneth Grahame, in Chapter 7, \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\", Ratty and Mole meet a mystical horned being, powerful, fearsome and kind. Grahame's work was a significant part of the cultural milieu which stripped the Greek god Pan of his cultural identity in favor of an unnamed, generic horned deity which led to Murray's thesis of historical origins.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Outside of works that predate the publication of Murray's thesis, horned god motifs and characters appear in fantasy literature that draws upon her work and that of her followers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the novel \"Childhood's End\" (1953) by Arthur C. Clarke, all humans have a collective premonition, also described as a memory of the future, of horned aliens which arrive to usher in a new phase of human evolution. The collective subconscious image of the horned aliens is what accounts for mankind's image of the devil or Satan. This theme is also explored in the \"Doctor Who\" story \"The D\u00e6mons\" in 1971, where the local superstitions around a landmark known as The Devil's Hump prove to be based on reality, as aliens from the planet D\u00e6mos have been affecting man's progress over the millennia and the Hump actually contains a spacecraft. The only D\u00e6mon to appear is a classic interpretation of a horned satyr-like being with hooves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the critically acclaimed and influential 1950s TV series created by Nigel Kneale, \"Quatermass and the Pit\", depictions of supernatural horned entities, with specific reference to prehistoric cave-art and shamanistic horned head-dress are revealed to be a \"race-memory\" of psychic Martian grasshoppers, manifested at the climax of the film by a fiery horned god.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Murray's theories has been seen to have had influence on \"The Blood on Satan's Claw\" (1971), where a murderous female-led cult worships a horned deity named Behemoth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Marion Zimmer Bradley, who acknowledges the influence of Murray, uses the figure of the \"horned god\" in her feminist fantasy transformation of Arthurian myth, \"Mists of Avalon\" (1984), and portrays ritualistic incest between King Arthur as the representative of the horned god and his sister Morgaine as the \"spring maiden\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the popular video game \"\", its expansion \"\" has a plot enemy known as Hircine, the Daedric god of the Hunt, who appears as a horned man with the face of a deer skull. He condemned his \"hounds\" (werewolves) to walk the mortal ground during the Bloodmoon until a champion defeats him or Bloodmoon falls. When in combat, Hircine appears as a horned wolf or bear.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 1992 \"Discworld\" novel \"Lords and Ladies\", by Terry Pratchett, features a King of the Elves who is strongly reminiscent of the Horned God. Although not worshipped by the witches who are the heroines of the book (indeed, quite the reverse), they temporarily ally themselves with him out of necessity.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Haggis", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Haggis is a savoury pudding containing sheep's pluck (heart, liver, and lungs); minced with onion, oatmeal, suet, spices, and salt, mixed with stock, and cooked while traditionally encased in the animal's stomach though now often in an artificial casing instead. According to the 2001 English edition of the \"Larousse Gastronomique\": \"Although its description is not immediately appealing, haggis has an excellent nutty texture and delicious savoury flavour\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is believed that food similar to haggis (though not so named)\u2014perishable offal quickly cooked inside an animal's stomach, all conveniently available after a hunt\u2014was eaten from ancient times.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the name \"hagws\" or \"hagese\" was first recorded in England c. 1430, the dish is considered traditionally of Scottish origin. It is even the national dish, as a result of Scots poet Robert Burns' poem \"Address to a Haggis\" of 1787. Haggis is traditionally served with \"neeps and tatties\", boiled and mashed separately, and a dram (a glass of Scotch whisky), especially as the main course of a Burns Supper.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the dish called in england ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Haggis is popularly assumed to be of Scottish origin, but many countries have produced similar dishes, albeit with different names. However, the recipes as known and standardised now are distinctly Scottish. The first known written recipes for a dish of the name, made with offal and herbs, are as \"hagese\", in the verse cookbook \"Liber Cure Cocorum\" dating from around 1430 in Lancashire, north west England, and, as \"hagws of a schepe\" from an English cookbook also of c. 1430.", "qas": [{"question": "what is haggis ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "<poem style=\"margin-left:24px;\">\n\"For hagese\"'.\n\u00dee hert of schepe, \u00fee nere \u00feou take,\n\u00deo bowel noght \u00feou shalle forsake,\nOn \u00fee turbilen made, and boyled wele,\nHacke alle togeder with gode persole,\n</poem>", "qas": [{"question": "what does style= mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Scottish poem, \"Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy\", which is dated before 1520 (the generally accepted date prior to the death of William Dunbar, one of the composers), refers to 'haggeis'.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the scottish poem ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "<poem style=\"margin-left:24px;\">\nThy fowll front had, and he that Bartilmo flaid;\nThe gallowis gaipis eftir thy graceles gruntill,\nAs thow wald for ane haggeis, hungry gled.\n</poem>", "qas": [{"question": "</poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem> </poem>", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 6, 1)"}]}, {"context": "An early printed recipe for haggis appears in 1615 in \"The English Huswife\" by Gervase Markham. It contains a section entitled \"Skill in Oate meale\".\nFood writer Alan Davidson suggests that the ancient Romans were the first known to have made products of the haggis type. Haggis was \"born of necessity, as a way to utilize the least expensive cuts of meat and the innards as well\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Clarissa Dickson Wright says that it \"came to Scotland in a longship [i.e., from Scandinavia] even before Scotland was a single nation.\" She cites etymologist Walter William Skeat as further suggestion of possible Scandinavian origins: Skeat claimed that the \"hag\u2013\" element of the word is derived from the Old Norse \"haggw\" or the Old Icelandic \"hoggva\" (\"h\u00f6ggva\" meaning 'to chop' in modern Icelandic), Modern Scots \"hag\", meaning 'to hew' or strike with a sharp weapon, relating to the chopped-up contents of the dish.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In her book, \"The Haggis: A Little History\", Dickson Wright suggests that haggis was invented as a way of cooking quick-spoiling offal near the site of a hunt, without the need to carry along an additional cooking vessel. The liver and kidneys could be grilled directly over a fire, but this treatment was unsuitable for the stomach, intestines, or lungs. Chopping up the lungs and stuffing the stomach with them and whatever fillers might have been on hand, then boiling the assembly \u2014 probably in a vessel made from the animal's hide \u2014 was one way to make sure these parts were not wasted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the absence of hard facts as to haggis' origins, popular folklore has provided some notions. One is that the dish originates from the days of the old Scottish cattle drovers. When the men left the Highlands to drive their cattle to market in Edinburgh, the women would prepare rations for them to eat during the long journey down through the glens. They used the ingredients that were most readily available in their homes and conveniently packaged them in a sheep's stomach allowing for easy transportation during the journey. Other speculations have been based on Scottish slaughtering practices. When a chieftain or laird required an animal to be slaughtered for meat (whether sheep or cattle) the workmen were allowed to keep the offal as their share.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A joke sometimes maintained is that a haggis is a small Scottish animal with longer legs on one side, so that it can run around the steep hills of the Scottish highlands without falling over. According to one poll, 33 percent of American visitors to Scotland believed haggis to be an animal.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a small ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Haggis is traditionally served as part of the Burns supper on or near January 25, the birthday of Scotland's national poet Robert Burns. Burns wrote the poem \"\", which starts \"Fair fa' your honest, sonsie face, Great chieftain o' the puddin-race!\" In Burns's lifetime haggis was a common dish of the poor as it was nourishing yet very cheap, being made from leftover parts of sheep otherwise discarded.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Haggis is widely available in supermarkets in Scotland all year, with cheaper brands normally packed in artificial casings, rather than stomachs. Sometimes haggis is sold in tins or a container which can be cooked in a microwave or conventional oven. Some commercial haggis is largely made from pig, rather than sheep, offal. Kosher haggis, not only pork-free but fully conformant to Jewish dietary laws, is produced.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Haggis is often served in Scottish fast-food establishments, in the shape of a large sausage and deep fried in batter. Together with chips, this comprises a \"haggis supper\". A \"haggis burger\" is a patty of fried haggis served on a bun. A \"haggis pakora\" is another deep fried variant, available in some Indian restaurants in Scotland. Haggis can be used as an ingredient in other dishes, even pizza, rather than the main part of a dish.", "qas": [{"question": "what can be used as an adjective in other dishes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 14, 4)"}]}, {"context": "A traditional haggis recipe describes haggis as \"sheep's 'pluck' (heart, liver, and lungs), minced with onion, oatmeal, suet, spices, and salt, mixed with stock, and traditionally encased in the animal's stomach and boiled\". Ingredients are sheep stomach, heart and lungs of one lamb, onions, oatmeal, salt, pepper, stock, and water, with optional ingredients dried coriander, cinnamon, and nutmeg. It can be boiled, baked, or deep fried.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 1960s various Scottish shops and manufacturers have made what they call vegetarian haggis, substituting various pulses, nuts and vegetables for the meat. There are also recipes for homemade vegetarian haggis. Oats and barley may be included as may different types of lentils, split peas, aduki beans, kidney beans, borlotti beans, peanuts, other nuts and mushrooms, onions, and carrots.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Haggis remains popular with Scottish immigrants in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, owing to the strong influence of Scottish culture, especially for Burns Suppers. It can easily be made in any country, but is sometimes imported from Scotland. A recipe from the Canadian province of New Brunswick uses pork and bakes it in a loaf pan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1971 it became illegal to import haggis into the US from the UK due to a ban on food containing sheep lung, which constitutes 10 \u2013 15 percent of the traditional recipe. The ban encompasses all lungs, as fluids such as stomach acid and phlegm may enter the lung during slaughter. The situation was further complicated in 1989 when all UK beef and lamb was banned from importation to the US due to a BSE crisis. In 2010 a spokeswoman for the US Department of Agriculture stated that they were reviewing the ban on beef and lamb products, but that the ban on food containing sheep lung would remain in force.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As haggis cannot be exported to the United States, it is instead made there, sometimes by Scottish companies. One such uses what is stated to be the same 150 year-old recipe and ingredients as in Scotland, except that sheep lung is not used, and the casing is always artificial.", "qas": [{"question": "what is exported to the united states ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hank Aaron", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Henry Louis Aaron (born February 5, 1934), nicknamed \"Hammer\" or \"Hammerin' Hank\", is a retired American Major League Baseball (MLB) right fielder who serves as the senior vice president of the Atlanta Braves. He played 21 seasons for the Milwaukee/Atlanta Braves in the National League (NL) and two seasons for the Milwaukee Brewers in the American League (AL), from 1954 through 1976. Aaron held the MLB record for career home runs for 33 years, and he still holds several MLB offensive records. He hit 24 or more home runs every year from 1955 through 1973, and is one of only two players to hit 30 or more home runs in a season at least fifteen times. In 1999, \"The Sporting News\" ranked Aaron fifth on its \"100 Greatest Baseball Players\" list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron was born and raised in and around Mobile, Alabama. Aaron had seven siblings, including Tommie Aaron, who later played in MLB with him. He appeared briefly in the Negro American League and in minor league baseball before starting his major league career. By his final MLB season, Aaron was the last Negro league baseball player on a major league roster.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron played the vast majority of his MLB games in right field, though he appeared at several other infield and outfield positions. In his last two seasons, he was primarily a designated hitter. Aaron was an NL All-Star for 20 seasons and an AL All-Star for 1 season, from 1955 through 1975. Aaron holds the record for the most seasons as an All-Star and the most All-Star Game selections (25), and is tied with Willie Mays and Stan Musial for the most All-Star Games played (24). He was a Gold Glove winner for three seasons. In 1957, he was the NL Most Valuable Player (MVP) when the Milwaukee Braves won the World Series. He won the NL Player of the Month award in May 1958 and June 1967. Aaron holds the MLB records for the most career runs batted in (RBI) (2,297), extra base hits (1,477), and total bases (6,856). Aaron is also in the top five for career hits (3,771) and runs (2,174). He is one of only four players to have at least seventeen seasons with 150 or more hits. Aaron is in second place in home runs (755) and at-bats (12,364), and in third place in games played (3,298). At the time of his retirement, Aaron held most of the game's key career power hitting records.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since his retirement, Aaron has held front office roles with the Atlanta Braves. He was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1982. In 1999, MLB introduced the Hank Aaron Award to recognize the top offensive players in each league. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2002. He was named a 2010 Georgia Trustee by the Georgia Historical Society in recognition of accomplishments that reflect the ideals of Georgia's founders. Aaron resides near Atlanta.", "qas": [{"question": "where is anthony located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 3, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Aaron was born in Mobile, Alabama to Herbert Aaron, Sr. and Estella Aaron. He had seven siblings. Tommie Aaron, one of his brothers, also went on to play Major League Baseball. By the time Aaron retired, he and his brother held the record for most career home runs by a pair of siblings (768). They were also the first siblings to appear in a League Championship Series as teammates.", "qas": [{"question": "where was anthony born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While he was born in a section of Mobile referred to as \"Down the Bay\", he spent most of his youth in Toulminville. Aaron grew up in a poor family. His family could not afford baseball equipment, so he practiced by hitting bottle caps with sticks. He would create his own bats and balls out of materials he found on the streets. His boyhood idol was baseball star Jackie Robinson. Aaron attended Central High School as a freshman and a sophomore. Like most high schools they did not have organized baseball, and so he played outfield and third base for the Mobile Black Bears, a semipro team. Aaron was a member of the Boy Scouts of America.", "qas": [{"question": "who was a member of the boy scouts of america ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 5, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Although he batted cross-handed (i.e., as a right-handed hitter, with his left hand above his right), Aaron established himself as a power hitter. As a result, in 1949, at the age of fifteen, Aaron had his first tryout with an MLB franchise, the Brooklyn Dodgers; however, he did not make the team. After this, Aaron returned to school to finish his secondary education, attending the Josephine Allen Institute, a private high school in Alabama. During his junior year, Aaron first joined the Pritchett Athletics, followed by the Mobile Black Bears, an independent Negro league team. While on the Bears, Aaron earned $3 per game ($ today), which was a dollar more than he got while on the Athletics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On November 20, 1951, baseball scout Ed Scott signed Aaron to a contract on behalf of the Indianapolis Clowns of the Negro American League where he played three months.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He started play as a , , shortstop, and earned $200 per month. As a result of his standout play with the Indianapolis Clowns, Aaron received two offers from MLB teams via telegram, one from the New York Giants and the other from the Boston Braves. Years later, Aaron remembered:", "qas": [{"question": "who was brian remembered: ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "I had the Giants' contract in my hand. But the Braves offered fifty dollars a month more. That's the only thing that kept Willie Mays and me from being teammates\u00a0\u2013 fifty dollars.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While with the Clowns he experienced some overt racism. His team was in Washington, D.C.", "qas": []}, {"context": "We had breakfast while we were waiting for the rain to stop, and I can still envision sitting with the Clowns in a restaurant behind Griffith Stadium and hearing them break all the plates in the kitchen after we finished eating. What a horrible sound. Even as a kid, the irony of it hit me: here we were in the capital in the land of freedom and equality, and they had to destroy the plates that had touched the forks that had been in the mouths of black men. If dogs had eaten off those plates, they'd have washed them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Howe Sports Bureau credits Aaron with a .366 batting average in 26 official Negro league games, with 5 home runs, 33 runs batted in (RBI), 41 hits, and 9 stolen bases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Braves purchased Aaron from the Clowns for $10,000, which GM John Quinn thought was a steal as he stated that he felt that Aaron was a $100,000 property. On June 12, 1952, Aaron signed with Braves' scout Dewey Griggs. During this time, he picked up the nickname 'pork chops' because it \"was the only thing I knew to order off the menu.\" A teammate later said, \"the man ate pork chops three meals a day, two for breakfast.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Braves assigned Aaron to the Eau Claire Bears, the Braves' Northern League Class-C farm team. The 1952 season proved to be very beneficial for Aaron. Playing in the infield, Aaron continued to develop as a ballplayer and made the Northern League's All-Star team. He broke his habit of hitting cross-handed and adopted the standard hitting technique. By the end of the season, he had performed so well that the league made him the unanimous choice for Rookie of the Year. Although he appeared in just 87 games, he scored 89 runs, had 116 hits, nine home runs, and 61 RBI. In addition, Aaron hit for a .336 batting average. During his minor league experience, he was very homesick and faced constant racism, but his brother, Herbert Jr., told him not to give up the opportunity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1953, the Braves promoted him to the Jacksonville Braves, their Class-A affiliate in the South Atlantic League. Helped by Aaron's performance, the Braves won the league championship that year. Aaron led the league in runs (115), hits (208), doubles (36), RBI (125), total bases (338), and batting average (.362). He won the league's Most Valuable Player Award. and had such a dominant year that one sportswriter was prompted to say, \"Henry Aaron led the league in everything except hotel accommodations.\" Aaron's time with the Braves did not come without problems. He was one of the first African Americans to play in the league. The 1950s were a period of racial segregation in parts of the United States, especially the southeastern portion of the country. When Aaron traveled around Jacksonville, Florida, and the surrounding areas, he was often separated from his team because of Jim Crow laws. In most circumstances, the team was responsible for arranging housing and meals for its players, but Aaron often had to make his own arrangements. The Braves' manager, Ben Geraghty, tried his best to help Aaron on and off the field. Former Braves minor league player and sportswriter Pat Jordan said, \"Aaron gave [Geraghty] much of the credit for his own swift rise to stardom.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "That same year, Aaron met his future wife, Barbara Lucas. The night they met, Lucas decided to attend the Braves' game. Aaron singled, doubled, and hit a home run in the game. On October 6, Aaron and Lucas married. In 1958, Aaron's wife noted that during the offseason he liked \"to sit and watch those shooting westerns.\" He also enjoyed cooking and fishing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron spent the winter of 1953 playing in Puerto Rico. Mickey Owen, the team's manager, helped Aaron with his batting stance. Up to that time, Aaron hit most pitches to left field or center field, but after working with Owen, Aaron was able to hit the ball more effectively all over the field. During his stay in Puerto Rico, Owen also helped Aaron to transition from second baseman to outfielder. Aaron had not played well at second base, but Owen had noted that Aaron could catch fly balls and throw the ball well from the outfield to the infield.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The stint in Puerto Rico also allowed Aaron to avoid being drafted into military service. Though the Korean War was over, people were still being drafted. The Braves were able to speak to the draft board, making the case that Aaron could be the player to integrate the Southern Association the following season with the Atlanta Crackers. The board appears to have been convinced, as Aaron was not drafted.", "qas": [{"question": "who was not drafted by the board ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 18, 3)"}]}, {"context": "In 1954, Aaron attended spring training with the major league club. Although he was on the roster of its farm club, Milwaukee manager Charley Grimm later stated, \"From the start, he did so well I knew we were going to have to carry him.\" On March 13, 1954, Milwaukee Braves left fielder Bobby Thomson fractured his ankle while sliding into second base during a spring training game. The next day, Aaron made his first spring training start for the Braves' major league team, playing in left field and hitting a home run. This led Hank Aaron to a major league contract, signed on the final day of spring training, and a Braves uniform with the number five. On April 13, Aaron made his major league debut and was hitless in five at-bats against the Cincinnati Reds' left-hander Joe Nuxhall. In the same game, Eddie Mathews hit two home runs, the first of a record 863 home runs the pair would hit as teammates. On April 15, Aaron collected his first major league hit, a double off Cardinals' pitcher Vic Raschi. Aaron hit his first major league home run on April 23, also off Raschi. Over the next 122 games, Aaron batted .280 with thirteen homers before he suffered a fractured ankle on September 5. He then changed his number to 44, which would turn out to look like a \"lucky number\" for the slugger. Aaron would hit 44 home runs in four different seasons, and he hit his record-breaking 715th career home run off Dodgers pitcher Al Downing, who coincidentally also wore number 44.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At this point, Aaron was known to family and friends primarily as \"Henry.\" Braves' public relations director Don Davidson, observing Aaron's quiet, reserved nature, began referring to him publicly as \"Hank\" in order to suggest more accessibility. The nickname quickly gained currency, but \"Henry\" continued to be cited frequently in the media, both sometimes appearing in the same article, and Aaron would answer to either one. During his rookie year, his other well-known nicknames, \"Hammerin' Hank\" (by teammates) and \"Bad Henry\" (by opposing pitchers) are reported to have arisen.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron hit .314 with 27 home runs and 106 RBI, in 1955. He was named to the NL All-Star roster for the first time; it was the first of a record 21 All-Star selections and first of a record 25 All-Star Game appearances. In 1956, Aaron hit .328 and captured the first of two NL batting titles. He was also named \"The Sporting News\" NL Player of the Year. In 1957, Aaron won his only NL MVP Award, as he had his first brush with the triple crown. He batted .322, placing third, and led the league in home runs and runs batted in. On September 23, 1957, Aaron hit a two-run game-ending home run in Milwaukee, clinching the pennant for the Braves and being carried off the field by his teammates. Milwaukee went on to win the World Series against the New York Yankees, the defending champions. Aaron did his part by hitting .393 with three homers and seven RBI. On December 15, 1957, his wife gave birth to twins. Two days later, one of the children died. In 1958, Aaron hit .326, with 30 home runs and 95 RBI. He led the Braves to another pennant, but this time they lost a seven-game World Series to the Yankees. Aaron finished third in the MVP race and he received his first of three Gold Glove Awards. During the next several years, Aaron had some of his best games and best seasons as a major league player. On June 21, 1959, against the San Francisco Giants, he hit three two-run home runs. It was the only time in his career that he hit three home runs in a game.", "qas": [{"question": "how many home runs did bruce hit ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1963, Aaron nearly won the triple crown. He led the league with 44 home runs and 130 RBI and finished third in batting average. In that season, Aaron became the third player to steal 30 bases and hit 30 home runs in a single season. Despite that, he again finished third in the MVP voting. The Braves moved from Milwaukee to Atlanta after the 1965 season. On May 10, 1967, he hit an inside-the-park home run against Jim Bunning in Philadelphia. It was his only inside-the-park home run of his career. In 1968, Aaron was the first Atlanta Braves player to hit his 500th career home run, and in 1970, he was the first Atlanta Brave to reach 3,000 career hits.", "qas": [{"question": "who won the super crown ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 22, 0)"}, {"question": "who was the first team to hit his 500th career ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 22, 7)"}]}, {"context": "During his days in Atlanta, Aaron reached a number of milestones; he was only the eighth player ever to hit 500 career home runs, with his 500th coming against Mike McCormick of the San Francisco Giants on July 14, 1968\u2014exactly one year after former Milwaukee Braves teammate Eddie Mathews had hit his 500th. Aaron was, at the time, the second-youngest player to reach that plateau. On July 31, 1969, Aaron hit his 537th home run, passing Mickey Mantle's total; this moved Aaron into third place on the career home run list, after Willie Mays and Babe Ruth. At the end of the 1969 season, Aaron again finished third in the MVP voting.", "qas": [{"question": "who finished third in the mvp vote ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 23, 3)"}]}, {"context": "In 1970, Aaron reached two more career milestones. On May 17, Aaron collected his 3,000th hit, in a game against the Cincinnati Reds, the team against which he played in his first major-league game. Aaron established the record for most seasons with thirty or more home runs in the National League. On April 27, 1971, Aaron hit his 600th career home run, the third major league player ever to do so. On July 13, Aaron hit a home run in the All-Star Game (played at Detroit's Tiger Stadium) for the first time. He hit his 40th home run of the season against the Giants' Jerry Johnson on August 10, which established a National League record for most seasons with 40 or more home runs (seven). At age 37, he hit a career-high 47 home runs during the season (along with a career-high .669 slugging percentage) and finished third in MVP voting for the sixth time. During the strike-shortened season of 1972, Aaron tied and then surpassed Willie Mays for second place on the career home run list. Aaron also knocked in the 2,000th run of his career and hit a home run in the first All-Star game played in Atlanta. As the year came to a close, Aaron broke Stan Musial's major-league record for total bases (6,134). Aaron finished the season with 673 home runs.", "qas": [{"question": "how many home runs did steve finish ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 24, 10)"}, {"question": "who was the author of the 1970, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Aaron himself downplayed the \"chase\" to surpass Babe Ruth, while baseball enthusiasts and the national media grew increasingly excited as he closed in on the 714 career home runs record. Aaron received thousands of letters every week during the summer of 1973, including hate mail; the Braves ended up hiring a secretary to help him sort through it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron (then age 39) hit 40 home runs in 392 at-bats, ending the 1973 season one home run short of the record. He hit home run number 713 on September 29, 1973, and with one day remaining in the season, many expected him to tie the record. But in his final game that year, playing against the Houston Astros (managed by Leo Durocher, who had once roomed with Babe Ruth), he was unable to achieve this. After the game, Aaron stated that his only fear was that he might not live to see the 1974 season.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the first home run ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He was the recipient of death threats during the 1973\u20131974 offseason and a large assortment of hate mail from people who did not want to see Aaron break Ruth's nearly sacrosanct home run record. The threats extended to those providing positive press coverage of Aaron. Lewis Grizzard, then sports editor of the \"Atlanta Journal\", reported receiving numerous phone calls calling journalists \"nigger lovers\" for covering Aaron's chase. While preparing the massive coverage of the home run record, he quietly had an obituary written, afraid that Aaron might be murdered.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Sports Illustrated\" pointedly summarized the racist vitriol that Aaron was forced to endure:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Is this to be the year in which Aaron, at the age of thirty-nine, takes a moon walk above one of the most hallowed individual records in American sport ... ? Or will it be remembered as the season in which Aaron, the most dignified of athletes, was besieged with hate mail and trapped by the cobwebs and goblins that lurk in baseball's attic?", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the end of the 1973 season, Aaron received a plaque from the US Postal Service for receiving more mail (930,000 pieces) than any person excluding politicians. Aaron received an outpouring of public support in response to the bigotry. Newspaper cartoonist Charles Schulz created a series of \"Peanuts\" strips printed in August 1973 in which Snoopy attempts to break the Ruth record, only to be besieged with hate mail. Lucy says in the August 11 strip, \"Hank Aaron is a great player ... but you! If you break Babe Ruth's record, it'll be a disgrace!\" Coincidentally, Snoopy was only one home run short of tying the record (and finished the season as such when Charlie Brown got picked off during Snoopy's last at-bat), and as it turned out, Aaron finished the 1973 season one home run short of Ruth. Babe Ruth's widow, Claire Hodgson, denounced the racism and declared that her husband would have enthusiastically cheered Aaron's attempt at the record. As the 1974 season began, Aaron's pursuit of the record caused a small controversy. The Braves opened the season on the road in Cincinnati with a three-game series against the Cincinnati Reds. Braves management wanted him to break the record in Atlanta, and were therefore going to have Aaron sit out the first three games of the season. But Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn ruled that he had to play two games in the first series. He played two out of three, tying Babe Ruth's record, April 4, 1974, in his very first at bat\u2014on his first swing of the season\u2014off Reds pitcher Jack Billingham, but did not hit another home run in the series.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Braves returned to Atlanta, and on April 8, 1974, a crowd of 53,775 people showed up for the game\u2014a Braves attendance record. The game was also broadcast nationally on NBC. In the fourth inning, Aaron hit home run number 715 off Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Al Downing. Although Dodgers outfielder Bill Buckner nearly went over the outfield wall trying to catch it, the ball landed in the Braves' bullpen, where relief pitcher Tom House caught it. While cannons were fired in celebration, two college students sprinted onto the field and jogged alongside Aaron for part of his circuit around the bases, temporarily startling him. A very youthful Craig Sager actually interviewed Aaron between third and home for a television station, WXLT (now WWSB-Channel 40) in Sarasota. As the fans cheered wildly, Aaron's parents ran onto the field as well. Braves announcer Milo Hamilton, calling the game on WSB radio, described the scene as Aaron broke the record: \"Henry Aaron, in the second inning walked and scored. He's sittin' on 714. Here's the pitch by Downing. Swinging. There's a drive into left-center field. That ball is gonna be-eee ... Outta here! It's gone! It's 715! There's a new home run champion of all time, and it's Henry Aaron! The fireworks are going. Henry Aaron is coming around third. His teammates are at home plate. And listen to this crowd!\" Meanwhile, Dodgers broadcaster Vin Scully addressed the racial tension\u2014or apparent lack thereof\u2014in his call of the home run: \"What a marvelous moment for baseball; what a marvelous moment for Atlanta and the state of Georgia; what a marvelous moment for the country and the world. A black man is getting a standing ovation in the Deep South for breaking a record of an all-time baseball idol. And it is a great moment for all of us, and particularly for Henry Aaron. ... And for the first time in a long time, that poker face in Aaron shows the tremendous strain and relief of what it must have been like to live with for the past several months.\" On October 2, 1974, Aaron hit his 733rd home run in his last at bat as a Braves player. Thirty days later, after Aaron decided not to retire, the Braves traded him to the Milwaukee Brewers for Roger Alexander and Dave May. The trade re-united Aaron with former teammate Del Crandall, who was now managing the Brewers. On May 1, 1975, Aaron broke baseball's all-time RBI record, previously held by Ruth with 2,213. That year, he also played in his last and 24th All-Star Game (25th All-Star Game selection); he lined out to Dave Concepci\u00f3n as a pinch-hitter in the second inning. This All-Star Game, like the first one he played in 1955, was before a home crowd at Milwaukee County Stadium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron hit his 755th and final home run on July 20, 1976, at Milwaukee County Stadium off Dick Drago of the California Angels, which stood as the MLB career home run record until it was broken in 2007 by Barry Bonds. Over the course of his record-breaking 23-year career, Aaron had a batting average of .305 with 163 hits a season, while hitting an average of just over 32 home runs a year and knocking home 99 runs batted in (RBIs) a year. He had 100+ RBIs in a season 15 times, including a record 13 in a row.\nAfter the 1976 season, Aaron rejoined the Braves as an executive. On August 1, 1982, he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, having received votes on 97.8 percent of the ballots, second only to Ty Cobb, who had received votes on 98.2% of the ballot in the inaugural 1936 Hall of Fame election. Aaron was then named the Braves' vice president and director of player development. This made him one of the first minorities in Major League Baseball upper-level management.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since December 1980, he has served as senior vice president and assistant to the Braves' president. He is the corporate vice president of community relations for TBS, a member of the company's board of directors and the vice president of business development for The Airport Network. On January 21, 2007, Major League Baseball announced the sale of the Atlanta Braves. In that announcement, Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig also announced that Aaron would be playing a major role in the management of Braves, forming programs through major league baseball that will encourage the influx of minorities into baseball. Aaron founded the Hank Aaron Rookie League program.", "qas": [{"question": "who founded the scott rookie league program ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 33, 4)"}]}, {"context": "His autobiography, \"I Had a Hammer\" was published in 1990. The book's title is a play on his nickname, \"The Hammer\" or \"Hammerin' Hank\", and the title of the folk song \"If I Had a Hammer\". Aaron now owns Hank Aaron BMW of south Atlanta in Union City, Georgia, where he gives an autographed baseball with every car sold. Aaron also owns Mini, Land Rover, Toyota, Hyundai and Honda dealerships throughout Georgia, as part of the Hank Aaron Automotive Group. Aaron sold all but the Toyota dealership in McDonough in 2007. Additionally, Aaron owns a chain of 30 restaurants around the country. During the 2006 season, San Francisco Giants slugger Barry Bonds passed Babe Ruth and moved into second place on the all-time home run list, attracting growing media coverage as he drew closer to Aaron's record. Playing off the intense interest in their perceived rivalry, Aaron and Bonds made a television commercial that aired during Super Bowl XLI, shortly before the start of the 2007 baseball season, in which Aaron jokingly tried to persuade Bonds to retire before breaking the record. As Bonds began to close in on the record during the 2007 season, Aaron let it be known that, although he recognized Bonds' achievements, he would not be present when Bonds broke the record. There was considerable speculation that this was a snubbing of Bonds based on the widespread belief that Bonds had used performance-enhancing drugs and steroids to aid his achievement. However, some observers looked back on Aaron's personal history, pointing out that he had downplayed his own breaking of Babe Ruth's all-time record and suggesting that Aaron was simply treating Bonds in a similar fashion. In a later interview with Atlanta sportscasting personality Chris Dimino, Aaron made it clear that his reluctance to attend any celebration of a new home run record was based upon his personal conviction that baseball is not about breaking records, but simply playing to the best of one's potential. After Bonds hit his record-breaking 756th home run on August 7, 2007, Aaron made a surprise appearance on the JumboTron video screen at AT&T Park in San Francisco to congratulate Bonds on his accomplishment:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron lives in the Atlanta area. In July 2013, media reported that his home was burglarized. Jewelry and two BMW vehicles were stolen. The cars were later recovered.", "qas": [{"question": "where did steve live live ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Aaron was awarded the Spingarn Medal in 1976, from the NAACP.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1982, Aaron was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame during his first year of eligibility. In 1988 Aaron was inducted into the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame for his time spent on the Milwaukee Braves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1999, MLB created the Hank Aaron Award, to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Aaron's surpassing of Babe Ruth's career home run mark of 714 home runs and to honor Aaron's contributions to baseball. The award is given annually to the baseball hitters voted the most effective in each respective league. That same year, baseball fans named Aaron to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Hank Aaron on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When the city of Atlanta was converting Centennial Olympic Stadium into a new baseball stadium, many local residents hoped the stadium would be named for Hank Aaron. When the stadium was instead named Turner Field (after Atlanta Braves owner Ted Turner), a section of Capitol Avenue running past the stadium was renamed Hank Aaron Drive. The stadium's street number is 755, after Aaron's total number of home runs; the 755 street number was retained for Turner Field's replacement, SunTrust Park. In April 1997, a new baseball facility for the AA Mobile Bay Bears constructed in Aaron's hometown of Mobile, Alabama was named Hank Aaron Stadium. Georgia State University acquired Turner Field, since rebuilt as Georgia State Stadium, in 2017, and university officials plan to build a new baseball park on the former Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium site, incorporating the left field wall where Aaron hit his record-breaking home run.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On February 5, 1999, at his 65th birthday celebration, Major League Baseball announced the introduction of the Hank Aaron Award. The award honors the best overall offensive performer in the American and National League. It was the first major award to be introduced in more than thirty years and had the distinction of being the first award named after a player who was still alive. Later that year, he ranked fifth on \"The Sporting News\" list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In July 2000 and again in July 2002, Aaron threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, played at Turner Field and Miller Park, respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On January 8, 2001, Hank Aaron was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton. He received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, from President George W. Bush in June 2002.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2001, a recreational trail in Milwaukee connecting Miller Park with Lake Michigan along the Menomonee River was dedicated as the \"Hank Aaron State Trail\". Hank Aaron was on hand for the dedication. Aaron is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2002, Aaron was honored with the \"Lombardi Award of Excellence\" from the Vince Lombardi Cancer Foundation. The award was created to honor Coach Lombardi's legacy, and is awarded annually to an individual who exemplifies the spirit of the Coach.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aaron dedicated the new exhibit \"Hank Aaron-Chasing the Dream\" at the Baseball Hall of Fame on April 25, 2009. Statues of Aaron stand outside the front entrance of both Turner Field and Miller Park. There is also a statue of him as an eighteen-year-old shortstop outside Carson Park in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, where he played his first season in the Braves' minor league system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was named a 2010 Georgia Trustee by the Georgia Historical Society, in conjunction with the Governor of Georgia, to recognize accomplishments and community service that reflect the ideals of the founding body of Trustees, which governed the Georgia colony from 1732 to 1752. Aaron received the Order of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Rosette in January 2016.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Holy Grail", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Holy Grail is a treasure that serves as an important motif in Arthurian literature. Different traditions describe it as a cup, dish or stone with miraculous powers that provide happiness, eternal youth or sustenance in infinite abundance, often in the custody of the Fisher King. The term \"holy grail\" is often used to denote an elusive object or goal that is sought after for its great significance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A \"grail\", wondrous but not explicitly holy, first appears in \"Perceval, le Conte du Graal\", an unfinished romance written by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes around 1190. Here, Chr\u00e9tien's story attracted many continuators, translators and interpreters in the later 12th and early 13th centuries, including Wolfram von Eschenbach, who perceived the Grail as a stone. In the late 12th century, Robert de Boron wrote in \"Joseph d'Arimathie\" that the Grail was Jesus's vessel from the Last Supper, which Joseph of Arimathea used to catch Christ's blood at the Crucifixion. Thereafter, the Holy Grail became interwoven with the legend of the Holy Chalice, the Last Supper cup, a theme continued in works such as the Vulgate Cycle, the Post-Vulgate Cycle, and \"Le Morte d'Arthur\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word \"graal\", as it is earliest spelled, comes from Old French \"graal\" or \"greal\", cognate with Old Proven\u00e7al \"grazal\" and Old Catalan \"gresal\", meaning \"a cup or bowl of earth, wood, or metal\" (or other various types of vessels in different Occitan dialects). The most commonly accepted etymology derives it from Latin \"gradalis\" or \"gradale\" via an earlier form, \"cratalis\", a derivative of \"crater\" or \"cratus\", which was, in turn, borrowed from Greek \"krater\" (\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1, a large wine-mixing vessel). Alternative suggestions include a derivative of \"cratis\", a name for a type of woven basket that came to refer to a dish, or a derivative of Latin \"gradus\" meaning \"'by degree', 'by stages', applied to a dish brought to the table in different stages or services during a meal\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 15th century, English writer John Hardyng invented a fanciful new etymology for Old French \"san-graal\" (or \"san-gr\u00e9al\"), meaning \"Holy Grail\", by parsing it as \"sang real\", meaning \"royal blood\". This etymology was used by some later medieval British writers such as Thomas Malory, and became prominent in the conspiracy theory developed in the book \"The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail\", in which \"sang real\" refers to the Jesus bloodline.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Grail literature divides into two classes. The first concerns King Arthur's knights visiting the Grail castle or questing after the object. The second concerns the Grail's history in the time of Joseph of Arimathea.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the second risk of the grail's history ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 4, 2)"}, {"question": "how many classes does stephen literature divide into ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The nine works from the first group are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Of the second group there are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Grail was considered a bowl or dish when first described by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes. There, it is a processional salver, a tray, used to serve at a feast. H\u00e9linand of Froidmont described a grail as a \"wide and deep saucer\" (\"scutella lata et aliquantulum profunda\"); other authors had their own ideas. Robert de Boron portrayed it as the vessel of the Last Supper. \"Peredur son of Efrawg\" had no Grail as such, presenting the hero instead with a platter containing his kinsman's bloody, severed head.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Grail is first featured in \"Perceval, le Conte du Graal\" (\"The Story of the Grail\") by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes, who claims he was working from a source book given to him by his patron, Count Philip of Flanders. In this incomplete poem, dated sometime between 1180 and 1191, the object has not yet acquired the implications of holiness it would have in later works. While dining in the magical abode of the Fisher King, Perceval witnesses a wondrous procession in which youths carry magnificent objects from one chamber to another, passing before him at each course of the meal. First comes a young man carrying a bleeding lance, then two boys carrying candelabras. Finally, a beautiful young girl emerges bearing an elaborately decorated \"graal\", or \"grail\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chr\u00e9tien refers to this object not as \"The Grail\" but as \"a grail\" (\"un graal\"), showing the word was used, in its earliest literary context, as a common noun. For Chr\u00e9tien a grail was a wide, somewhat deep dish or bowl, interesting because it contained not a pike, salmon, or lamprey, as the audience may have expected for such a container, but a single Mass wafer which provided sustenance for the Fisher King's crippled father. Perceval, who had been warned against talking too much, remains silent through all of this and wakes up the next morning alone. He later learns that if he had asked the appropriate questions about what he saw, he would have healed his maimed host, much to his honour. The story of the Wounded King's mystical fasting is not unique; several saints were said to have lived without food besides communion, for instance Saint Catherine of Genoa. This may imply that Chr\u00e9tien intended the Mass wafer to be the significant part of the ritual, and the Grail to be a mere prop.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though Chr\u00e9tien's account is the earliest and most influential of all Grail texts, it was in the work of Robert de Boron that the Grail truly became the \"Holy Grail\" and assumed the form most familiar to modern readers in its Christian context. In his verse romance \"Joseph d'Arimathie\", composed between 1191 and 1202, Robert tells the story of Joseph of Arimathea acquiring the chalice of the Last Supper to collect Christ's blood upon his removal from the cross. Joseph is thrown in prison, where Christ visits him and explains the mysteries of the blessed cup. Upon his release Joseph gathers his in-laws and other followers and travels to the west, and founds a dynasty of Grail keepers that eventually includes Perceval.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The authors of the Vulgate Cycle used the Grail as a symbol of divine grace; Galahad, illegitimate son of Lancelot and Elaine, the world's greatest knight and the Grail Bearer at the castle of Corbenic, is destined to achieve the Grail, his spiritual purity making him a greater warrior than even his illustrious father. Galahad and the interpretation of the Grail involving him were picked up in the 15th century by Thomas Malory in \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" and remain popular today.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Parzival\", Wolfram von Eschenbach, citing the authority of a certain (probably fictional) Kyot the Proven\u00e7al, claimed the Grail was a Stone (called \"Lapsit exillis\" which in alchemy is the name of the Philosopher's stone), the sanctuary of the neutral angels who took neither side during Lucifer's rebellion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Joseph Campbell considered \"Parzival\" the greatest of the Grail stories, told from a heroic view, where Parzival, is a married man and a self-motivated figure. There are Alchemical and Gnostic themes running through Wolfram's \"Parzival\". Campbell sees the Grail as, \"...a stone vessel, which was brought down from heaven. Now what he (Wolfram) is doing is imitating the Muslim Kaaba, the stone at Mecca that was brought down from heaven\". At the end of the story, writing appears on the stone which reads: \"...any Templar whom God should bestow on a distant people for their lord must forbid them to ask his name of lineage, but must help them gain their rights.\" Campbell explains that for the first time in the history of civilization: \"Here is the idea of the king ruling, not in his name, but in the name of the people.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scholars have long speculated on the origins of the Holy Grail before Chr\u00e9tien, suggesting that it may contain elements of the trope of magical cauldrons from Celtic mythology combined with Christian legend surrounding the Eucharist, the latter found in Eastern Christian sources, conceivably in that of the Byzantine Mass, or even Persian sources. The view that the \"origin\" of the Grail legend should be seen as deriving from Celtic mythology was championed by Roger Sherman Loomis, Alfred Nutt and Jessie Weston. Loomis traced a number of parallels between Medieval Welsh literature and Irish material and the Grail romances, including similarities between the \"Mabinogion\"s Bran the Blessed and the Arthurian Fisher King, and between Bran's life-restoring cauldron and the Grail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The opposing view dismissed the \"Celtic\" connections as spurious and interpreted the legend as essentially Christian in origin. Joseph Goering has identified sources for Grail imagery in 12th-century wall paintings from churches in the Catalan Pyrenees (now mostly removed to the Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya), which present unique iconic images of the Virgin Mary holding a bowl that radiates tongues of fire, images that predate the first literary account by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes. Goering argues that they were the original inspiration for the Grail legend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Psychologists Emma Jung and Marie-Louise von Franz used analytical psychology to interpret the Grail as a series of symbols in their book \"The Grail Legend\". This expanded on interpretations by Carl Jung, which were later invoked by Joseph Campbell.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Richard Barber (2004) argued that the Grail legend is connected to the introduction of \"more ceremony and mysticism\" surrounding the sacrament of the Eucharist in the high medieval period, proposing that the first Grail stories may have been connected to the \"renewal in this traditional sacrament\". Daniel Scavone (1999, 2003) has argued that the \"Grail\" in origin referred to the Shroud of Turin. Goulven Peron (2016) suggested that the Holy Grail may reflect the horn of the river-god Achelous as described by Ovid in the \"Metamorphoses\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the wake of the Arthurian romances, several artifacts came to be identified as the Holy Grail in medieval relic veneration. These artifacts are said to have been the vessel used at the Last Supper, but other details vary. Despite the prominence of the Grail literature, traditions about a Last Supper relic remained rare in contrast to other items associated with Jesus' last days, such as the True Cross and Holy Lance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One tradition predates the Grail romances: in the 7th century, the pilgrim Arculf reported that the Last Supper chalice was displayed near Jerusalem. In the wake of Robert de Boron's Grail works, several other items came to be claimed as the true Last Supper vessel. In the late 12th century, one was said to be in Byzantium; Albrecht von Scharfenberg's Grail romance \"Der J\u00fcngere Titurel\" associated it explicitly with the Arthurian Grail, but claimed it was only a copy. This item was said to have been looted in the Fourth Crusade and brought to Troyes in France, but it was lost during the French Revolution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Two relics associated with the Grail survive today. The \"Sacro Catino\" is a green glass dish held at the Genoa Cathedral said to have been used at the Last Supper. Its provenance is unknown, and there are two divergent accounts of how it was brought to Genoa by Crusaders in the 12th century. It was not associated with the Last Supper until later, in the wake of the Grail romances; the first known association is in Jacobus da Varagine's chronicle of Genoa in the late 13th century, which draws on the Grail literary tradition. The Catino was moved and broken during Napoleon's conquest in the early 19th century, revealing that it is glass rather than emerald.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Holy Chalice of Valencia is an agate dish with a mounting for use as a chalice. The bowl may date to Greco-Roman times, but its dating is unclear, and its provenance is unknown before 1399, when it was gifted to Martin I of Aragon. By the 14th century an elaborate tradition had developed that this object was the Last Supper chalice. This tradition mirrors aspects of the Grail material, with several major differences, suggesting a separate tradition entirely. It is not associated with Joseph of Arimathea or Jesus' blood; it is said to have been taken to Rome by Saint Peter and later entrusted to Saint Lawrence. Early references do not call the object the \"Grail\"; the first evidence connecting it to the Grail tradition is from the 15th century. The monarchy sold the cup in the 15th century to Valencia Cathedral, where it remains a significant local icon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several objects were identified with the Holy Grail in the 17th century. In the 20th century, a series of new items became associated with it. These include the Nanteos Cup, a medieval wooden bowl found near Rhydyfelin, Wales; a glass dish found near Glastonbury, England; and the Antioch chalice, a 6th-century silver-gilt object that became attached to the Grail legend in the 1930s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the modern era, a number of places have become associated with the Holy Grail. One of the most prominent is Glastonbury in Somerset, England. Glastonbury was associated with King Arthur and his resting place of Avalon by the 12th century. In the 13th century, a legend arose that Joseph of Arimathea was the founder of Glastonbury Abbey. Early accounts of Joseph at Glastonbury focus on his role as the evangelist of Britain rather than as the custodian of the Holy Grail, but from the 15th century, the Grail became a more prominent part of the legends surrounding Glastonbury. Interest in Glastonbury resurged in the late 19th century, inspired by renewed interest in the Arthurian legend and contemporary spiritual movements centered on ancient sacred sites. In the late 19th century, John Goodchild hid a glass bowl near Glastonbury; a group of his friends, including Wellesley Tudor Pole, retrieved the cup in 1906 and promoted it as the original Holy Grail. Glastonbury and its Holy Grail legend have since become a point of focus for various New Age and Neopagan groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early 20th century, esoteric writers identified Monts\u00e9gur, a stronghold of the heretical Cathar sect in the 13th century, as the Grail castle. Similarly, the 14th-century Rosslyn Chapel in Midlothian, Scotland, became attached to the Grail legend in the mid-20th century when a succession of conspiracy books identified it as a secret hiding place of the Grail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 19th century, the Holy Grail has been linked to various conspiracy theories. In 1818, Austrian pseudohistorical writer Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall connected the Grail to contemporary myths surrounding the Knights Templar that cast the order as a secret society dedicated to mystical knowledge and relics. In Hammer-Purgstall's work, the Grail is not a physical relic but a symbol of secret knowledge that the Templars sought. There is no historical evidence linking the Templars to a search for the Grail, but subsequent writers have elaborated on the Templar theories.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Starting in the early 20th century, writers, particularly in France, further connected the Templars and Grail to the Cathars. In 1906, French esoteric writer Jos\u00e9phin P\u00e9ladan identified the Cathar castle of Monts\u00e9gur with Munsalv\u00e4sche or Montsalvat, the Grail castle in Wolfram's \"Parzival\". This identification has inspired a wider legend asserting that the Cathars possessed the Holy Grail. According to these stories, the Cathars guarded the Grail at Monts\u00e9gur, and smuggled it out when the castle fell in 1244.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Starting in 1933, German writer Otto Rahn published a series of books tying the Grail, Templars, and Cathars to a German nationalist mythology. According to Rahn, the Grail was a symbol of a pure Germanic religion repressed by Christianity. Rahn's books inspired interest in the Grail in Nazi occultism and led to Heinrich Himmler's abortive sponsorship of Rahn's search for the Grail, as well as many subsequent conspiracy theories and fictional works about the Nazis searching for the Grail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late 20th century, British writers Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh and Henry Lincoln created one of the most widely known conspiracy theories about the Holy Grail. The theory first appeared in the BBC documentary series \"Chronicle\" in the 1970s, and was elaborated upon in the bestselling 1982 book \"Holy Blood, Holy Grail\". The theory combines myths about the Templars and Cathars with various other legends and a prominent hoax about a secret order called the Priory of Sion. According to this theory, the Holy Grail is not a physical object, but a symbol of the bloodline of Jesus. The blood connection is based on the etymology reading \"san greal\" (holy grail) as \"sang real\" (royal blood), which dates to the 15th century. The narrative developed here is that Jesus was not divine, and had children with Mary Magdalene, who took the family to France where their descendants became the Merovingians dynasty. While the Catholic Church worked to destroy the dynasty, they were protected by the Priory of Sion and their associates, including the Templars, Cathars, and other secret societies. The book, its arguments, and its evidence have been widely criticized by scholars, but it has had a vast influence on conspiracy and alternate history books. It has also inspired fiction, most notably Dan Brown's 2003 novel \"The Da Vinci Code\" and its 2006 film adaptation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The combination of hushed reverence, chromatic harmonies and sexualized imagery in Richard Wagner's final music drama \"Parsifal\", premiered in 1882, developed this theme, associating the grail \u2013 now periodically producing blood \u2013 directly with female fertility. The high seriousness of the subject was also epitomized in Dante Gabriel Rossetti's painting in which a woman modeled by Alexa Wilding holds the Grail with one hand, while adopting a gesture of blessing with the other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A major mural series depicting the Quest for the Holy Grail was done by the artist Edwin Austin Abbey during the first decade of the 20th century for the Boston Public Library. Other artists, including George Frederic Watts and William Dyce, also portrayed grail subjects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The story of the Grail and of the quest to find it became increasingly popular in the 19th century, referred to in literature such as Alfred, Lord Tennyson's Arthurian cycle the \"Idylls of the King\". A sexualised interpretation of the grail, now identified with female genitalia, appeared in 1870 in Hargrave Jennings' book \"The Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn the cinema, the Holy Grail debuted in the 1904 silent film \"Parsifal\". More recent adaptations of the motif include the hit films \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" (1989) and \"The Fisher King\" (1991).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hunt the Wumpus", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hunt the Wumpus is a text-based adventure game developed by Gregory Yob in 1973. In the game, the player moves through a series of connected caves, arranged in a dodecahedron, as they hunt a monster named the Wumpus. The turn-based game has the player trying to avoid fatal bottomless pits and \"super bats\" that will move them around the cave system; the goal is to fire one of their \"crooked arrows\" through the caves to kill the Wumpus. Yob created the game in early 1973 due to his annoyance at the multiple \"hide and seek\" games set in caves in a grid pattern, and it and multiple variations were sold via mail order by Yob and the People's Computer Company. The source code to the game was published in \"Creative Computing\" in 1975 and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing\" the following year.", "qas": [{"question": "who developed the wumpus ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The game sparked multiple variations and expanded versions and was ported to several systems, including the TI-99/4A home computer. It has been cited as an early example of the survival horror genre, and was listed in 2012 on \"Time\"s All-Time 100 greatest video games list. The Wumpus monster has appeared in several forms in media since 1973, including other video games, a novella, and \"\" cards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Hunt the Wumpus\" is a text-based adventure game set in a series of caves connected by tunnels. In one of the twenty caves is a \"Wumpus\", which the player is attempting to kill. Additionally, two of the caves contain bottomless pits, while two others contain \"super bats\" which will pick up the player and move them to a random cave. The game is turn-based; each cave is given a number by the game, and each turn begins with the player being told which cave they are in and which caves are connected to it by tunnels. The player then elects to either move to one of those connected caves or shoot one of their five \"crooked arrows\", named for their ability to change direction while in flight. Each cave is connected to three others, and the system as a whole is equivalent to a dodecahedron.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the wumpus ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The caves are in complete darkness, so the player cannot see into adjacent caves; instead, upon moving to a new empty cave, the game describes if they can smell a Wumpus, hear a bat, or feel a draft from a pit in one of the connected caves. Entering a cave with a pit ends the game due to the player falling in, while entering the cave with the Wumpus startles them; the Wumpus will either move to another cave or remain and kill the player. If the player chooses to fire an arrow, they first select how many caves, up to five, that the arrow will travel through, and then enters each cave that the arrow moves through. If the player enters a cave number that is not connected to where the arrow is, the game picks a valid option at random. If the arrow hits the player while it is travelling, the player loses; if it hits the Wumpus, they win. If the arrow does not hit anything, then the Wumpus is startled and may move to a new cave; unlike the player, the Wumpus is not affected by super bats or pits. If the Wumpus moves to the player's location, they lose.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the game called that is in complete heaven ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In early 1973, Gregory Yob was looking through some of the games published by the People's Computer Company (PCC), and grew annoyed that there were multiple games, including \"Hurkle\", \"Snark\", and \"Mugwump\", that had the player \"hide and seek\" in a ten by ten grid. Yob was inspired to make a game that used a non-grid pattern, where the player would move through points connected through some other type of topology. Yob came up with the name \"Hunt the Wumpus\" that afternoon, and decided from there that the player would traverse through rooms arranged in a non-grid pattern, with a monster called a Wumpus somewhere in them. Yob chose a dodecahedron because it was his favorite platonic solid, and because he had once made a kite shaped like one. From there, Yob added the arrows to shoot between rooms, terming it the \"crooked arrow\" as it would need to change directions to go through multiple caves, and decided that the player could only sense nearby caves by smell, as a light would wake the Wumpus up. He then added the bottomless pits, and a couple days later the super bats. Finally, feeling that players would want to create a map, he made the cave map fixed and gave each cave a number. Yob later claimed that, to his knowledge, most players did not create maps of the cave system, nor follow his expected strategy of carefully moving around the system to determine exactly where the Wumpus was before firing an arrow. While playtesting the game, Yob found it unexciting that the Wumpus always stayed in one place, and so changed it to be able to move. He then delivered a copy of the game, written in BASIC, to the PCC.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the section of the game that napoleon sent to the pcc ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 4, 9)"}]}, {"context": "In May 1973, one month after he had finished coding the game, Yob went to a conference at Stanford University and discovered that in the section of the conference where the PCC had set up computer terminals, multiple players were engrossed in playing \"Wumpus\", making it, in his opinion, a hit game. The PCC first mentioned the game in its newsletter in September 1973 as a \"cave game\" that would be available to order through them soon, and gave it a full two-page description in its next issue in November 1973. Tapes containing \"Wumpus\" were sold via mail order by both the PCC and Yob himself. The PCC description was republished along with source code in its book \"What to Do After You Hit Return\" in 1977, while a description of the game and its source code was published in \"Creative Computing\" in its October 1975 issue, and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing\" the following year. It also appeared in other books of BASIC games, such as \"Computer Programs in BASIC\" in 1981.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiple versions of \"Hunt the Wumpus\" were created and distributed after the game's release. Yob made \"Wumpus 2\" and \"Wumpus 3\", beginning immediately after finishing the original game, with \"Wumpus 2\" adding different cave arrangements and \"Wumpus 3\" adding more hazards. The source code for \"Wumpus 2\" was published in \"Creative Computing\" and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing 2\" (1977), along with a description of \"Wumpus 3\". The PCC announced in the same November 1973 newsletter issue as it discussed the original game that a version from them titled \"Super Wumpus\" would be available soon, and listed it in its order catalog in its January 1974 issue. In 1978, a book titled \"Superwumpus\", by Jack Emmerichs, was published containing source code for both BASIC and assembly language versions of his unrelated version of \"Hunt the Wumpus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to the original BASIC games, versions of \"Hunt the Wumpus\" have been created for numerous other systems. Yob had seen or heard of versions in several languages, such as IBM RPG and Fortran, by 1975. A version in C, written by Ken Thompson, creator of the Unix operating system, was released in 1975, and can still be found in the bsdgames package on modern BSD and Linux operating systems. A version was released for the HP-41C calculator in 1981, and a commercial port for the TI-99/4A home computer was published by Texas Instruments in 1980, with graphics and a torus shape of caves displayed in a grid pattern instead of a dodecahedron.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Hunt the Wumpus\" has been cited as an early example of a survival horror game; the book \"Vampires and Zombies\" claims that it was an early example of the genre, while the paper \"Restless dreams in Silent Hill\" states that \"from a historical perspective the genre's roots lie in \"Hunt the Wumpus\"\". Other sources, however, such as the book \"The World of Scary Video Games\", claim that the game lacks elements needed for a \"horror\" game, as the player hunts rather than is hunted by the Wumpus, and nothing in the game is explicitly intended to frighten the player, making it more of an early adventure or puzzle game. In 2012, \"Hunt the Wumpus\" was listed on \"Time\"s All-Time 100 greatest video games list. The Wumpus monster has appeared in several different forms of media, including a \"Hunted Wumpus\" \"\" card, the 1983 video game \"M.U.L.E.\", and Cory Doctorow's 2011 novella \"The Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hearst Communications", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hearst Communications often referred to simply as Hearst, is an American mass media and business information conglomerate based in New York City.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearst owns a wide variety of newspapers, magazines, television channels, and television stations, including the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", the \"Houston Chronicle\", \"Cosmopolitan\" and \"Esquire\". It owns 50% of broadcasting firm A&E Networks, and 20% of the sports broadcaster ESPN with partner The Walt Disney Company.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite being better known for the above media holdings, Hearst makes most of its profits in the business information section, where it owns companies including Fitch Ratings, First Databank, and others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearst Communications is based in the Hearst Tower in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. The company was founded by William Randolph Hearst as an owner of newspapers, and the Hearst family remains involved in its ownership and management.", "qas": [{"question": "where is ` nyc ' based ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "who founded the ctr ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 3, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 1880, George Hearst, mining entrepreneur and U.S. senator, entered the publishing business by acquiring the \"San Francisco Daily Examiner.\" In 1887, he turned the \"Examiner\" over to his son, William Randolph Hearst, who that year officially founded the Hearst Corp. W. R. Hearst later went on to purchase or launch several more newspapers in multiple cities (including the \"New York Journal\" in 1895) and to found the \"Los Angeles Examiner\" in 1903. W. R. Hearst found early success, growing readership for the \"Examiner\" from 15,000 in 1887 to over 20 million.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearst's magazine division began in 1903, with W. R. Hearst's creation of \"Motor\" magazine. He later acquired several other publications, including \"Cosmopolitan\" in 1905, and \"Good Housekeeping\" in 1911. W. R. Hearst entered the book publishing business in 1913 with the formation of Hearst's International Library. W. R. Hearst began producing film features in the mid-1910s, creating one of the earliest animation studios: the International Film Service, turning characters from Hearst newspaper strips into film characters. After purchasing the \"Atlanta Georgian\" in 1912, the \"San Francisco Call\" and the \"San Francisco Post\" in 1913, Hearst acquired the \"Boston Advertiser\" and the \"Washington Times\" (unrelated to the present-day paper) in 1917. He later purchased the \"Chicago Herald\" in 1918 (resulting in the \"Herald-Examiner\"). In 1919, Hearst's book publishing division was renamed Cosmopolitan Book.", "qas": [{"question": "what magazine did hearst's create ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 5, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the book book division ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 5, 6)"}]}, {"context": "In the 1920s and 1930s, Hearst owned the biggest media conglomerate in the world, which included a number of magazines and newspapers in major cities. Hearst also began acquiring radio stations to complement his papers. Hearst saw financial challenges in the early 1920s, during which time he was subsidizing funds from his corporation to fund the construction of Hearst Castle in San Simeon and movie production at Cosmopolitan Productions. This eventually lead to the merger of the magazine Hearst International with Cosmopolitan in 1925.", "qas": [{"question": "the merger of the publisher of the encyclopedia of the times resulted from the merger of the merger of the encyclopedia business with what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 6, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Despite some financial troubles, Hearst began extending its reach in 1921, purchasing the \"Detroit Times\", \"The Boston Record\" and the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer.\" Hearst then added the \"Los Angeles Herald\" and \"Washington Herald,\" as well as the \"Oakland Post-Enquirer\", the \"Syracuse Telegram\" and the \"Rochester Journal\" in 1922. He continued his buying spree into the mid 1920's, purchasing the \"Baltimore News\" (1923), the \"San Antonio Light\" (1924), the \"Albany Times Union\" (1924), and \"The Milwaukee Sentinel\" (1924). In 1924, Hearst entered the tabloid market in New York City with \"The New York Mirror\", meant to compete with the \"New York Daily News\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to print and radio, Hearst established Cosmopolitan Pictures in the early 1920s, distributing his films under the newly created Metro Goldwyn Mayer. In 1929, Hearst and MGM created the Hearst Metrotone newsreels.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the company created by hearst ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 8, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The Great Depression hit Hearst hard. Cosmopolitan Book was sold to Farrar and Reinhart in 1931. Hearst was also forced to sell the \"Washington Times\" and \"Herald\" to Eleanor \"Cissy\" Patterson (of the McCormick-Patterson family that owned the \"Chicago Tribune\") in 1939 who merged them to form the \"Washington Times-Herald\". That year he also bought the \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" from Paul Block (who bought it from the Pfisters in 1929), absorbing his afternoon \"Wisconsin News\" into the morning publication. Also in 1939, he sold the \"Atlanta Georgian\" to Cox Newspapers, which merged it with the \"Atlanta Journal\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the cause of the great depression ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hearst, with his chain now owned by his creditors after a 1937 liquidation, also had to merge some of his morning papers into his afternoon papers. In Chicago, he combined the morning \"Herald-Examiner\" and the afternoon \"American\" into the \"Herald-American\" in 1939. This followed the 1937 combination of the New York \"Evening Journal\" and the morning \"American\" into the \"Journal-American\", the sale of the \"Omaha Bee-News\" to the \"World-Herald\". Abandoning the morning market was harmful in the long run for Hearst's media empire as most of his remaining newspapers became afternoon papers. Newspapers in Rochester, Syracuse and Fort Worth were sold or closed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afternoon papers were a profitable business in pre-television days, often outselling their morning counterparts featuring stock market information in early editions, while later editions were heavy on sporting news with results of baseball games and horse races. Afternoon papers also benefited from continuous reports from the battlefront during World War II. After the war however, both television news and suburbs experienced an explosive growth; thus, evening papers were more affected than those published in the morning, whose circulation remained stable while their afternoon counterparts' sales plummeted. Another major blow was the fact that beginning in the 1950s, football and baseball games were being played later in the afternoon and now stretched through early in the evening, preventing afternoon papers from publishing all the results.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1947, Hearst produced an early television newscast for the DuMont Television Network: \"I.N.S. Telenews\", and in 1948 he became the owner of one of the first television stations in the country, WBAL-TV in Baltimore.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earnings of Hearst's three morning papers, the \"San Francisco Examiner\", the \"Los Angeles Examiner\", and \"The Milwaukee Sentinel\", supported the company's money-losing afternoon publications such as the \"Los Angeles Herald-Express\", the \"New York Journal-American\", and the \"Chicago American\". The company sold the latter paper in 1956 to the \"Chicago Tribune\"'s owners, who changed it to the tabloid-size \"Chicago Today\" in 1969 and ceased publication in 1974). In 1960, Hearst also sold the \"Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph\" to the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" and the \"Detroit Times\" to \"The Detroit News\". After a lengthy strike it sold the \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" to the afternoon \"Milwaukee Journal\" in 1962. The same year Hearst's Los Angeles papers \u2013 the morning \"Examiner\" and the afternoon \"Herald-Express\" \u2013 merged to become the evening \"Los Angeles Herald-Examiner\". The 1962-63 New York City newspaper strike left the city with no papers for over three months, with the \"Journal-American\" one of the earliest strike targets of the Typographical Union. The \"Boston Record\" and the \"Evening American\" merged in 1961 as the \"Record-American\" and in 1964, the \"Baltimore News-Post\" became the \"Baltimore News-American\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1953 Hearst Magazines bought \"Sports Afield\" magazine, which it published until 1999 when it sold the journal to Robert E. Petersen. In 1958, Hearst's International News Service merged with E.W. Scripps' United Press, forming United Press International as a response to the growth of the Associated Press and Reuters. The following year Scripps-Howard's \"San Francisco News\" merged with Hearst's afternoon \"San Francisco Call-Bulletin\". Also in 1959, Hearst acquired the paperback book publisher Avon Books.", "qas": [{"question": "who bought the paperback book ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 14, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In 1965, the Hearst Corporation began pursuing Joint Operating Agreements (JOA's). It reached the first agreement with the DeYoung family, proprietors of the afternoon \"San Francisco Chronicle\", which began to produce a joint Sunday edition with the \"Examiner\". In turn, the \"Examiner\" became an evening publication, absorbing the \"News-Call-Bulletin\". The following year, the \"Journal-American\" reached another JOA with another two landmark New York City papers: the \"Herald-Tribune\" and Scripps-Howard's \"World-Telegram and Sun\" to form the \"New York World Journal Tribune\" (recalling the names of the city's mid-market dailies), which collapsed after only a few months.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 1962 merger of the \"Herald-Express\" and \"Examiner\" in Los Angeles led to the termination of many journalists who began to stage a 10-year strike in 1967. The effects of the strike accelerated the pace of the company's demise, with the \"Herald Examiner\" ceasing publication November 2, 1989.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hearst moved into hardcover publishing by acquiring Arbor House in 1978 and William Morrow and Company in 1981.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1982, the company sold the \"Boston Herald American\" \u2014the result of the 1972 merger of Hearst's \"Record-American & Advertiser\" with the \"Herald-Traveler\"\u2014 to Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which promptly renamed the paper as \"The Boston Herald\", competing to this day with the \"Boston Globe\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1986, Hearst bought the \"Houston Chronicle\" and that same year closed the 213-year-old \"Baltimore News-American\" after a failed attempt to reach a JOA with A.S. Abell Company, the family who published \"The Baltimore Sun\" since its founding in 1837. Abell sold the paper several days later to the Times-Mirror syndicate of the Chandlers' \"Los Angeles Times\", also competitor to the evening \"Los Angeles Herald-Examiner\", which folded in 1989.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1993, Hearst closed the \"San Antonio Light\" after it purchased the rival \"San Antonio Express-News\" from Murdoch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On November 8, 1990, Hearst Corporation acquired the remaining 20% stake of ESPN, Inc. from RJR Nabisco for a price estimated between $165\u00a0million and $175\u00a0million. The other 80% has been owned by The Walt Disney Company since 1996. Over the last 25 years, the ESPN investment is said to have accounted for at least 50% of total Hearst Corp profits and is worth at least $13\u00a0billion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1999, Hearst sold its Avon and Morrow book publishing activities to HarperCollins.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the book that bought hearst ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 2000, the Hearst Corp. pulled another \"switcheroo\" by selling its flagship and \"Monarch of the Dailies\", the afternoon \"San Francisco Examiner\", and acquiring the long-time competing, but now larger morning paper, \"San Francisco Chronicle\" from the Charles de Young family. The \"San Francisco Examiner\" is now published as a daily freesheet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In December 2003, Marvel Entertainment acquired \"Cover Concepts\" from Hearst, to extend Marvel's demographic reach among public school children.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2009, A&E Networks acquired Lifetime Entertainment Services, with Hearst ownership increasing to 42%.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2009, the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\" switched to a digital-only format, leaving the \"Albany Times-Union\" as the only remaining Hearst paper from its golden age still owned by the company. In 2010, Hearst acquired digital marketing agency iCrossing.", "qas": [{"question": "what company did hearst buy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 26, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 2011, Hearst absorbed more than 100 magazine titles from the Lagardere group for more than $700\u00a0million and became a challenger of Time Inc ahead of Cond\u00e9 Nast. In December 2012, Hearst Corporation partnered again with NBCUniversal to launch Esquire Network.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On February 20, 2014, Hearst Magazines International appointed Gary Ellis to the new position, Chief Digital Officer. That December, DreamWorks Animation sold a 25% stake in AwesomenessTV for $81.25\u00a0million to Hearst.", "qas": [{"question": "how much money did steven turner sell for $81.25 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 28, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In January 2017, Hearst announced that it had acquired a majority stake in Litton Entertainment. Its CEO, Dave Morgan, was a former employee of Hearst.", "qas": [{"question": "who was comcast 's ceo ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 29, 1)"}]}, {"context": "On January 23, 2017, Hearst announced that it has acquired the business operations of The Pioneer Group from fourth-generation family owners Jack and John Batdorff. The Pioneer Group was a Michigan-based communications network that circulates print and digital news to local communities across the state. In addition to daily newspapers, \"The Pioneer\" and \"Manistee News Advocate\", Pioneer published three weekly papers and four local shopper publications, and operated a digital marketing services business. The acquisition brought Hearst Newspapers to publishing 19 daily and 61 weekly papers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other 2017 acquisitions include the New Haven Register and associated papers from Digital First Media, and the Alton, Illinois, \"Telegraph\" and Jacksonville, Illinois, \"Journal-Courier\" from Civitas Media.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In October 2017, Hearst announced it would acquire the magazine and book businesses of Rodale, with some sources reporting the purchase price as about $225\u00a0million. The transaction was expected to close in January following government approvals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "A non-exhaustive list of its current properties and investments includes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nUnder William Randolph Hearst's will, a common board of thirteen trustees (its composition fixed at five family members and eight outsiders) administers the Hearst Foundation, the William Randolph Hearst Foundation, and the trust that owns (and selects the 24-member board of) the Hearst Corporation (immediate parent of Hearst Communications which shares the same officers). The foundations shared ownership until tax law changed to prevent this.\nIn 2009, it was estimated to be the largest private company managed by trustees in this way. As of 2017, the trustees are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "The trust dissolves when all family members alive at the time of Hearst's death in August 1951 have died.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hunter S. Thompson", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hunter Stockton Thompson (July 18, 1937\u00a0\u2013 February 20, 2005) was an American journalist and author, and the founder of the gonzo journalism movement. He first rose to prominence with the publication of \"\" (1967), a book for which he spent a year living and riding with the Hells Angels motorcycle gang in order to write a first-hand account of the lives and experiences of its members.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1970 he wrote an unconventional magazine feature entitled \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\" for Scanlan's Monthly which both raised his profile and established him as a writer with counterculture credibility. It also set him on a path to establishing his own sub-genre of New Journalism which he called \"Gonzo,\" which was essentially an ongoing experiment in which the writer becomes a central figure and even a participant in the events of the narrative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson remains best known for \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1971), a book first serialized in \"Rolling Stone\" in which he grapples with the implications of what he considered the failure of the 1960s counterculture movement. It was adapted on film twice: loosely in \"Where the Buffalo Roam\" starring Bill Murray as Thompson in 1980, and directly in 1998 by director Terry Gilliam in a film starring Johnny Depp and Benicio del Toro. The Doonesbury cartoon character Duke \u2013 who was modeled after Thompson \u2013 pens an essay about \"my shoplifting conviction\" entitled \"Fear and Loathing at Macy's Menswear\", a reference to Thompson's book.", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote an essay about `` my shoplifting conviction '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Politically minded, Thompson ran unsuccessfully for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado in 1970 on the Freak Power ticket. He became well known for his dislike of Richard Nixon, whom he claimed represented \"that dark, venal, and incurably violent side of the American character\". He covered Nixon's 1972 reelection campaign for Rolling Stone and later collected the stories in book form as \"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's output notably declined from the mid-1970s, as he struggled with the consequences of fame, and he complained that he could no longer merely report on events as he was too easily recognized. He was also known for his lifelong use of alcohol and illegal narcotics, his love of firearms, and his iconoclastic contempt for authoritarianism. He often remarked: \"I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence, or insanity to anyone, but they've always worked for me.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson died by suicide at the age of 67, following a series of health problems. In accordance with his wishes, his ashes were fired out of a cannon in a ceremony funded by his friend Johnny Depp and attended by friends including then-Senator John Kerry and Jack Nicholson. Hari Kunzru wrote that \"the true voice of Thompson is revealed to be that of American moralist\u00a0... one who often makes himself ugly to expose the ugliness he sees around him.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who died at the age of 67, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Thompson was born into a middle-class family in Louisville, Kentucky, the first of three sons of Virginia Ray Davison (1908, Springfield, Kentucky \u2013 March 20, 1998, Louisville), who worked as head librarian at the Louisville Free Public Library and Jack Robert Thompson (September 4, 1893, Horse Cave, Kentucky \u2013 July 3, 1952, Louisville), a public insurance adjuster and World War I veteran. His parents were introduced to each other by a friend from Jack's fraternity at the University of Kentucky in September 1934, and married on November 2, 1935. Thompson's first name came from a purported ancestor on his mother's side, the Scottish surgeon John Hunter. Hunter Stockton was named for his maternal grandparents, Prestly Stockton Ray and Lucille Hunter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On December 2, 1943, when Thompson was six years old, the family settled at 2437 Ransdell Avenue in the affluent Cherokee Triangle neighborhood of The Highlands. On July 3, 1952, when Thompson was 14 years old, his father, aged 58, died of myasthenia gravis. Hunter and his brothers were raised by their mother. Hunter also had a much older half-brother, James Thompson, Jr., from his father's first marriage, who was not part of the Thompson household. Virginia worked as a librarian to support her children, and is described as having become a \"heavy drinker\" following her husband's death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Interested in sports and athletically inclined from a young age, Thompson co-founded the Hawks Athletic Club while attending I.N. Bloom Elementary School, which led to an invitation to join Louisville's Castlewood Athletic Club, a club for adolescents that prepared them for high-school sports. Ultimately he never joined any sports teams in high school.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson attended I.N. Bloom Elementary School, Highland Middle School, and Atherton High School, before transferring to Louisville Male High School in September 1952. Also in 1952, he was accepted as a member of the Athenaeum Literary Association, a school-sponsored literary and social club that dated to 1862. Its members at the time, generally drawn from Louisville's wealthy upper-class families, included Porter Bibb, who later became the first publisher of \"Rolling Stone\" at Thompson's behest. During this time Thompson read and admired J.\u00a0P. Donleavy's \"The Ginger Man\".", "qas": [{"question": "who attended the song `` i '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "who was the author of the ginger man ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 9, 4)"}]}, {"context": "As an Athenaeum member, Thompson contributed articles to and helped produce the club's yearbook \"The Spectator\". The group ejected Thompson in 1955, citing his legal problems. Charged as an accessory to robbery after being in a car with the perpetrator, Thompson was sentenced to 60 days in Kentucky's Jefferson County Jail. He served 31 days and, a week after his release, enlisted in the United States Air Force. While he was in jail, the school superintendent refused him permission to take his high-school final examinations, and as a result he did not graduate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson completed basic training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas, and transferred to Scott Air Force Base in Belleville, Illinois, to study electronics. He applied to become an aviator, but the Air Force's aviation-cadet program rejected his application. In 1956, he transferred to Eglin Air Force Base near Fort Walton Beach, Florida. While serving at Eglin, he took evening classes at Florida State University. At Eglin, he landed his first professional writing job as sports editor of \"The Command Courier\" by lying about his job experience. As sports editor, Thompson traveled around the United States with the Eglin Eagles football team, covering its games. In early 1957 he wrote a sports column for \"The Playground News\", a local newspaper in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. He could not use his name on the column because the Air Force did not allow airmen to hold other jobs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson was discharged from the Air Force in November 1957 as an Airman First Class, his commanding officer having recommended him for an early honorable discharge. \"In summary, this airman, although talented, will not be guided by policy,\" chief of information services Colonel William S. Evans wrote to the Eglin personnel office. \"Sometimes his rebel and superior attitude seems to rub off on other airmen staff members.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the Air Force, Thompson worked as sports editor for a newspaper in Jersey Shore, Pennsylvania, before relocating to New York City. There he audited several courses at the Columbia University School of General Studies. During this time he worked briefly for \"Time\" as a copy boy for $51 a week. While working, he used a typewriter to copy F. Scott Fitzgerald's \"The Great Gatsby\" and Ernest Hemingway's \"A Farewell to Arms\" in order to learn about the writing styles of the authors. In 1959 \"Time\" fired him for insubordination. Later that year he worked as a reporter for \"The Middletown Daily Record\" in Middletown, New York. He was fired from this job after damaging an office candy machine and arguing with the owner of a local restaurant who happened to be an advertiser with the paper.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1960, Thompson moved to San Juan, Puerto Rico, to take a job with the sporting magazine \"El Sportivo\", which folded soon after his arrival. Thompson applied for a job with the Puerto Rican English-language daily \"The San Juan Star\", but its managing editor, future novelist William J. Kennedy, turned him down. Nonetheless, the two became friends, and after the demise of \"El Sportivo\", Thompson worked as a stringer for the \"New York Herald Tribune\" and for a few stateside papers on Caribbean issues, with Kennedy working as his editor. After returning to the States, Thompson hitchhiked across the United States along U.S. Highway 40, eventually ending up in Big Sur working as a security guard and caretaker at Slates Hot Springs for an eight-month period in 1961, just before it became the Esalen Institute. While there, he published his first magazine feature in the nationally distributed \"Rogue\" magazine, on the artisan and bohemian culture of Big Sur. Thompson had had a rocky tenure as caretaker of the hot springs, and his unflattering portrayal of Big Sur was not well-received by the residents. His over-the-top antics were finally too much for Vinnie MacDonald Murphy, the owner of Slates Hot Springs. Even though Thompson promised to \"retreat down to the rocks or up in the canyon whenever I feel the need to shoot\", she evicted him on August 12, 1961.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During this period, Thompson wrote two novels, \"Prince Jellyfish\" and \"The Rum Diary\", and submitted many short stories to publishers \u2013 with little success. \"The Rum Diary\", a novel based on Thompson's experiences in Puerto Rico, was eventually published in .", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the book published in puerto rico ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 15, 1)"}]}, {"context": "From May 1962 to May 1963, Thompson traveled to South America as a correspondent for a Dow Jones-owned weekly newspaper, the \"National Observer\". In Brazil he spent several months as a reporter for the \"Brazil Herald\", the country's only English-language daily, published in Rio de Janeiro. His longtime girlfriend Sandra Dawn Conklin (a.k.a. Sandy Conklin Thompson, now Sondi Wright) later joined him in Rio. They married on May 19, 1963, shortly after returning to the United States, and lived briefly in Aspen, Colorado, where they had a son, Juan Fitzgerald Thompson (born March 23, 1964). The couple conceived five more times, but three pregnancies were miscarried, and the other two produced infants who died shortly after birth. Hunter and Sandy divorced in 1980 but always remained close friends.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1964 the family relocated to Glen Ellen, California, where Thompson continued to write for the \"National Observer\" on an array of domestic subjects. One story told of his 1964 visit to Ketchum, Idaho, to investigate the reasons for Ernest Hemingway's suicide. While there, he stole a pair of elk antlers hanging above the front door of Hemingway's cabin. Thompson severed his ties with the \"Observer\" after his editor refused to print his review of Tom Wolfe's 1965 essay collection \"The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby\", and moved to San Francisco. He immersed himself in the drug and hippie culture that was taking root in the area, and soon began writing for the Berkeley underground paper \"Spider\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1965 Carey McWilliams, editor of \"The Nation\", hired Thompson to write a story about the Hells Angels motorcycle club in California. The article appeared on May 17, 1965, and after that Thompson received several book offers and spent the next year living and riding with the club. The relationship broke down when the bikers perceived that Thompson was exploiting them for personal gain and demanded a share of the profits from his writings. An argument at a party resulted in Thompson suffering a savage beating (or \"stomping\", as the Angels referred to it). Random House published the hard-cover \"\" in 1966, and the fight between Thompson and the Angels was well-marketed. CBC Television even broadcast an encounter between Thompson and Hells Angel Skip Workman before a live studio audience.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A reviewer for \"The New York Times\" praised the work as an \"angry, knowledgeable, fascinating and excitedly written book\", that shows the Hells Angels \"not so much as dropouts from society but as total misfits, or unfits\u2014emotionally, intellectually and educationally unfit to achieve the rewards, such as they are, that the contemporary social order offers\". The reviewer also praised Thompson as a \"spirited, witty, observant and original writer; his prose crackles like motorcycle exhaust\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the success of \"Hell's Angels\", Thompson successfully sold articles to several national magazines including \"The New York Times Magazine\", \"Esquire\", \"Pageant\", and \"Harper's\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1967, shortly before the Summer of Love Thompson wrote \"The Hashbury is the Capital of the Hippies\" for The New York Times Magazine. He criticized San Francisco's Hippies as devoid of both the political convictions of the New Left and the artistic core of the Beats, resulting in a culture overrun with young people who spent their time in the pursuit of drugs. \"The thrust is no longer for 'change' or 'progress' or 'revolution' but merely to escape, to live on the far perimeter of a world that might have been \u2014 perhaps should have been \u2014 and strike a bargain for survival on purely personal terms,\" he wrote.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the capital of the hippies ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By late 1967, Thompson and his family moved back to Colorado and rented a house in Woody Creek, a small mountain hamlet outside Aspen. In early 1969, Thompson received a $15,000 royalty check for the paperback sales of \"Hell's Angels\" and used two-thirds of the money for a down payment on a modest home and property where he would live for the rest of his life. He named the house Owl Farm and often described it as his \"fortified compound.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In early 1968, Thompson signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War. According to Thompson's letters and his later writings, at this time he planned to write a book called \"The Joint Chiefs\" about \"the death of the American Dream.\" He used a $6,000 advance from Random House to travel the 1968 Presidential campaign trail and attend the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago for research. From his hotel room in Chicago, Thompson watched the clashes between police and protesters, which he wrote had a great effect on his political views. The book was never finished, and the theme of the death of the American dream would be carried over into his later work. The contract with Random House was eventually fulfilled with the 1972 book \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\". He also signed a deal with Ballantine Books in 1968 to write a satirical book called \"The Johnson File\" about Lyndon B. Johnson. A few weeks after the contract was signed, however, Johnson announced that he would not seek re-election, and the deal was canceled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1970, Thompson ran for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado, as part of a group of citizens running for local offices on the \"Freak Power\" ticket. The platform included promoting the decriminalization of drugs (for personal use only, not trafficking, as he disapproved of profiteering), tearing up the streets and turning them into grassy pedestrian malls, banning any building so tall as to obscure the view of the mountains, disarming all police forces, and renaming Aspen \"Fat City\" to deter investors. Thompson, having shaved his head, referred to the crew cut-wearing Republican candidate as \"my long-haired opponent\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "With polls showing him with a slight lead in a three-way race, Thompson appeared at \"Rolling Stone\" magazine headquarters in San Francisco with a six-pack of beer in hand, and declared to editor Jann Wenner that he was about to be elected Sheriff of Aspen, Colorado, and wished to write about the \"Freak Power\" movement. Thus, Thompson's first article in \"Rolling Stone\" was published as \"The Battle of Aspen\" with the byline \"By: Dr. Hunter S. Thompson (Candidate for Sheriff)\". Despite the publicity, Thompson narrowly lost the election. While carrying the city of Aspen, he garnered only 44% of the county-wide vote in what had become a two-way race. The Republican candidate agreed to withdraw a few days before the election in order to consolidate the anti-Thompson votes, in return for the Democrats withdrawing their candidate for county commissioner. Thompson later remarked that the \"Rolling Stone\" article mobilized his opposition far more than his supporters.", "qas": [{"question": "what article did jones later say he was a part of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 25, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Also in 1970, Thompson wrote an article entitled \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\" for the short-lived new journalism magazine \"Scanlan's Monthly\". For that article, editor Warren Hinckle paired Thompson with illustrator Ralph Steadman, who drew expressionist illustrations with lipstick and eyeliner. Thompson and Steadman collaborated regularly after that. Although it was not widely read, the article was the first to use the techniques of Gonzo journalism, a style Thompson would later employ in almost every literary endeavor. The manic first-person subjectivity of the story was reportedly the result of sheer desperation; he was facing a looming deadline and started sending the magazine pages ripped out of his notebook.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first use of the word \"Gonzo\" to describe Thompson's work is credited to the journalist Bill Cardoso. Cardoso first met Thompson on a bus full of journalists covering the 1968 New Hampshire primary. In 1970, Cardoso (who was then the editor of \"The Boston Globe Sunday Magazine\") wrote to Thompson praising the \"Kentucky Derby\" piece as a breakthrough: \"This is it, this is pure Gonzo. If this is a start, keep rolling.\" According to Steadman, Thompson took to the word right away and said, \"Okay, that's what I do. Gonzo.\" Thompson's first published use of the word appears in \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\": \"Free Enterprise. The American Dream. Horatio Alger gone mad on drugs in Las Vegas. Do it \"now\": pure Gonzo journalism.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what is the first use of word ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The book for which Thompson gained most of his fame had its genesis during the research for \"Strange Rumblings in Aztlan\", an expos\u00e9 for \"Rolling Stone\" on the 1970 killing of the Mexican-American television journalist Rub\u00e9n Salazar. Salazar had been shot in the head at close range with a tear gas canister fired by officers of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department during the National Chicano Moratorium March against the Vietnam War. One of Thompson's sources for the story was Oscar Zeta Acosta, a prominent Mexican-American activist and attorney. Finding it difficult to talk in the racially tense atmosphere of Los Angeles, Thompson and Acosta decided to travel to Las Vegas, and take advantage of an assignment by \"Sports Illustrated\" to write a 250-word photograph caption on the Mint 400 motorcycle race held there.", "qas": []}, {"context": "What was to be a short caption quickly grew into something else entirely. Thompson first submitted to \"Sports Illustrated\" a manuscript of 2,500 words, which was, as he later wrote, \"aggressively rejected.\" \"Rolling Stone\" publisher Jann Wenner was said to have liked \"the first 20 or so jangled pages enough to take it seriously on its own terms and tentatively scheduled it for publication\u00a0\u2014 which gave me the push I needed to keep working on it\", Thompson later wrote.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The result of the trip to Las Vegas became the 1972 book \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", which first appeared in the November 1971 issues of \"Rolling Stone\" as a two-part series. It is written as a first-person account by a journalist named Raoul Duke on a trip to Las Vegas with Dr. Gonzo, his \"300-pound Samoan attorney\", to cover a narcotics officers' convention and the \"fabulous Mint 400\". During the trip, Duke and his companion (always referred to as \"my attorney\") become sidetracked by a search for the American Dream, with \"two bags of grass, seventy-five pellets of mescaline, five sheets of high-powered blotter acid, a salt shaker half full of cocaine, and a whole galaxy of multi-colored uppers, downers, screamers, laughers\u00a0... and also a quart of tequila, a quart of rum, a case of Budweiser, a pint of raw ether, and two dozen amyls.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Coming to terms with the failure of the 1960s countercultural movement is a major theme of the novel, and the book was greeted with considerable critical acclaim, including being heralded by \"The New York Times\" as \"by far the best book yet written on the decade of dope\". \"The Vegas Book\", as Thompson referred to it, was a mainstream success and introduced his Gonzo journalism techniques to a wide public.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning in late 1971 Thompson wrote extensively for \"Rolling Stone\" on the election campaigns of President Richard Nixon and his unsuccessful opponent, Senator George McGovern. The articles were soon combined and published as \"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\". As the title suggests, Thompson spent nearly all of his time traveling the \"campaign trail\", focusing largely on the Democratic Party's primaries. Nixon, as the Republican incumbent, performed little campaign work, while McGovern competed with rival candidates Edmund Muskie and Hubert Humphrey. Thompson was an early supporter of McGovern and wrote unflattering coverage of the rival campaigns in the increasingly widely read \"Rolling Stone\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson went on to become a fierce critic of Nixon, both during and after his presidency. After Nixon's death in 1994, Thompson described him in \"Rolling Stone\" as a man who \"could shake your hand and stab you in the back at the same time\", and said \"his casket [should] have been launched into one of those open-sewage canals that empty into the ocean just south of Los Angeles. He was a swine of a man and a jabbering dupe of a president. [He] was an evil man\u2014evil in a way that only those who believe in the physical reality of the Devil can understand it.\" Following Nixon's pardon by Gerald Ford in 1974, Hunter ruminated on the approximately $400,000 pension Nixon maneuvered his way into, by resigning before being formally indicted. While \"The Washington Post\" was lamenting Nixon's \"lonely and depressed\" state after being forced from the White House, Hunter wrote that '[i]f there were any such thing as true justice in this world, his [Nixon's] rancid carcass would be somewhere down around Easter Island right now, in the belly of a hammerhead shark.' There was however one passion shared by Thompson and Nixon: a love of football, discussed in \"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\".", "qas": [{"question": "what political party did jones serve on ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 33, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the love of football ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 33, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Thompson's journalistic work began to seriously suffer after his trip to Africa to cover \"The Rumble in the Jungle\"\u2014the world heavyweight boxing match between George Foreman and Muhammad Ali\u2014in 1974. He missed the match while intoxicated at his hotel, and did not submit a story to the magazine. As Wenner put it to the film critic Roger Ebert in the 2008 documentary \"Gonzo: The Life and Work of Dr. Hunter S. Thompson\", \"After Africa he just couldn't write. He couldn't piece it together\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Plans for Thompson to cover the 1976 presidential campaign for \"Rolling Stone\" and later publish a book fell through after Wenner canceled the project without informing Thompson. Wenner then assigned Thompson to travel to Vietnam to cover what appeared to be the end of the Vietnam War. Thompson arrived in Saigon just as South Vietnam was collapsing and as other journalists were leaving the country. Again, Wenner pulled the plug on the project. The incidents strained Thompson's relationship with Wenner and \"Rolling Stone.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the relationship between wenner and `` rolling stone '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 35, 4)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the campaign that provided the presidential campaign for jones ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From the late 1970s on, most of Thompson's literary output appeared as a four-volume series of books entitled \"The Gonzo Papers\". Beginning with \"The Great Shark Hunt\" in 1979 and ending with \"Better Than Sex\" in 1994, the series is largely a collection of rare newspaper and magazine pieces from the pre-gonzo period, along with almost all of his \"Rolling Stone\" pieces.", "qas": [{"question": "what did most of the literary output appear as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Starting in about 1980, Thompson became more reclusive. He would often retreat to his compound in Woody Creek, rejecting projects and assignments or failing to complete them. Despite a lack of new material, Wenner kept Thompson on the \"Rolling Stone\" masthead as chief of the \"National Affairs Desk\", a position he would hold until his death.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the thompson that became more reclusive ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 37, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1980 Thompson divorced wife Sandra Conklin. The same year marked the release of \"Where the Buffalo Roam\", a loose film adaptation based on Thompson's early 1970s work, starring Bill Murray as the writer. Murray eventually became one of Thompson's trusted friends. Later that year Thompson relocated to Hawaii to research and write, \"The Curse of Lono\", a Gonzo-style account of the 1980 Honolulu Marathon. Extensively illustrated by Ralph Steadman, the piece first appeared in \"Running\" magazine in 1981 as \"The Charge of the Weird Brigade\" and was excerpted in 1983 \"Playboy\".", "qas": [{"question": "who did michael divorce in 1980 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1983, he covered the U.S. invasion of Grenada but didn't write or discuss the experiences until the publication of \"Kingdom of Fear\" in 2003. Later that year, at the behest of Terry McDonell, he wrote \"A Dog Took My Place\", an expos\u00e9 for \"Rolling Stone\" of the scandalous Roxanne Pulitzer divorce case and what he called the \"Palm Beach lifestyle\". The story included dubious insinuations of bestiality but was widely considered to be a return by Thompson to his proper form. In 1985 Thompson accepted an advance to write about \"couples pornography\" for \"Playboy\". As part of his research, he spent evenings at the Mitchell Brothers O'Farrell Theatre striptease club in San Francisco. The experience evolved into an as-yet-unpublished novel tentatively entitled \"The Night Manager\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson next accepted a role as weekly media columnist and critic for \"The San Francisco Examiner.\" The position was arranged by former editor and fellow \"Examiner\" columnist Warren Hinckle. His editor at The Examiner, David McCumber described \"One week it would be acid-soaked gibberish with a charm of its own. The next week it would be incisive political analysis of the highest order.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many of these columns were collected in \"\" (1988) and \"\" (1990), a collection of autobiographical reminiscences, articles and previously unpublished material.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Throughout the early 1990s, Thompson claimed to be at work on a novel entitled \"Polo Is My Life\". It was briefly excerpted in \"Rolling Stone\" in 1994, and Thompson himself described it 1996 as \"a sex book\u00a0\u2014 you know, sex, drugs and rock and roll. It's about the manager of a sex theater who's forced to leave and flee to the mountains. He falls in love and gets in even more trouble than he was in the sex theater in San Francisco\". The novel was slated to be released by Random House in 1999, and was even assigned , but was never published.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the book who wrote to be at work on a novel ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Thompson continued to publish irregularly in \"Rolling Stone\", ultimately contributing 17 pieces to the magazine between 1984 and 2004. \"Fear and Loathing in Elko,\" published in 1992, was a well-received fictional rallying cry against the nomination of Clarence Thomas to a seat on the Supreme Court of the United States. \"Trapped in Mr. Bill's Neighborhood\" was a largely factual account of an interview with Bill Clinton at a Little Rock, Arkansas steakhouse. Rather than traveling the campaign trail as he had done in previous presidential elections, Thompson monitored the proceedings on cable television; \"Better Than Sex: Confessions of a Political Junkie\", his account of the 1992 presidential campaign, is composed of reactive faxes to \"Rolling Stone\". In 1994, the magazine published \"He Was a Crook,\" a \"scathing\" obituary of Richard Nixon.", "qas": [{"question": "how many pieces did jones publish to the magazine ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 43, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In November 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" published Thompson's final magazine feature \"The Fun-Hogs in the Passing Lane: Fear and Loathing, Campaign 2004\", a brief account of the 2004 presidential election in which he compared the outcome of the \"Bush v. Gore\" court case to the Reichstag fire and formally endorsed Senator John Kerry, a longtime friend, for president.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's work gained renewed attention with the release of the film \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\". New editions of the book were published, introducing Thompson's work to a new generation of readers. The same year, an early novel \"The Rum Diary\" was published, as were the two volumes of collected letters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's next, and penultimate, collection, \"Kingdom of Fear: Loathsome Secrets of a Star-Crossed Child In the Final Days of the American Century\", was widely publicized as Thompson's first memoir. Published in 2003, it combined new material (including reminiscences of the O'Farrell Theater), selected newspaper and digital clippings, and other older works.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the title of thompson's 's child ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 46, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Thompson finished his journalism career in the same way it had begun: Writing about sports. From 2000 until his death in 2005, he wrote a weekly column for ESPN.com's Page 2 entitled \"Hey, Rube.\" In 2004 Simon & Schuster collected some of the columns from the first few years and released it in mid-2004 as \"Hey Rube: Blood Sport, the Bush Doctrine, and the Downward Spiral of Dumbness\".", "qas": [{"question": "how long did edwards finish his career ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 47, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Thompson married assistant Anita Bejmuk on April 23, 2003.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At 5:42\u00a0p.m. on February 20, 2005, Thompson died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head at Owl Farm, his \"fortified compound\" in Woody Creek, Colorado. His son Juan, daughter-in-law Jennifer, and grandson were visiting for the weekend. His wife Anita, who was at the Aspen Club, was on the phone with him as he cocked the gun. According to the \"Aspen Daily News\", Thompson asked her to come home to help him write his ESPN column, then set the receiver on the counter. Anita said she mistook the cocking of the gun for the sound of his typewriter keys and hung up as he fired. Will and Jennifer were in the next room when they heard the gunshot, but mistook the sound for a book falling and did not check on Thompson immediately. Juan Thompson found his father's body. According to the police report and Anita's cell phone records, he called the sheriff's department half an hour later, then walked outside and fired three shotgun blasts into the air to \"mark the passing of his father\". The police report stated that in Thompson's typewriter was a piece of paper with the date \"Feb. 22 '05\" and a single word, \"counselor\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's inner circle told the press that he had been depressed and always found February a \"gloomy\" month, with football season over and the harsh Colorado winter weather. He was also upset over his advancing age and chronic medical problems, including a hip replacement; he would frequently mutter \"This kid is getting old.\" \"Rolling Stone\" published what Doug Brinkley described as a suicide note written by Thompson to his wife, titled \"Football Season Is Over\". It read:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's collaborator and friend Ralph Steadman wrote:", "qas": []}, {"context": "On August 20, 2005, in a private funeral, Thompson's ashes were fired from a cannon. This was accompanied by red, white, blue and green fireworks\u2014all to the tune of Norman Greenbaum's \"Spirit in the Sky\" and Bob Dylan's \"Mr. Tambourine Man\". The cannon was placed atop a tower which had the shape of a , a symbol originally used in his 1970 campaign for Sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado. The plans for the monument were initially drawn by Thompson and Steadman, and were shown as part of an \"Omnibus\" program on the BBC titled \"Fear and Loathing in Gonzovision\" (1978). It is included as a special feature on the second disc of the 2004 Criterion Collection DVD release of \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", and labeled as \"Fear and Loathing on the Road to Hollywood\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to his widow, Anita, the $3 million funeral was funded by actor Johnny Depp, who was a close friend of Thompson. Depp told the \"Associated Press\", \"All I'm doing is trying to make sure his last wish comes true. I just want to send my pal out the way he wants to go out.\" An estimated 280 people attended, including U.S. Senators John Kerry and George McGovern; \"60 Minutes\" correspondents Ed Bradley and Charlie Rose; actors Jack Nicholson, John Cusack, Bill Murray, Benicio del Toro, Sean Penn, and Josh Hartnett; musicians Lyle Lovett, John Oates and David Amram, and artist and long-time friend Ralph Steadman.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson is often credited as the creator of Gonzo journalism, a style of writing that blurs distinctions between fiction and nonfiction. His work and style are considered to be a major part of the New Journalism literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which attempted to break free from the purely objective style of mainstream reportage of the time. Thompson almost always wrote in the first person, while extensively using his own experiences and emotions to color \"the story\" he was trying to follow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite his having personally described his work as \"Gonzo\", it fell to later observers to articulate what the term actually meant. While Thompson's approach clearly involved injecting himself as a participant in the events of the narrative, it also involved adding invented, metaphoric elements, thus creating, for the uninitiated reader, a seemingly confusing amalgam of facts and fiction notable for the deliberately blurred lines between one and the other. Thompson, in a 1974 interview in \"Playboy\" addressed the issue himself, saying \"Unlike Tom Wolfe or Gay Talese, I almost never try to reconstruct a story. They're both much better reporters than I am, but then, I don't think of myself as a reporter.\" Tom Wolfe would later describe Thompson's style as \"...\u00a0part journalism and part personal memoir admixed with powers of wild invention and wilder rhetoric.\" Or as one description of the differences between Thompson and Wolfe's styles would elaborate, \"While Tom Wolfe mastered the technique of being a fly on the wall, Thompson mastered the art of being a fly in the ointment.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The majority of Thompson's most popular and acclaimed work appeared within the pages of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. Along with Joe Eszterhas and David Felton, Thompson was instrumental in expanding the focus of the magazine past music criticism; indeed, Thompson was the only staff writer of the epoch never to contribute a music feature to the magazine. Nevertheless, his articles were always peppered with a wide array of pop music references ranging from Howlin' Wolf to Lou Reed. Armed with early fax machines wherever he went, he became notorious for haphazardly sending sometimes illegible material to the magazine's San Francisco offices as an issue was about to go to press.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Robert Love, Thompson's editor of 23 years at \"Rolling Stone\", wrote that \"the dividing line between fact and fancy rarely blurred, and we didn't always use italics or some other typographical device to indicate the lurch into the fabulous. But if there were living, identifiable humans in a scene, we took certain steps\u00a0... Hunter was a close friend of many prominent Democrats, veterans of the ten or more presidential campaigns he covered, so when in doubt, we'd call the press secretary. 'People will believe almost any twisted kind of story about politicians or Washington,' he once said, and he was right.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Discerning the line between the fact and the fiction of Thompson's work presented a practical problem for editors and fact-checkers of his work. Love called fact-checking Thompson's work \"one of the sketchiest occupations ever created in the publishing world\", and \"for the first-timer\u00a0... a trip through a journalistic fun house, where you didn't know what was real and what wasn't. You knew you had better learn enough about the subject at hand to know when the riff began and reality ended. Hunter was a stickler for numbers, for details like gross weight and model numbers, for lyrics and caliber, and there was no faking it.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson often used a blend of fiction and fact when portraying himself in his writing as well, sometimes using the name Raoul Duke as an author surrogate whom he generally described as a callous, erratic, self-destructive journalist who constantly drank alcohol and took hallucinogenic drugs. Fantasizing about causing bodily harm to others was also a characteristic in his work used to comedic effect and an example of his brand of humor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late sixties, Thompson acquired the title of \"Doctor\" from the Universal Life Church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A number of critics have commented that as he grew older the line that distinguished Thompson from his literary self became increasingly blurred. Thompson admitted during a 1978 BBC interview that he sometimes felt pressured to live up to the fictional self that he had created, adding \"I'm never sure which one people expect me to be. Very often, they conflict\u00a0\u2014 most often, as a matter of fact.\u00a0... I'm leading a normal life and right alongside me there is this myth, and it is growing and mushrooming and getting more and more warped. When I get invited to, say, speak at universities, I'm not sure if they are inviting Duke or Thompson. I'm not sure who to be.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson's writing style and eccentric persona gave him a cult following in both literary and drug circles, and his cult status expanded into broader areas after being portrayed three times in major motion pictures. Hence, both his writing style and persona have been widely imitated, and his likeness has even become a popular costume choice for Halloween.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson was a firearms and explosives enthusiast (in his writing and in life) and owned a vast collection of handguns, rifles, shotguns, and various automatic and semi-automatic weapons, along with numerous forms of gaseous crowd control and many homemade devices. He was a proponent of the right to bear arms and privacy rights. A member of the National Rifle Association, Thompson was also co-creator of \"The Fourth Amendment Foundation\", an organization to assist victims in defending themselves against unwarranted search and seizure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Part of his work with The Fourth Amendment Foundation centered around support of Lisl Auman, a Colorado woman who was sentenced for life in 1997 under felony murder charges for the death of police officer Bruce VanderJagt, despite contradictory statements and dubious evidence. Thompson organized rallies, provided legal support, and co-wrote an article in the June 2004 issue of \"Vanity Fair\" outlining the case. The Colorado Supreme Court eventually overturned Auman's sentence in March 2005, shortly after Thompson's death, and Auman is now free. Auman's supporters claim Thompson's support and publicity resulted in the successful appeal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson was also an ardent supporter of drug legalization and became known for his detailed accounts of his own drug use. He was an early supporter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws and served on the group's advisory board for over 30 years, until his death. He told an interviewer in 1997 that drugs should be legalized \"[a]cross the board. It might be a little rough on some people for a while, but I think it's the only way to deal with drugs. Look at Prohibition: all it did was make a lot of criminals rich.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a 1965 letter to his friend Paul Semonin, Thompson explained an affection for the Industrial Workers of the World, \"I have in recent months come to have a certain feeling for Joe Hill and the Wobbly crowd who, if nothing else, had the right idea. But not the right mechanics. I believe the IWW was probably the last human concept in American politics.\" In another letter to Semonin, Thompson wrote that he agreed with Karl Marx, and compared him to Thomas Jefferson. In a letter to William Kennedy, Thompson confided that he was \"coming to view the free enterprise system as the single greatest evil in the history of human savagery.\" In the documentary \"Breakfast with Hunter\", Hunter S. Thompson is seen in several scenes wearing different Che Guevara T-shirts. Additionally, actor and friend Benicio del Toro has stated that Thompson kept a \"big\" picture of Che in his kitchen. Thompson wrote on behalf of African-American rights and the civil rights movement. He strongly criticized the dominance in American society of, what he called, \"white power structures\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the September 11 attacks, Thompson voiced skepticism regarding the official story on who was responsible for the attacks. He speculated to several interviewers that it may have been conducted by the U.S. Government or with the government's assistance, though readily admitting he had no way to prove his theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2004, Thompson wrote: \"Nixon was a professional politician, and I despised everything he stood for\u2014but if he were running for president this year against the evil Bush\u2013Cheney gang, I would happily vote for him.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson wrote a number of books, publishing from 1966 to the end of his life. His best-known works include \"\", \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", and \"The Rum Diary\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a journalist over the course of decades, Thompson published numerous articles in various periodicals. He wrote for many publications, including \"Rolling Stone\", \"Esquire\", \"The Boston Globe\", \"Chicago Tribune\", \"The New York Times\", \"The San Francisco Examiner\", \"Time\", \"Vanity Fair\", \"The San Juan Star\", and \"Playboy\". He was also guest editor for a single edition of \"The Aspen Daily News\". A collection of 100 of his columns from \"The San Francisco Examiner\" was published in 1988 as \"Gonzo Papers, Vol. 2: Generation of Swine: Tales of Shame and Degradation in the '80s\". A collection of his articles for \"Rolling Stone\" was released in 2011 as \"Fear and Loathing at Rolling Stone: The Essential Writings of Hunter S. Thompson\". The book was edited by the magazine's co-founder and publisher, Jann S. Wenner, who also provided an introduction to the collection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson wrote many letters, which were his primary means of personal communication. He made carbon copies of all his letters, usually typed, a habit begun in his teenage years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"The Fear and Loathing Letters\" is a three-volume collection of selections from Thompson's correspondence, edited by the historian Douglas Brinkley. The first volume, \"The Proud Highway\" was published in 1997, and contains letters from 1955 to 1967. \"Fear and Loathing in America\" was published in 2000 and contains letters dating from 1968 to 1976. A third volume, titled \"The Mutineer: Rants, Ravings, and Missives from the Mountaintop 1977\u20132005\" was edited by Douglas Brinkley and published by Simon & Schuster in 2005. As of January 2018, it has yet to be sold to the public. It contains a special introduction by Johnny Depp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Accompanying the eccentric and colorful writing of Hunter Thompson, illustrations by British artist Ralph Steadman offer visual representations of the Gonzo style. Steadman and Thompson developed a close friendship, and often traveled together. Though his illustrations occur in most of Thompson's books, they are conspicuously featured in full-page color in Thompson's \"The Curse of Lono\", set in Hawaii.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thompson was an avid amateur photographer throughout his life and his photos have been exhibited since his death at art galleries in the United States and United Kingdom. In late 2006, AMMO Books published a limited-edition 224-page collection of Thompson photos called \"\", with an introduction by Johnny Depp. Thompson's snapshots were a combination of the subjects he was covering, stylized self-portraits, and artistic still life photos. The \"London Observer\" called the photos \"astonishingly good\" and noted that \"Thompson's pictures remind us, brilliantly in every sense, of very real people, real colours.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film \"Where the Buffalo Roam\" (1980) depicts heavily fictionalized attempts by Thompson to cover the Super Bowl and the 1972 U.S. presidential election. It stars Bill Murray as Thompson and Peter Boyle as Thompson's attorney Oscar Zeta Acosta, referred to in the movie as Carl Lazlo, Esq.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 1998 film adaptation of \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" was directed by Monty Python veteran Terry Gilliam, and starred Johnny Depp (who moved into Thompson's basement to \"study\" Thompson's persona before assuming his role in the film) as Raoul Duke and Benicio del Toro as Dr. Gonzo. The film has achieved something of a cult following.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film adaptation of Thompson's novel \"The Rum Diary\" was released in October 2011, also starring Johnny Depp as the main character, Paul Kemp. The novel's premise was inspired by Thompson's own experiences in Puerto Rico. The film was written and directed by Bruce Robinson.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At a press junket for \"The Rum Diary\" shortly before the film's release, Depp said that he would like to adapt \"The Curse of Lono\", \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\", and \"\" for the big screen: \"I'd just keep playing Hunter. There's a great comfort in it for me, because I get a great visit with my old friend who I miss dearly.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Fear and Loathing in Gonzovision\" (1978) is an extended television profile by the BBC. It can be found on disc 2 of The Criterion Collection edition of \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Mitchell brothers, owners of the O'Farrell Theatre in San Francisco, made a documentary about Thompson in 1988 called \"Hunter S. Thompson: The Crazy Never Die\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wayne Ewing created three documentaries about Thompson. The film \"Breakfast with Hunter\" (2003) was directed and edited by Ewing. It documents Thompson's work on the movie \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", his arrest for drunk driving, and his subsequent fight with the court system. \"When I Die\" (2005) is a video chronicle of making Thompson's final farewell wishes a reality, and documents the send-off itself. \"Free Lisl: Fear and Loathing in Denver\" (2006) chronicles Thompson's efforts in helping to free Lisl Auman, who was sentenced to life in prison without parole for the shooting of a police officer, a crime she didn't commit. All three films are only available online.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Come on Down: Searching for the American Dream\" (2004) Thompson gives director Adamm Liley insight into the nature of the American Dream over drinks at the Woody Creek Tavern.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"\" (2006) was directed by Tom Thurman, written by Tom Marksbury, and produced by the Starz Entertainment Group. The original documentary features interviews with Thompson's inner circle of family and friends, but the thrust of the film focuses on the manner in which his life often overlapped with numerous Hollywood celebrities who became his close friends, such as Johnny Depp, Benicio del Toro, Bill Murray, Sean Penn, John Cusack, Thompson's wife Anita, son Juan, former Senators George McGovern and Gary Hart, writers Tom Wolfe and William F. Buckley, actors Gary Busey and Harry Dean Stanton, and the illustrator Ralph Steadman among others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Blasted!!! The Gonzo Patriots of Hunter S. Thompson\" (2006), produced, directed, photographed and edited by Blue Kraning, is a documentary about the scores of fans who volunteered their privately owned artillery to fire the ashes of the late author, Hunter S. Thompson. \"Blasted!!!\" premiered at the 2006 Starz Denver International Film Festival, part of a tribute series to Hunter S. Thompson held at the Denver Press Club.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2008, Academy Award-winning documentarian Alex Gibney (\"\", \"Taxi to the Dark Side\") wrote and directed a documentary on Thompson, titled \"\". The film premiered on January 20, 2008, at the Sundance Film Festival. Gibney uses intimate, never-before-seen home videos, interviews with friends, enemies and lovers, and clips from films adapted from Thompson's material to document his turbulent life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lou Stein's adaptation of \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" was performed at the Battersea theatre. Stein persuades London's 'Time Out' Magazine to put Thompson up for a fortnight, in exchange for him writing a cover story to publicize the play. Thompson doesn't write the story, but does rampage around London on Time Out's expense account. The play was revived for the Vault Fringe Festival in 2014.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"GONZO: A Brutal Chrysalis\" is a one-man show about Thompson written by Paul Addis, who also played the author. Set in the writing den of Thompson's Woody Creek home, the show portrays his life between 1968 and 1971. James Cartee began playing the role soon after Addis's arrest in 2009, and again after Addis's death in 2012.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Historicism", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Historicism is the idea of attributing meaningful significance to space and time, such as historical period, geographical place, and local culture. Historicism tends to be hermeneutical because it values cautious, rigorous, and contextualized interpretation of information; or relativist, because it rejects notions of universal, fundamental and immutable interpretations. The approach varies from individualist theories of knowledge such as empiricism and rationalism, which neglect the role of traditions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term \"historicism\" (\"Historismus\") was coined by German philosopher Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel. Over time it has developed different and somewhat divergent meanings. Elements of historicism appear in the writings of French essayist Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) and Italian philosopher G. B. Vico (1668\u20131744), and became more fully developed with the dialectic of Georg Hegel (1770\u20131831), influential in 19th-century Europe. The writings of Karl Marx, influenced by Hegel, also include historicism. The term is also associated with the empirical social sciences and with the work of Franz Boas.", "qas": [{"question": "which two ideas are associated with the behavioral social sciences ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 1, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Historicism may be contrasted with reductionist theories\u2014which assumes that all developments can be explained by fundamental principles (such as in economic determinism)\u2014or with theories that posit that historical changes occur as a result of random chance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Austrian-English philosopher Karl Popper condemned historicism along with the determinism and holism which he argued formed its basis. In his \"Poverty of Historicism\", he identified historicism with the opinion that there are \"inexorable laws of historical destiny\", which opinion he warned against. This contrasts with the contextually relative interpretation of historicism for which its proponents argue. Talcott Parsons criticized historicism as a case of idealistic fallacy in \"The Structure of Social Action\" (1937).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Post-structuralism uses the term \"New Historicism\", which has some associations with both anthropology and Hegelianism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The theological use of the word denotes the interpretation of biblical prophecy as being related to church history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hegel viewed the realization of human freedom as the ultimate purpose of history, which could only be achieved through the creation of the perfect state. And this progressive history would only occur through a dialectical process: namely, the tension between the purpose of humankind (freedom), the position that humankind currently finds itself, and mankind's attempt to bend the current world into accord with its nature. However, because humans are often not aware of the goal of both humanity and history, the process of achieving freedom is necessarily one of self-discovery. Hegel also saw the progress toward freedom being conducted by the \"spirit\" (Geist), a seemingly supernatural force that directed all human actions and interactions. Yet Hegel makes clear that the spirit is a mere abstraction, and only comes into existence \"through the activity of finite agents.\" Thus, Hegel's philosophy of history is not necessarily metaphysical, despite the fact that many of Hegel's opponents and interpreters have understood Hegel's philosophy of history as a metaphysical and determinist view of history. For example, Karl Popper in his book \"The Poverty of Historicism\" interpreted Hegel's philosophy of history as metaphysical and deterministic. Popper referred to this \"Hegelian\" philosophy of history as \"Historicism\".", "qas": [{"question": "what did hegel believe could be achieved ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hegel's historicism also suggests that any human society and all human activities such as science, art, or philosophy, are defined by their history. Consequently, their essence can be sought only by understanding said history. The history of any such human endeavor, moreover, not only continues but also reacts against what has gone before; this is the source of Hegel's famous dialectic teaching usually summarized by the slogan \"thesis, antithesis, and synthesis\". (Hegel did not use these terms, although Johann Fichte did.) Hegel's famous aphorism, \"Philosophy is the history of philosophy,\" describes it bluntly.", "qas": [{"question": "according to hegel's , what is defined by their history ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hegel's position is perhaps best illuminated when contrasted against the atomistic and reductionist opinion of human societies and social activities self-defining on an \"ad hoc\" basis through the sum of dozens of interactions. Yet another contrasting model is the persistent metaphor of a social contract. Hegel considers the relationship between individuals and societies as organic, not atomic: even their social discourse is mediated by language, and language is based on etymology and unique character. It thus preserves the culture of the past in thousands of half-forgotten metaphors. To understand why a person is the way he is, you must examine that person in his society: and to understand that society, you must understand its history, and the forces that influenced it. The \"Zeitgeist\", the \"Spirit of the Age,\" is the concrete embodiment of the most important factors that are acting in human history at any given time. This contrasts with teleological theories of activity, which suppose that the end is the determining factor of activity, as well as those who believe in a tabula rasa, or blank slate, opinion, such that individuals are defined by their interactions.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the position of reductionist position ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "These ideas can be interpreted variously. The Right Hegelians, working from Hegel's opinions about the organicism and historically determined nature of human societies, interpreted Hegel's historicism as a justification of the unique destiny of national groups and the importance of stability and institutions. Hegel's conception of human societies as entities greater than the individuals who constitute them influenced nineteenth-century romantic nationalism and its twentieth-century excesses. The Young Hegelians, by contrast, interpreted Hegel's thoughts on societies influenced by social conflict for a doctrine of social progress, and attempted to manipulate these forces to cause various results. Karl Marx's doctrine of \"historical inevitabilities\" and historical materialism is one of the more influential reactions to this part of Hegel's thought. Significantly, Karl Marx's theory of alienation argues that capitalism disrupts traditional relationships between workers and their work.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hegelian historicism is related to his ideas on the means by which human societies progress, specifically the dialectic and his conception of logic as representing the inner essential nature of reality. Hegel attributes the change to the \"modern\" need to interact with the world, whereas ancient philosophers were self-contained, and medieval philosophers were monks. In his History of Philosophy Hegel writes:\nIn modern times things are very different; now we no longer see philosophic individuals who constitute a class by themselves. With the present day all difference has disappeared; philosophers are not monks, for we find them generally in connection with the world, participating with others in some common work or calling. They live, not independently, but in the relation of citizens, or they occupy public offices and take part in the life of the state. Certainly they may be private persons, but if so, their position as such does not in any way isolate them from their other relationship. They are involved in present conditions, in the world and its work and progress. Thus their philosophy is only by the way, a sort of luxury and superfluity. This difference is really to be found in the manner in which outward conditions have taken shape after the building up of the inward world of religion. In modern times, namely, on account of the reconciliation of the worldly principle with itself, the external world is at rest, is brought into order \u2014 worldly relationships, conditions, modes of life, have become constituted and organized in a manner which is conformable to nature and rational. We see a universal, comprehensible connection, and with that individuality likewise attains another character and nature, for it is no longer the plastic individuality of the ancients. This connection is of such power that every individuality is under its dominion, and yet at the same time can construct for itself an inward world.\nThis opinion that entanglement in society creates an indissoluble bond with expression, would become an influential question in philosophy, namely, the requirements for individuality. It would be considered by Nietzsche, John Dewey and Michel Foucault directly, as well as in the work of numerous artists and authors. There have been various responses to Hegel's challenge. The Romantic period emphasized the ability of individual genius to transcend time and place, and use the materials from their heritage to fashion works which were beyond determination. The modern would advance versions of John Locke's infinite malleability of the human animal. Post-structuralism would argue that since history is not present, but only the image of history, that while an individual era or power structure might emphasize a particular history, that the contradictions within the story would hinder the very purposes that the history was constructed to advance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the context of anthropology and other sciences which study the past, historicism has a different meaning. Anthropological historicism is associated with the work of Franz Boas. His theory used the diffusionist concept that there were a few \"cradles of civilization\" which grew outwards, and merged it with the idea that societies would adapt to their circumstances, which is called historical particularism. The school of historicism grew in response to unilinear theories that social development represented adaptive fitness, and therefore existed on a continuum. While these theories were espoused by Charles Darwin and many of his students, their application as applied in social Darwinism and general evolution characterized in the theories of Herbert Spencer and Leslie White, historicism was neither anti-selection, nor anti-evolution, as Darwin never attempted nor offered an explanation for cultural evolution. However, it attacked the notion that there was one normative spectrum of development, instead emphasizing how local conditions would create adaptations to the local environment. Julian Steward refuted the viability of globally and universally applicable adaptive standards proposing that culture was honed adaptively in response to the idiosyncrasies of the local environment, the cultural ecology, by specific evolution. What was adaptive for one region might not be so for another. This conclusion has likewise been adopted by modern forms of biological evolutionary theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The primary method of historicism was empirical, namely that there were so many requisite inputs into a society or event, that only by emphasizing the data available could a theory of the source be determined. In this opinion, grand theories are unprovable, and instead intensive field work would determine the most likely explanation and history of a culture, and hence it is named \"historicism.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "This opinion would produce a wide range of definition of what, exactly, constituted culture and history, but in each case the only means of explaining it was in terms of the historical particulars of the culture itself.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 1950s, when Jacques Lacan and Foucault argued that each epoch has its own knowledge system, within which individuals are inexorably entangled, many post-structuralists have used \"historicism\" to describe the opinion that all questions must be settled within the cultural and social context in which they are raised. Answers cannot be found by appeal to an external truth, but only within the confines of the norms and forms that phrase the question. This version of historicism holds that there are only the raw texts, markings and artifacts that exist in the present, and the conventions used to decode them. This school of thought is sometimes given the name of \"New Historicism\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the school of thought ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 14, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The same term, \"new historicism\" is also used for a school of literary scholarship which interprets a poem, drama, etc. as an expression of or reaction to the power-structures of its society. Stephen Greenblatt is an example of this school.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another term for a student of literary scholarship ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Within the context of 20th-century philosophy, debates continue as to whether ahistorical and immanent methods were sufficient to understand meaning\u2014that is to say, \"what you see is what you get\" positivism\u2014or whether context, background and culture are important beyond the mere need to decode words, phrases and references. While post-structural historicism is relativist in its orientation, that is, it sees each culture as its own frame of reference, a large number of thinkers have embraced the need for historical context, not because culture is self-referential, but because there is no more compressed means of conveying all of the relevant information except through history. This opinion is often seen as deriving from the work of Benedetto Croce. Recent historians using this tradition include Thomas Kuhn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Christianity, the term \"historicism\" refers to the confessional Protestant form of prophetical interpretation which holds that the fulfillment of biblical prophecy has occurred throughout history and continues to occur; as opposed to other methods which limit the time-frame of prophecy-fulfillment to the past or to the future.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is also a particular opinion in ecclesiastical history and in the history of dogmas which has been described as historicist by Pope Pius XII in the encyclical \"Humani generis\". \"They add that the history of dogmas consists in the reporting of the various forms in which revealed truth has been clothed, forms that have succeeded one another in accordance with the different teachings and opinions that have arisen over the course of the centuries.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The social theory of Karl Marx, with respect to modern scholarship, has an ambiguous relation to historicism. Critics of Marx have charged his theory with historicism since its very genesis. However, the issue of historicism also finds itself important to many debates within Marxism itself; the charge of historicism has been made against various types of Marxism, typically disparaged by Marxists as \"vulgar\" Marxism.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the social theory of friedrich marx ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Marx himself expresses critical concerns with this historicist tendency in his Theses on Feuerbach:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Karl Popper used the term \"historicism\" in his influential books \"The Poverty of Historicism\" and \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", to mean: \"an approach to the social sciences which assumes that \"historical prediction\" is their primary aim, and which assumes that this aim is attainable by discovering the 'rhythms' or the 'patterns', the 'laws' or the 'trends' that underlie the evolution of history\". Karl Popper wrote with reference to Hegel's theory of history, which he criticized extensively. However, there is wide dispute whether Popper's description of \"historicism\" is an accurate description of Hegel, or more his characterisation of his own philosophical antagonists, including Marxist-Leninist thought, then widely held as posing a challenge to the philosophical basis of the West, as well as theories such as Spengler's which drew predictions about the future course of events from the past.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", Popper attacks \"historicism\" and its proponents, among whom (as well as Hegel) he identifies and singles out Plato and Marx\u2014calling them all \"enemies of the open society\". The objection he makes is that historicist positions, by claiming that there is an inevitable and deterministic pattern to history, abrogate the democratic responsibility of each one of us to make our own free contributions to the evolution of society, and hence lead to totalitarianism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another of his targets is what he terms \"moral historicism\", the attempt to infer moral values from the course of history; in Hegel's words, that \"history is the world's court of justice\". This may take the form of conservatism (former might is right), positivism (might is right) or futurism (presumed coming might is right). As against these, Popper says that he does not believe \"that success proves anything or that history is our judge\". Futurism must be distinguished from prophecies that the right will prevail: these attempt to infer history from ethics, rather than ethics from history, and are therefore historicism in the normal sense rather than moral historicism.", "qas": [{"question": "what is one of his targets ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He also attacks what he calls \"Historism\", which he regards as distinct from historicism. By historism, he means the tendency to regard every argument or idea as completely accounted for by its historical context, as opposed to assessing it by its merits. In Popperian terms, the \"New Historicism\" is an example of historism rather than of historicism proper.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leo Strauss used the term \"historicism\" and reportedly termed it the single greatest threat to intellectual freedom insofar as it denies any attempt to address injustice-pure-and-simple (such is the significance of historicism's rejection of \"natural right\" or \"right by nature\"). Strauss argued that historicism \"rejects political philosophy\" (insofar as this stands or falls by questions of permanent, trans-historical significance) and is based on the belief that \"all human thought, including scientific thought, rests on premises which cannot be validated by human reason and which came from historical epoch to historical epoch.\" Strauss further identified R. G. Collingwood as the most coherent advocate of historicism in the English language. Countering Collingwood's arguments, Strauss warned against historicist social scientists' failure to address real-life problems\u2014most notably that of tyranny\u2014to the extent that they relativize (or \"subjectivize\") all ethical problems by placing their significance strictly in function of particular or ever-changing socio-material conditions devoid of inherent or \"objective\" \"value.\" Similarly, Strauss criticized Eric Voegelin's abandonment of ancient political thought as guide or vehicle in interpreting modern political problems.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the author of the leo ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In his books, \"Natural Right and History\" and \"On Tyranny\", Strauss offers a complete critique of historicism as it emerges in the works of Hegel, Marx, and Heidegger. Many believe that Strauss also found historicism in Edmund Burke, Tocqueville, Augustine, and John Stuart Mill. Although it is largely disputed whether Strauss himself was a historicist, he often indicated that historicism grew out of and against Christianity and was a threat to civic participation, belief in human agency, religious pluralism, and, most controversially, an accurate understanding of the classical philosophers and religious prophets themselves. Throughout his work, he warns that historicism, and the understanding of progress that results from it, expose us to tyranny, totalitarianism, and democratic extremism. In his exchange with Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve in \"On Tyranny\", Strauss seems to blame historicism for Nazism and Communism. In a collection of his works by Kenneth Hart entitled \"Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity\", he argues that Islam, traditional Judaism, and ancient Greece, share a concern for sacred law that makes them especially susceptible to historicism, and therefore to tyranny. Strauss makes use of Nietzsche's own critique of progress and historicism, although Strauss refers to Nietzsche himself (no less than to Heidegger) as a \"radical historicist\" who articulated a philosophical (if only untenable) justification for historicism.", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote `` natural right and history '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hunter College", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hunter College is one of the constituent colleges of the City University of New York, an American public university. It is located in the Lenox Hill neighborhood of the Upper East Side of Manhattan, New York City. The college offers studies in more than one hundred undergraduate and postgraduate fields across five schools. It also administers Hunter College High School and Hunter College Elementary School.", "qas": [{"question": "what school of school does the hunter provide ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 0, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Hunter was founded in 1870 as a women's college; it first admitted male freshmen in 1946. The main campus has been located on Park Avenue since 1873. In 1943, Eleanor Roosevelt dedicated Franklin Delano Roosevelt's and her former townhouse to the college; the building was reopened in 2010 as the Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College.", "qas": [{"question": "when was hunter founded ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The college is the only one in the nation whose roster of alumni includes two female Nobel laureates in medicine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter College has its origins in the 19th-century movement for normal school training which swept across the United States. Hunter descends from the Female Normal and High School (later renamed the Normal College of the City of New York), established in New York City in 1870. Founded by Irish immigrant Thomas Hunter, who was president of the school during the first 37 years, it was originally a women's college for training teachers. The school, which was housed in an armory and saddle store at Broadway and East Fourth Street in Manhattan, was open to all qualified women, irrespective of race, religion or ethnic background. At the time most women's colleges had racial or ethno-religious admissions criteria.", "qas": [{"question": "what is hunter college 's origins ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Created by the New York State Legislature, Hunter was deemed the only approved institution for those seeking to teach in New York City. The school incorporated an elementary and high school for gifted children, where students practiced teaching. In 1887, a kindergarten was established as well. (Today, the elementary school and the high school still exist at a different location, and are now called the Hunter College Campus Schools.)", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the school campus at washington university ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 4, 3)"}]}, {"context": "During Thomas Hunter's tenure as president of the school, Hunter became known for its impartiality regarding race, religion, ethnicity, financial or political favoritism; its pursuit of higher education for women; its high entry requirements; and its rigorous academics. The first female professor at the school, Helen Gray Cone, was elected to the position in 1899. The college's student population quickly expanded, and the college subsequently moved uptown, in 1873, into a new Gothic structure, now known as Thomas Hunter Hall, on Lexington Avenue between 68th and 69th Streets. The hall was probably designed by the architect Snyder.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1888 the school was incorporated as a college under the statutes of New York State, with the power to confer the degree of A.B. This led to the separation of the school into two \"camps\": the \"Normals\", who pursued a four-year course of study to become licensed teachers, and the \"Academics\", who sought non-teaching professions and the Bachelor of Arts degree. After 1902 when the \"Normal\" course of study was abolished, the \"Academic\" course became standard across the student body.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1914 the Normal College became Hunter College in honor of its first president. At the same time, the college was experiencing a period of great expansion as increasing student enrollments necessitated more space. The college reacted by establishing branches in the boroughs of Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. By 1920, Hunter College had the largest enrollment of women of any municipally financed college in the United States. In 1930, Hunter's Brooklyn campus merged with City College's Brooklyn campus, and the two were spun off to form Brooklyn College.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the normal college become hunter college in honor of its first president ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Between 1938 and 1939 the garden at Park Avenue was given up for the construction of the north building. The expansion also destroyed a large part of the neo-gothic original structure, fusing them together. Only the back part facing Lexington Avenue between 68th and 69th street remain from the original building.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The late 1930s saw the construction of Hunter College in the Bronx (later known as the Bronx Campus). During the Second World War, Hunter leased the Bronx Campus buildings to the United States Navy who used the facilities to train 95,000 women volunteers for military service as WAVES and SPARS. When the Navy vacated the campus, the site was briefly occupied by the nascent United Nations, which held its first Security Council sessions at the Bronx Campus in 1946, giving the school an international profile.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1943, Eleanor Roosevelt dedicated a town house at 47\u201349 East 65th Street in Manhattan to the college. The house had been a home for the future President and First Lady. Today it is known as The Roosevelt House of Public Policy and opened in fall 2010 as an academic center hosting prominent speakers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter became the women's college of the municipal system, and in the 1950s, when City College became coeducational, Hunter started admitting men to its Bronx campus. In 1964, the Manhattan campus began admitting men also. The Bronx campus subsequently became Lehman College in 1968.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1968\u20131969, Black and Puerto Rican students struggled to get a department that would teach about their history and experience. These and supportive students and faculty expressed this demand through building take-overs, rallies, etc. In Spring 1969, Hunter College established Black and Puerto Rican Studies (now called Africana/Puerto Rican and Latino Studies). An \"open admissions\" policy initiated in 1970 by the City University of New York opened the school's doors to historically underrepresented groups by guaranteeing a college education to any and all who graduated from NYC high schools. Many African Americans, Asian Americans, Latinos, Puerto Ricans, and students from the developing world made their presence felt at Hunter, and even after the end of \"open admissions\" still comprise a large part of the school's student body. As a result of this increase in enrollment, Hunter opened new buildings on Lexington Avenue during the early 1980s. In further advancing Puerto Rican studies, Hunter became home to the Centro de Estudios Puertorrique\u00f1os (\"Center for Puerto Rican Studies\" or simply \"Centro\") in 1982.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today, Hunter College is a comprehensive teaching and research institution. Of the more than 20,000 students enrolled at Hunter, nearly 5,000 are enrolled in a graduate program, the most popular of which are education and social work. Although less than 28% of students are the first in their families to attend college, the college maintains its tradition of concern for women's education, with nearly three out of four students being female. In 2006, Hunter became home to the Bella Abzug Leadership Institute, which will run training programs for young women to build their leadership, public speaking, business and advocacy skills. Princeton Review named the college as one of America's \"Best Value\" Colleges in its 2007 guide.", "qas": [{"question": "what is hunter college ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In recent years, the college has integrated its undergraduate and graduate programs to successfully make advanced programs in fields such as (Psychology and Biology) \u2013 \"Ph.D Program\", (Education) \u2013 \"Master's Program\", (Mathematics) \u2013 \"Master's Program\", -\"Ph.D Program\" (Biology & Chemistry) \u2013 \"Biochemistry\", (Accounting) \u2013 \"Master's Program\" along with the highly competitive (Economics) \u2013 \"Master's Program\" to which only a select few students may enter based on excellent scholarship and performance, and less than half will earn a master's degree by maintaining a nearly perfect academic record and performing thesis research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although far from the polar regions, Hunter is a member institution of the University of the Arctic, a network of schools providing education accessible to northern students.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter College is anchored by its main campus at East 68th Street and Lexington Avenue, a modern complex of three towers \u2014 the East, West, and North Buildings \u2014 and Thomas Hunter Hall, all of which are interconnected by skywalks. The college's official street address is 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10065. (Formerly bearing the ZIP code of 10021, the code changed on July 1, 2007 in accordance with the United States Postal Service's plan to split the 10021 ZIP code.)<ref</ref> It claims a Park Avenue address by virtue of the North Building, which stretches from 68th to 69th Streets along Park Avenue.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main campus is situated within walking distance of Central Park, as well as many of New York's most prestigious cultural institutions, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Asia Society Museum, and the Frick Collection. The New York City Subway's 68th Street \u2013 Hunter College station () on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line is directly underneath, and serves the entire campus. Adjacent to the staircase to the station, in front of the West Building, sits an iconic Hunter sculpture, \"Tau\", created by late Hunter professor and respected artist Tony Smith.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main campus is home to the School of Arts and Sciences and the School of Education. It features numerous facilities that serve not only Hunter, but the surrounding community, and is particularly well known as a center for the arts. The Assembly Hall, which seats more than 2,000, is a major performance site; the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse, a 675-seat proscenium theatre, has over 100,000 visitors annually and hosts over 200 performances each season; the Ida K. Lang Recital Hall is a fully equipped concert space with 148 seats; the Frederick Loewe Theatre, a 50 x black box performance space is the site of most department performances; and the Bertha and Karl Leubsdorf Art Gallery hosts professionally organized art exhibits.", "qas": [{"question": "what school is home to the school of arts and sciences ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Students have access to specialized learning facilities at the main campus, including the Dolciani Mathematics Learning Center, the Leona and Marcy Chanin Language Center, and the Physical Sciences Learning Center. A respected research institution, Hunter has numerous research laboratories in the natural and biomedical sciences. These labs accommodate post-docs, PhD students from the CUNY Graduate School, and undergraduate researchers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "College sports and recreational programs are served by the Hunter Sportsplex, located below the West Building.<ref name=\"About Hunter: In Brief, 12/1/07\"></ref>", "qas": [{"question": "where is the hunter sportsplex located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hunter has two satellite campuses: The Silberman School of Social Work Building, located on 3rd Avenue between East 118th and East 119th Streets, which houses the School of Social Work, the School of Urban Public Health, and the Brookdale Center on Aging; and the Brookdale Campus, located at East 25th Street and 1st Avenue, which houses the Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, the Schools of the Health Professions, the Health Professions Library and several research centers and computer labs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Brookdale Campus is the site of the Hunter dormitory, which is home to over 600 undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a limited number of nurses employed at Bellevue Hospital. Prior to the opening of City College's new \"Towers,\" the Brookdale complex was the City University's only dormitory facility.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter College owns and operates property outside of its main campuses, including the MFA Building, Roosevelt House, and the Hunter College Campus Schools. The MFA Building, located on West 41st Street between 9th and 10th Avenues, is a space that is the site of most BFA and MFA exhibitions. Roosevelt House, located on East 65th Street, is the historic family home of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Hunter's Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute is now located there, honoring the public policy commitments of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. The Hunter Campus Schools\u2014Hunter College High School and Hunter College Elementary School\u2014are publicly funded schools for the intellectually gifted. Located at East 94th Street, the Campus Schools are among the nation's oldest and largest elementary and secondary schools of their kind.", "qas": [{"question": "where is hunter college located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hunter library collections are housed in the Leon and Toby Cooperman Library (the main library) and the Zabar Art Library at East 68th Street, the Health Professions Library at the Brookdale Campus, and the Social Work Library at East 79th Street. There is a small library at the Roosevelt House building. Together, these libraries hold over 760,000 volumes, more than 2,100 current print periodical subscriptions and approximately 10,000 in electronic format, 1,168,000 microforms, 13,000 videos and music CDs, 250,000 art slides, and 40,000+ digital images. The CUNY+ online catalog of university-wide holdings and remote online databases are accessible at all Hunter libraries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Under the guidance of the Presidential Task Force on the Library, created in the fall of 2006, the Leon and Toby Cooperman Library has undergone several improvements in the areas of facilities, holdings, and services. The library now features wireless capability, a redesigned student lounge and circulation desk, improved lighting, and expanded electronic resources. Additionally, the college has extended library hours, hired more library staff, and instituted a laptop loan program for students. More improvements are planned for the future, as part of an initiative to fully modernize the library.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter, a fully accredited college, is organized into four schools: The School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Education, the School of the Health Professions, and the School of Social Work. The College is highly selective, with an admissions acceptance rate of 25.1%. Hunter students have their choice of 70 programs leading to a BA or BS degree; 10 BA-MA joint degree programs; and 75 graduate programs.\nThey may study within the fields of fine arts, the humanities, the language arts, the sciences, the social sciences, and the applied arts and sciences, as well as in professional areas in accounting, education, health sciences, and nursing. Regardless of area of concentration, all Hunter students are encouraged to have broad exposure to the liberal arts; Hunter was one of the first colleges in the nation to pass a 12-credit curriculum requirement for pluralism and diversity courses. [Link not relevant to citation.]", "qas": [{"question": "how many schools: the school of arts does hunter have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hunter has 673 full-time and 886 part-time faculty members, and 20,844 students\u201415,718 undergraduates and 5,126 graduates. Over 50% of Hunter's students belong to ethnic minority groups. The class of 2011 represents 60 countries and speaks 59 different languages. Seventy-one percent of these students were born outside the United States or have at least one foreign-born parent. SAT and high school GPA scores for the entering Fall 2012 class of freshmen have an SAT score 25th\u201375th percentile range of 1090 to 1280, meaning that 75% of students scored higher than 1090 on the SAT and 25% received a score higher than 1280. And high school GPA 25th\u201375th percentile range of 85% to 92%, meaning that 75% of students had an average high school GPA higher than an 85% and 25% had a high school GPA higher than 92%.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the average high school diploma higher than an 85% and 25% ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 27, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Hunter is also known as one of the more affordable schools in the Manhattan area providing low-cost, yet high quality education. In 2006, Hunter was listed in Barron's \"Best Buys in College Education\"\u2014the only CUNY school to receive such recognition\u2014as a \"dynamic college, with an energy that makes the campus sizzle.\" Hunter students graduate from the college with one of the lowest debt-loads in the country, and are frequent recipients of prestigious prizes and awards, including Fulbright and Mellon Fellowships. Additionally, they are regularly accepted into graduate programs at the nation's most prestigious universities. Hunter's creative writing program has been ranked No. 26 in the nation in graduating authors and poets.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of education is hunter also known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "According to the \"Best Value Colleges for 2010,\" a ranking published by The Princeton Review and \"U.S.A. Today\", Hunter is the nation's number 2 \"Best Value\" in public colleges (on the basis of the analysis of over 10 factors in three areas: academics, costs of attendance, and financial aid). The Princeton Review's 2011 edition of the \"Best 373 Colleges\" includes Hunter as one of the best colleges or universities in the United States. Hunter also was cited among the \"Best Northeastern Colleges\", one of five regional guides published by the Princeton Review. It is ranked 284th on Forbes' college rankings list.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 2011 edition of \"America's Best Colleges,\" published by \"U.S. News & World Report\", places the college 8th among public universities in the north in the \"Best Universities-Master's\" category, and among the 574 public and private institutions in this category, Hunter is in the first tier with a rank of 39. Hunter is 3rd in the nation among master's institutions in the number of students awarded Fulbright grants, according to the October 2009 ranking compiled by the \"Chronicle of Higher Education\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Out of 442 nationally ranked colleges and universities, Hunter is No. 2 in the number of women graduates who pursue PhDs and No. 9 in the number of minority graduates who pursue PhDs. In a separate study conducted by the National Science Foundation for the period 1999\u20132003, out of 604 institutions of higher education evaluated, Hunter was No. 6 in the total number of doctorate recipients earned by undergraduates.", "qas": [{"question": "how many colleges are in the university of bras\u00edlia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 2009, Hunter\u2014along with the U.S. Military academy\u2014was among only seven universities nationwide to receive the highest ranking out of 130 colleges and universities evaluated by the American Council of Trustees and Alumni (ACTA). The ACTA report, \"What Will They Learn? A Report on General Education Requirements at 100 of the Nation's Leading Colleges and Universities,\" ranks colleges in the first category (or a letter grade of A) if the college requires all students to take courses in six of seven academic areas: composition, literature, foreign languages, U.S. government or history, economics, mathematics and natural or physical sciences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter offers several honors programs, including the Macaulay Honors College and the Thomas Hunter Honors Program. The Macaulay Honors College, a CUNY-wide honors program, supports the undergraduate education of academically gifted students. University Scholars benefit from a full tuition scholarship (up to the value of in-state tuition only as of Fall 2013, effectively restricting it to NY state residents), personalized advising, early registration, access to internships, and study abroad opportunities. All scholars at Hunter are given the choice of either a free dormitory room at the Brookdale Campus for two years or a yearly stipend.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the thomas hunter 's profession ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 33, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Thomas Hunter Honors Program offers topical interdisciplinary seminars and academic concentrations designed to meet students\u2019 individual interests. The program is open to outstanding students pursuing a BA and is orchestrated under the supervision of an Honors Council. It can be combined with, or replace, a formal departmental major/minor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter offers other honors programs, including: Honors Research Training Programs and Departmental Honors opportunities, The Muse Scholar program, the Jenny Hunter program, the Athena program, and the Yallow program.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the muse program ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In addition to these honors programs, several honors societies are based at Hunter, including Phi Beta Kappa (PBK). A small percentage of Hunter students are invited to join Hunter's Nu chapter of PBK, which has existed at the college since 1920. Less than 10% of the nation's liberal arts colleges qualify academically for a PBK chapter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hunter College student body is governed by the Undergraduate Student Government and the Graduate Student Association (GSA), both of which offer a wide range of activities and services.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter offers approximately 150 clubs that reflect the diverse interests of its student body. These organizations range from the academic to the athletic, and from the religious/spiritual to the visual and performing arts. There are even clubs based on specific interests, such as \"Russian Club\", which offers a look at Russian life and culture and \"InterVarsity Christian Fellowship\" an organization whose vision is to \"transform students and faculty, renew the campus, and develop world changers. \"", "qas": []}, {"context": "National \u2013 Social", "qas": []}, {"context": "National \u2013 Service", "qas": []}, {"context": "Local \u2013 Social", "qas": []}, {"context": "Local \u2013 Service", "qas": []}, {"context": "Non-Greek", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter College has a campus radio station, \"WHCS\", which once broadcast at 590AM but is now solely online. \"The Envoy\" is the main campus newspaper, published bi-weekly during the academic year. Its literary and art magazine \"The Olivetree Review\" offers opportunities for publishing student prose, poetry, drama, and art. Other publications include \"Culture Magazine\" (fashion and lifestyle), \"Hunted Hero Comics\" (comics and graphic stories), \"The Photographer's Collective\" (photography), \"Nursing Student Press\" (medical news and articles), \"Psych News\" (psychology), \"The Wistarion\" (yearbook), \"SABOR\" (Spanish language and photography/now defunct), \"Revista De La Academia\" (Spanish language/now defunct), the \"Islamic Times\" (now defunct), \"Political Paradigm\" (political science/now defunct), \"Hakol\" (Jewish interest/now defunct), and \"Spoof\" (humor/now defunct).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Past publications also include \"the WORD\" (news) and \"Hunter Anonymous\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hunter is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and competes at the Division III level.<ref name=\"All About Athletics, 12/1/07\">\"All About Athletics\", December 1, 2007</ref> According to the CUNY website, \"Hunter offers what is widely considered the premier athletic program in the City University of New York.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a partnership with the New York City Department of Education, the Manhattan/Hunter College High School for Sciences was opened in 2003 on the campus of the former Martin Luther King, Jr. High School on the Upper West Side. Unlike Hunter's campus schools, Hunter Science does not require an entrance exam for admission.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This list covers alumni in visual, musical, and performing arts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nInformational notes\nCitations", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Harry Shearer", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Harry Julius Shearer (born December 23, 1943) is an American actor, voice actor, comedian, writer, musician, radio host, director and producer. Born in Los Angeles, California, Shearer began his career as a child actor. From 1969 to 1976, Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap, a radio comedy group. Following the breakup of the group, Shearer co-wrote the film \"Real Life\" with Albert Brooks and started writing for Martin Mull's television series \"Fernwood 2 Night\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer was a cast member on \"Saturday Night Live\" between 1979 and 1980, and 1984 and 1985. Shearer co-created, co-wrote and co-starred in the 1984 film \"This Is Spinal Tap\", a satirical rockumentary, which became a cult hit. In 1989, he joined the cast of the animated sitcom \"The Simpsons\"; he provides voices for characters including Mr. Burns, Waylon Smithers, Principal Skinner, Ned Flanders, Reverend Lovejoy, Kent Brockman, Dr. Hibbert and more. Shearer has appeared in films including \"A Mighty Wind\" and \"The Truman Show,\" and has directed two, \"Teddy Bears' Picnic\" and \"The Big Uneasy.\" He has written three books. Since 1983, Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy/music program \"Le Show\", incorporating satire, music, and sketch comedy.", "qas": [{"question": "on what day was the queen queen member ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer has won a Primetime Emmy Award, has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the radio category, and has received several other Emmy and Grammy Award nominations. He has been married to singer-songwriter Judith Owen since 1993. He is currently \"artist in residence\" at Loyola University, New Orleans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer was born December 23, 1943, in Los Angeles, the son of Dora Warren (n\u00e9e Kohn; d. 2008), a bookkeeper, and Mack Shearer. His parents were Jewish emigrants from Austria and Poland. Starting when Shearer was four years old, he had a piano teacher whose daughter worked as a child actress. The piano teacher later decided to make a career change and become a children's agent, since she knew people in the business through her daughter's work. The teacher asked Shearer's parents for permission to take him to an audition. Several months later, she called Shearer's parents and told them that she had gotten Shearer an audition for the radio show \"The Jack Benny Program\". Shearer received the role when he was seven years old. He described Jack Benny as \"very warm and approachable ... He was a guy who dug the idea of other people on the show getting laughs, which sort of spoiled me for other people in comedy.\" Shearer said in an interview that one person who \"took him under his wing\" and was one of his best friends during his early days in show business was voice actor Mel Blanc, who voiced many animated characters, including Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck and Barney Rubble. Shearer made his film debut in the 1953 film \"Abbott and Costello Go to Mars\", in which he had a small part. Later that year he appeared in \"The Robe\". Throughout his childhood and teenage years he worked in television, film, and radio. In 1957, Shearer played the precursor to the Eddie Haskell character in the pilot episode of the television series \"Leave It to Beaver\". After the filming, Shearer's parents said they did not want him to be a regular in a series. Instead they wanted him to just do occasional work so that he could have a normal childhood. Shearer and his parents made the decision not to accept the role in the series if it was picked up by a television network.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of shearer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer attended UCLA as a political science major in the early 1960s and decided to quit show business to become a \"serious person\". However, he says this lasted approximately a month, and he joined the staff of the \"Daily Bruin\", UCLA's school newspaper, during his first year. He was editor of the college humor magazine (Satyr) including the June 1964 parody, Preyboy He also worked as a newscaster at KRLA, a top 40 radio station in Pasadena, during this period. According to Shearer, after graduating, he had \"a very serious agenda going on, and it was 'Stay Out of the Draft'.\" He attended graduate school at Harvard University for one year and worked at the state legislature in Sacramento. In 1967 and 1968, he was a high school teacher, teaching English and social studies. He left teaching following \"disagreements with the administration.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1969 to 1976, Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap, a radio comedy group that included David Lander, Richard Beebe and Michael McKean. The group consisted of \"a bunch of newsmen\" at KRLA 1110, \"the number two station\" in Los Angeles. They wanted to do more than just straight news, so they hired comedians who were talented vocalists. Shearer heard about it from a friend so he brought over a tape to the station and nervously gave it to the receptionist. He found out he was hired that same day. The group's radio show was canceled in 1970 by KRLA and in 1971 by KPPC-FM, so they started performing in various clubs and concert venues. While at KRLA, Shearer also interviewed Creedence Clearwater Revival for the Pop Chronicles music documentary. In 1973, Shearer appeared as Jim Houseafire on \"How Time Flys\", an album by The Firesign Theatre's David Ossman. The Credibility Gap broke up in 1976 when Lander and McKean left to perform in the sitcom \"Laverne & Shirley\". Shearer started working with Albert Brooks, producing one of Brooks' albums and co-writing the film \"Real Life\". Shearer also started writing for Martin Mull's television series \"Fernwood 2 Night\". In the mid-1970s, he started working with Rob Reiner on a pilot for ABC. The show, which starred Christopher Guest, Tom Leopold and McKean, was not picked up.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In August 1979, Shearer was hired as a writer and cast member on \"Saturday Night Live\", one of the first additions to the cast, and an unofficial replacement for John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd, who were both leaving the show. Al Franken recommended Shearer to \"Saturday Night Live\" creator Lorne Michaels. Shearer describes his experience on the show as a \"living hell\" and \"not a real pleasant place to work.\" He did not get along well with the other writers and cast members and states that he was not included with the cast in the opening montage (although he was added to the montage for latter episodes of the 1979\u201380 season) and that Lorne Michaels had told the rest of the cast that he was just a writer. Michaels left \"Saturday Night Live\" at the end of the fifth season, taking the entire cast with him. Shearer told new executive producer Jean Doumanian that he was \"not a fan of Lorne's\" and offered to stay with the show if he was given the chance to overhaul the program and bring in experienced comedians, like Christopher Guest. However, Doumanian turned him down, so he decided to leave with the rest of the cast.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1984, while promoting the film \"This Is Spinal Tap\", Shearer, Christopher Guest and Michael McKean performed on \"Saturday Night Live\". All three members were offered the chance to join the show in the 1984\u20131985 season. Shearer accepted because he was treated well by the producers and he thought the backstage environment had improved but later stated that he \"didn't realize that guests are treated better than the regulars.\" Guest also accepted the offer while McKean rejected it, although he would join the cast in 1994. Dick Ebersol, who replaced Lorne Michaels as the show's producer, said that Shearer was \"a gifted performer but a pain in the butt. He's just so demanding on the preciseness of things and he's very, very hard on the working people. He's just a nightmare-to-deal-with person.\" In January 1985, Shearer left the show for good, partially because he felt he was not being used enough. Martin Short said Shearer \"wanted to be creative and Dick [Ebersol] wanted something else. ... I think he felt his voice wasn't getting represented on the show. When he wouldn't get that chance, it made him very upset.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who performed the movie `` the this '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer co-created, co-wrote and co-starred in Rob Reiner's 1984 film \"This Is Spinal Tap\". Shearer, Reiner, Michael McKean and Christopher Guest received a deal to write a first draft of a screenplay for a company called Marble Arch. They decided that the film could not be written and instead filmed a 20-minute demo of what they wanted to do. It was eventually greenlighted by Norman Lear and Jerry Perenchio at Embassy Pictures. The film satirizes the wild personal behavior and musical pretensions of hard rock and heavy metal bands, as well as the hagiographic tendencies of rockumentaries of the time. The three core members of the band Spinal Tap\u2014David St. Hubbins, Derek Smalls and Nigel Tufnel\u2014were portrayed by McKean, Shearer and Guest respectively. The three actors play their musical instruments and speak with mock English accents throughout the film. There was no script, although there was a written breakdown of most of the scenes, and many of the lines were ad-libbed. It was filmed in 25 days.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the film that is spinal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "how many days was it filmed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 8, 8)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer said in an interview that \"The animating impulse was to do rock 'n' roll right. The four of us had been around rock 'n' roll and we were just amazed by how relentlessly the movies got it wrong. Because we were funny people it was going to be a funny film, but we wanted to get it right.\" When they tried to sell it to various Hollywood studios, they were told that the film would not work. The group kept saying, \"No, this is a story that's pretty familiar to people. We're not introducing them to anything they don't really know,\" so Shearer thought it would at least have some resonance with the public. The film was only a modest success upon its initial release but found greater success, and a cult following, after its video release. In 2000, the film was ranked 29th on the American Film Institute's list of the top 100 comedy movies in American cinema and it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer, Guest and McKean have since worked on several projects as their Spinal Tap characters. They released three albums: \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984), \"Break Like the Wind\" (1992) and \"Back From The Dead\" (2009). In 1992, Spinal Tap appeared in an episode of \"The Simpsons\" called \"The Otto Show\". The band has played several concerts, including at Live Earth in London on July 7, 2007. In anticipation of the show, Rob Reiner directed a short film entitled \"Spinal Tap\". In 2009, the band released \"Back from the Dead\" to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the release of the film. The album features re-recorded versions of songs featured in \"This Is Spinal Tap\" and its soundtrack, and five new songs. The band performed a one date \"world tour\" at London's Wembley Arena on June 30, 2009. The Folksmen, a mock band featured in the film \"A Mighty Wind\" that is also made up of characters played by Shearer, McKean and Guest\u00a0\u2013 was the opening act for the show.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer is also known for his prolific work as a voice actor on \"The Simpsons\". Matt Groening, the creator of the show, was a fan of Shearer's work, while Shearer was a fan of a column Groening used to write. Shearer was asked if he wanted to be in the series, but he was initially reluctant because he thought the recording sessions would be too much trouble. He felt voice acting was \"not a lot of fun\" because traditionally, voice actors record their parts separately. He was told that the actors would record their lines together and after three calls, executive producer James L. Brooks managed to convince Shearer to join the cast. Shearer's first impression of \"The Simpsons\" was that it was funny. Shearer, who thought it was a \"pretty cool\" way to work, found it peculiar that the members of the cast were adamant about not being known to the public as the people behind the voices.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the voice actor on the simpsons ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer provides voices for Principal Skinner, Kent Brockman, Mr. Burns, Waylon Smithers, Ned Flanders, Reverend Lovejoy, Dr. Hibbert, Lenny Leonard, Otto Mann, Rainier Wolfcastle, Scratchy, Kang, Dr. Marvin Monroe, Judge Snyder and many others. He has described all of his regular characters' voices as \"easy to slip into. ... I wouldn't do them if they weren't easy.\" Shearer modeled Mr. Burns's voice on the two actors Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan. Shearer says that Burns is the most difficult character for him to voice because it is rough on his vocal cords and he often needs to drink tea and honey to soothe his voice. He describes Burns as his favorite character, saying he \"like[s] Mr. Burns because he is pure evil. A lot of evil people make the mistake of diluting it. Never adulterate your evil.\" Shearer is also the voice of Burns' assistant Smithers, and is able to perform dialogue between the two characters in one take. In the episode \"Bart's Inner Child\", Harry Shearer said \"wow\" in the voice of Otto, which was then used when Otto was seen jumping on a trampoline. Ned Flanders had been meant to be just a neighbor that Homer was jealous of, but because Shearer used \"such a sweet voice\" for him, Flanders was broadened to become a Christian and a sweet guy that someone would prefer to live next to over Homer. Dr. Marvin Monroe's voice was based on psychiatrist David Viscott. Monroe has been retired since the seventh season because voicing the character strained Shearer's throat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2004, Shearer criticized what he perceived as the show's declining quality: \"I rate the last three seasons as among the worst, so season four looks very good to me now.\" Shearer has also been vocal about \"The Principal and the Pauper\" (season nine, 1997) one of the most controversial episodes of \"The Simpsons\". Many fans and critics reacted negatively to the revelation that Principal Seymour Skinner, a recurring character since the first season, was an impostor. The episode has been criticized by both Shearer and Groening. In a 2001 interview, Shearer recalled that after reading the script, he told the writers, \"That's so wrong. You're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason, for a story we've done before with other characters. It's so arbitrary and gratuitous, and it's disrespectful to the audience.\" Due to scheduling and availability conflicts, Shearer decided not to participate in \"The Simpsons Ride\", which opened in 2008, so none of his characters have vocal parts and many do not appear in the ride at all. In a 2010 interview on \"The Howard Stern Show\", Shearer alluded that the reason he was not part of the ride was because he would not be getting paid for it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until 1998, Shearer was paid $30,000 per episode. During a pay dispute in 1998, Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors, going as far as preparing for casting of new voices. The dispute, however, was resolved and Shearer received $125,000 per episode until 2004, when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $360,000 an episode. The dispute was resolved a month later, and Shearer's pay rose to $250,000 per episode. After salary re-negotiations in 2008, the voice actors received $400,000 per episode. Three years later, with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut, Shearer and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut, down to just over $300,000 per episode. On May 13, 2015, Shearer announced he was leaving the show. After the other voice actors signed a contract for the same pay, Shearer refused, stating it was not enough. Al Jean made a statement from the producers saying \"the show must go on,\" but did not elaborate on what might happen to the characters Shearer voiced. On July 7, 2015, Shearer agreed to continue with the show, on the same terms as the other voice actors.", "qas": [{"question": "who was paid in the episode ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 14, 0)"}, {"question": "on what date was the show of the show written ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 14, 9)"}]}, {"context": "Since 1983, Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy/music program \"Le Show\". The program is a hodgepodge of satirical news commentary, music, and sketch comedy that takes aim at the \"mega morons of the mighty media\". It is carried on many National Public Radio and other public radio stations throughout the United States. Since the merger of SIRIUS and XM satellite radio services the program is no longer available on either. The show has also been made available as a podcast on iTunes and by WWNO. On the weekly program Shearer alternates between DJing, reading and commenting on the news of the day after the manner of Mort Sahl, and performing original (mostly political) comedy sketches and songs. In 2008, Shearer released a music CD called \"Songs of the Bushmen\", consisting of his satirical numbers about former President George W. Bush on \"Le Show\". Shearer says he criticizes both Republicans and Democrats equally, and also says that \"the iron law of doing comedy about politics is you make fun of whoever is running the place\" and that \"everyone else is just running around talking. They are the ones who are actually doing something, changing people's lives for better or for worse. Other people the media calls 'satirists' don't work that way.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who has been the host of the public radio ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since encountering satellite news feeds when he worked on \"Saturday Night Live\", Shearer has been fascinated with the contents of the video that does not air. Shearer refers to these clips as found objects. \"I thought, wow, there is just an unending supply of this material, and it's wonderful and fascinating and funny and sometimes haunting \u2013 but it's always good,\" said Shearer. He collects this material and uses it on \"Le Show\" and on his website. In 2008, he assembled video clips of newsmakers from this collection into an art installation titled \"The Silent Echo Chamber\" which was exhibited at The Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum in Ridgefield, Connecticut. The exhibit was also displayed in 2009 at Institut Valenci\u00e0 d'Art Modern (IVAM) in Valencia, Spain and in 2010 at the New Orleans Contemporary Arts Center.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2006 Shearer appeared with Brian Hayes in four episodes of the BBC Radio 4 sitcom \"Not Today, Thank You\", playing Nostrils, a man so ugly he cannot stand to be in his own presence. He was originally scheduled to appear in all six episodes but had to withdraw from recording two due to a problem with his work permit. On June 19, 2008, it was announced that Shearer would receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the radio category. The date of the ceremony where his star will be put in place has yet to be announced.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2002, Shearer directed his first feature film \"Teddy Bears' Picnic\", which he also wrote. The plot is based on Bohemian Grove, which hosts a three-week encampment of some of the most powerful men in the world. The film was not well received by critics. It garnered a 0% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with all 19 reviews being determined as negative and received a rating of 32 out of 100 (signifying \"generally negative reviews\") on Metacritic from 10 reviews. In 2003, he co-wrote \"J. Edgar! The Musical\" with Tom Leopold, which spoofed J. Edgar Hoover's relationship with Clyde Tolson. It premiered at the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen, Colorado and starred Kelsey Grammer and John Goodman.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first feature film called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 2003, Shearer, Guest and McKean starred in the folk music mockumentary \"A Mighty Wind\", portraying a band called The Folksmen. The film was written by Guest and Eugene Levy, and directed by Guest. Shearer had a major role in the Guest-directed parody of Oscar politicking \"For Your Consideration\" in 2006. He played Victor Allan Miller, a veteran actor who is convinced that he is going to be nominated for an Academy Award. He also appeared as a news anchor in \"Godzilla\" with fellow \"The Simpsons\" cast members Hank Azaria and Nancy Cartwright. His other film appearances include \"The Right Stuff\", \"Portrait of a White Marriage\", \"The Fisher King\", \"The Truman Show\", \"EdTV\" and \"Small Soldiers\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer has also worked as a columnist for the \"Los Angeles Times Magazine\", but decided that it \"became such a waste of time to bother with it.\" His columns have also been published in \"Slate\" and \"Newsweek\". Since May 2005 he has been a contributing blogger at \"The Huffington Post\". Shearer has written three books. \"Man Bites Town\", published in 1993, is a collection of columns that he wrote for \"The Los Angeles Times\" between 1989 and 1992. Published in 1999, \"It's the Stupidity, Stupid\" analyzed the hatred some people had for then-President Bill Clinton. Shearer believes that Clinton became disliked because he had an affair with \"the least powerful, least credentialed women cleared into his official compound.\" His most recent book is \"Not Enough Indians\", his first novel. Published in 2006, it is a comic novel about Native Americans and gambling. Without the \"pleasures of collaboration\" and \"spontaneity and improvisation which characterize his other projects\", \"Not Enough Indians\" was a \"struggle\" for Shearer to write. He said that \"the only fun thing about it was having written it. It was lonely, I had no deal for it and it took six years to do. It was a profoundly disturbing act of self-discipline.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer has released five solo comedy albums: \"It Must Have Been Something I Said\" (1994), \"Dropping Anchors\" (2006), \"Songs Pointed and Pointless\" (2007), \"Songs of the Bushmen\" (2008) and \"Greed and Fear\" (2010). His most recent CD, \"Greed and Fear\" is mainly about Wall Street economic issues, rather than politics like his previous albums. Shearer decided to make the album when he\"started getting amused by the language of the economic meltdown \u2013 when 'toxic assets' suddenly became 'troubled assets,' going from something poisoning the system to just a bunch of delinquent youth with dirty faces that needed not removal from the system but just ... understanding.\" In May 2006, Shearer received an honorary doctorate from Goucher College.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer is the director of \"The Big Uneasy\" (2010), a documentary film about the impacts of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans. Narrated by actor John Goodman, the film describes levee failures and catastrophic flooding in the New Orleans metropolitan area, and includes extended interviews with former LSU professor Ivor Van Heerden, Robert Bea, an engineering professor at the University of California at Berkeley, and Maria Garzino, an engineer and contract specialist for the Los Angeles district of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The film is critical of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and its management of flood protection projects in Southern Louisiana. Shearer draws on numerous technical experts to maintain that Hurricane Katrina's \"... tragic floods creating widespread damage were caused by manmade errors in engineering and judgment.\" Shearer's film currently has a 74% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on twenty-three reviews by approved critics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shearer married Penelope Nichols in 1974. They divorced in 1977. He has been married to singer-songwriter Judith Owen since 1993. In 2005, the couple launched their own record label called Courgette Records. Shearer has homes in Santa Monica, California, the French Quarter of New Orleans, Louisiana, and Notting Hill, London. He first went to New Orleans in 1988 and has attended every New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival since.", "qas": [{"question": "who married married ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Shearer often speaks and writes about the failure of the Federal levee system which flooded New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina, blasting the coverage of it in the mainstream media and criticizing the role of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Prior to the DVD release of his film, \"The Big Uneasy\", Shearer would hold screenings of the film at different venues and take questions from audience members.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nShearer was the last of the six regular voice actors from \"The Simpsons\" to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Character Voice-Over Performance. His win came for the season 25 episode \"Four Regrettings and a Funeral\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "High fantasy", "paragraphs": [{"context": "High fantasy or epic fantasy is a subgenre of fantasy, defined either by the epic nature of its setting or by the epic stature of its characters, themes, or plot. The term \"high fantasy\" was coined by Lloyd Alexander in a 1971 essay, \"High Fantasy and Heroic Romance\" (originally given at the New England Round Table of Children's Librarians in October 1969).", "qas": []}, {"context": "High fantasy is defined as fantasy set in an alternative, fictional (\"secondary\") world, rather than \"the real\", or \"primary\" world. The secondary world is usually internally consistent, but its rules differ from those of the primary world. By contrast, low fantasy is characterized by being set in the primary, or \"real\" world, or a rational and familiar fictional world, with the inclusion of magical elements.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the definition of high drama ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The romances of William Morris, such as \"The Well at the World's End\", set in an imaginary medieval world, are sometimes regarded as the first examples of high fantasy. The works of J. R. R. Tolkien\u2014especially \"The Lord of the Rings\"\u2014are regarded as archetypal works of high fantasy. Stephen R. Donaldson's \"The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant\" is another example of a high fantasy series.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many high fantasy stories are told from the viewpoint of one main hero. Often, much of the plot revolves around his or her heritage or mysterious nature. In many novels the hero is an orphan or unusual sibling, often with an extraordinary talent for magic or combat. He or she begins the story young, if not as an actual child. In other works the hero is a completely developed individual with a unique character and spirit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The hero often begins as a childlike figure, but matures rapidly, experiencing a considerable gain in fighting/problem-solving abilities along the way. The plot of the story often depicts the hero's fight against the evil forces as a Bildungsroman.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the plot of the story seen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 4, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In many books there is a knowing, mystical mentor or teacher. This character is often a formidable wizard or warrior, who provides the main character with advice and help.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The progress of the story leads to the character learning the nature of the unknown forces against him or her, that they constitute a force with great power and malevolence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Good versus evil is a common theme in high fantasy, and the character of evil is often an important theme in a work of high fantasy, as in \"The Lord of the Rings\". Indeed, the importance of the concepts of good and evil can be regarded as the distinguishing mark between high fantasy and sword and sorcery. In many works of high fantasy, this conflict marks a deep concern with moral issues; in other works, the conflict is a power struggle, with, for instance, wizards behaving irresponsibly whether they are \"good\" or \"evil\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is a common theme in high drama ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There is often some evil that must be defeated, sometimes, a mysterious Dark Lord, often obsessed with taking over the world and killing the main hero. The evil character is sometimes an evil wizard or sorcerer, or sometimes a kind of god or demon. The antagonist usually commands a large army or a group of highly feared servants, and the protagonists appear outmatched.", "qas": [{"question": "what is often seen as a dark lord ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Role-playing games such as \"Dungeons & Dragons\" with campaign settings like \"Greyhawk\" by Gary Gygax, \"Dragonlance\" by Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis and \"Forgotten Realms\" by Ed Greenwood are a common basis for many fantasy books and many other authors continue to contribute to the settings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Human sexual activity", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Human sexual activity, human sexual practice or human sexual behaviour is the manner in which humans experience and express their sexuality. People engage in a variety of sexual acts, ranging from activities done alone (e.g., masturbation) to acts with another person (e.g., sexual intercourse, non-penetrative sex, oral sex, etc.) in varying patterns of frequency, for a wide variety of reasons. Sexual activity usually results in sexual arousal and physiological changes in the aroused person, some of which are pronounced while others are more subtle. Sexual activity may also include conduct and activities which are intended to arouse the sexual interest of another or enhance the sex life of another, such as strategies to find or attract partners (courtship and display behaviour), or personal interactions between individuals (for instance, foreplay or BDSM). Sexual activity may follow sexual arousal.", "qas": [{"question": "what may follow sexual arousal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 0, 5)"}, {"question": "what is human activity defined as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Human sexual activity has sociological, cognitive, emotional, behavioural and biological aspects; these include personal bonding, sharing emotions and the physiology of the reproductive system, sex drive, sexual intercourse and sexual behaviour in all its forms.", "qas": [{"question": "what does human activity include ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In some cultures, sexual activity is considered acceptable only within marriage, while premarital and extramarital sex are taboo. Some sexual activities are illegal either universally or in some countries or subnational jurisdictions, while some are considered contrary to the norms of certain societies or cultures. Two examples that are criminal offences in most jurisdictions are sexual assault and sexual activity with a person below the local age of consent.", "qas": [{"question": "what are criminal crimes in most jurisdictions ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Sexual activity can be classified in a number of ways: acts which involve one person (also called autoeroticism) such as masturbation, or two or more people such as vaginal sex, anal sex, oral sex or mutual masturbation. Penetrative sex between two people may be described as sexual intercourse, but definitions vary. If there are more than two participants in a sex act, it may be referred to as group sex. Autoerotic sexual activity can involve use of dildos, vibrators, butt plugs, and other sex toys, though these devices can also be used with a partner.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sexual activity can be classified into the gender and sexual orientation of the participants, as well as by the relationship of the participants. For example, the relationships can be ones of marriage, intimate partners, casual sex partners or anonymous. Sexual activity can be regarded as conventional or as alternative, involving, for example, fetishism, paraphilia, or BDSM activities. Fetishism can take many forms ranging from the desire for certain body parts, for example large breasts, navels or foot worship. The object of desire can often be shoes, boots, lingerie, clothing, leather or rubber items. Some non-conventional autoerotic practices can be dangerous. These include erotic asphyxiation and self-bondage. The potential for injury or even death that exists while engaging in the partnered versions of these fetishes (choking and bondage, respectively) becomes drastically increased in the autoerotic case due to the isolation and lack of assistance in the event of a problem.", "qas": [{"question": "what can be classified into the gender and sexual orientation of the participants ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sexual activity can be consensual, which means that both or all participants agree to take part and are of the age that they can consent, or it may take place under force or duress, which is often called sexual assault or rape. In different cultures and countries, various sexual activities may be lawful or illegal in regards to the age, gender, marital status or other factors of the participants, or otherwise contrary to social norms or generally accepted sexual morals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In evolutionary psychology and behavioral ecology, human mating strategies are a set of behaviors used by individuals to attract, select, and retain mates. Mating strategies overlap with reproductive strategies, which encompass a broader set of behaviors involving the timing of reproduction and the trade-off between quantity and quality of offspring (see life history theory).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Relative to other animals, human mating strategies are unique in their relationship with cultural variables such as the institution of marriage. Humans may seek out individuals with the intention of forming a long-term intimate relationship, marriage, casual relationship, or friendship. The human desire for companionship is one of the strongest human drives. It is an innate feature of human nature, and may be related to the sex drive. The human mating process encompasses the social and cultural processes whereby one person may meet another to assess suitability, the courtship process and the process of forming an interpersonal relationship. Commonalities, however, can be found between humans and nonhuman animals in mating behavior (see animal sexual behavior).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The physiological responses during sexual stimulation are fairly similar for both men and women and there are four phases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sexual dysfunction is the inability to react emotionally or physically to sexual stimulation in a way projected of the average healthy person; it can affect different stages in the sexual response cycles, which are desire, excitement and orgasm. In the media, sexual dysfunction is often associated with men, but in actuality, it is more commonly observed in females (43 percent) than males (31 percent).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sexual activity can lower blood pressure and overall stress levels, regardless of age. It serves to release tension, elevate mood, and possibly create a profound sense of relaxation, especially in the postcoital period. From a biochemical perspective, sex causes the release of endorphins and increases levels of white blood cells that actually boost the immune system. A study published in the journal Biological Psychology described how men who had had sex the previous night responded better to stressful situations, it suggested that if a person is regularly sexual, they're regularly relaxed, and when the person is relaxed, they cope better with stressful situations. A 2007 study published in the Archives of Sexual Behavior 36, (no. 3 (June 2007): 357\u201368) reported that sexual behavior with a partner on one day significantly predicted lower negative mood and stress, and higher positive mood, on the following day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "People engage in sexual activity for any of a multitude of possible reasons. Although the primary evolutionary purpose of sexual activity is reproduction, research on college students suggested that people have sex for four general reasons: \"physical attraction\", as a \"means to an end\", to increase \"emotional connection\", and to \"alleviate insecurity\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most people engage in sexual activity because of pleasure they derive from the arousal of their sexuality, especially if they can achieve orgasm. Sexual arousal can also be experienced from foreplay and flirting, and from fetish or BDSM activities, or other erotic activities. Most commonly, people engage in sexual activity because of the sexual desire generated by a person to whom they feel sexual attraction; but they may engage in sexual activity for the physical satisfaction they achieve in the absence of attraction for another, as in the case of casual or social sex. At times, a person may engage in a sexual activity solely for the sexual pleasure of their partner, such as because of an obligation they may have to the partner or because of love, sympathy or pity they may feel for the partner.", "qas": [{"question": "why do most people engage in sexual activity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 12, 0)"}, {"question": "what can a person engage in a sexual activity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 12, 3)"}]}, {"context": "A person may engage in sexual activity for purely monetary considerations, or to obtain some advantage from either the partner or the activity. A man and woman may engage in sexual intercourse with the objective of conception. Some people engage in hate sex, which occurs between two people who strongly dislike or annoy each other. It is related to the idea that opposition between two people can heighten sexual tension, attraction and interest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It has been shown that sexual activity plays a large part in the interaction of social species. Joan Roughgarden, in her book \"Diversity, Gender, and Sexuality in Nature and People,\" postulates that this applies equally to humans as it does to other social species. She explores the purpose of sexual activity and demonstrates that there are many functions facilitated by such activity including pair bonding, group bonding, dispute resolution and reproduction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Research has found that people also engage in sexual activity for reasons associated with self-determination theory. The self-determination theory can be applied to a sexual relationship when the participants have positive feelings associated with the relationship. These participants do not feel guilty or coerced into the partnership. Researchers have proposed the model of self-determined sexual motivation. The purpose of this model is to connect self-determination and sexual motivation. This model has helped to explain how people are sexually motivated when involved in self-determined dating relationships. This model also links the positive outcomes, (satisfying the need for autonomy, competence, and relatedness) gained from sexual motivations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the completed research associated with this model, it was found that people of both sexes who engaged in sexual activity for self-determined motivation had more positive psychological well-being. While engaging in sexual activity for self-determined reasons, the participants also had a higher need for fulfillment. When this need was satisfied, they felt better about themselves. This was correlated with greater closeness to their partner and higher overall satisfaction in their relationship. Though both sexes engaged in sexual activity for self-determined reasons, there were some differences found between males and females. It was concluded that females had more motivation than males to engage in sexual activity for self-determined reasons. Females also had higher satisfaction and relationship quality than males did from the sexual activity. Overall, research concluded that psychological well-being, sexual motivation, and sexual satisfaction were all positively correlated when dating couples partook in sexual activity for self-determined reasons.", "qas": [{"question": "according to research , what did studies reveal about sexual orientation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 16, 7)"}]}, {"context": "The frequency of sexual activity might range from zero (sexual abstinence) to 15 or 20 times a week. In the United States, the average frequency of sexual intercourse for married couples is 2 to 3 times a week. It is generally recognized that postmenopausal women experience declines in frequency of sexual intercourse and that average frequency of intercourse declines with age. According to the Kinsey Institute, the average frequency of sexual intercourse in the US for individuals who have partners is 112 times per year (age 18\u201329), 86 times per year (age 30\u201339), and 69 times per year (age 40\u201349).", "qas": [{"question": "what is the frequency of sexual activity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The age at which adolescents tend to become sexually active varies considerably between different cultures and from time to time. (See Prevalence of virginity.) The first sexual act of a child or adolescent is sometimes referred to as the sexualization of the child, and may be considered as a milestone or a change of status, as the loss of virginity or innocence. Youth are legally free to have intercourse after they reach the age of consent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 1999 survey of students indicated that approximately 40% of ninth graders across the United States report having had sexual intercourse. This figure rises with each grade. Males are more sexually active than females at each of the grade levels surveyed. Sexual activity of young adolescents differs in ethnicity as well. A higher percent of African American and Hispanic adolescents are sexually active than White adolescents.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Research on sexual frequency has also been conducted solely on female adolescents who engage in sexual activity. Female adolescents tended to engage in more sexual activity due to positive mood. In female teenagers, engaging in sexual activity was directly positively correlated with being older, greater sexual activity in the previous week or prior day, and more positive mood the previous day or the same day as the sexual activity occurred. Decreased sexual activity was associated with prior or current day negative mood or menstruating.", "qas": [{"question": "what has been conducted on male frequency ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Although opinions differ, others suggest that sexual activity is an essential part of humans, and that teenagers need to experience sex. According to a research study, sexual experiences help teenagers understand pleasure and satisfaction. In relation to hedonic and eudaimonic well-being, it stated that teenagers can positively benefit from sexual activity. The cross-sectional study was conducted in 2008 and 2009 at a rural upstate New York community. Teenagers who had their first sexual experience at age 16 revealed a higher well-being than those who were sexually inexperienced or who were first sexually active at a later age of 17. Furthermore, teenagers who had their first sexual experience at age 15 or younger, or who had many sexual partners were not negatively affected and did not have associated lower well-being.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the first sexual experience ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 21, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Sexual activity is an innately physiological function, but like other physical activity, it comes with risks. There are four main types of risks that may arise from sexual activity: unwanted pregnancy, contracting a sexually transmitted infection (STI/STD), physical injury, and psychological injury.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Any sexual activity that involves the introduction of semen into a woman's vagina, such as during sexual intercourse, or even contact of semen with her vulva, may result in a pregnancy. To reduce the risk of unintended pregnancies, some people who engage in penile-vaginal sex may use contraception, such as birth control pills, a condom, diaphragms, spermicides, hormonal contraception or sterilization. The effectiveness of the various contraceptive methods in avoiding pregnancy varies considerably.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a woman's vagina ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Sexual activity that involves skin-to-skin contact, exposure to an infected person's bodily fluids or mucosal membranes carries the risk of contracting a sexually transmitted infection. People may not be able to detect that their sexual partner has one or more STIs, for example if they are asymptomatic (show no symptoms). The risk of STIs can be reduced by safe sex practices, such as using condoms. Both partners may opt be tested for STIs before engaging in sex. The exchange of body fluids is not necessary to contract an infestation of crab lice. Crab lice typically are found attached to hair in the pubic area but sometimes are found on coarse hair elsewhere on the body (for example, eyebrows, eyelashes, beard, mustache, chest, armpits, etc.). Pubic lice infestations (pthiriasis) are spread through direct contact with someone who is infested with the louse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some STIs can also be contracted by using IV drug needles after their use by an infected person, as well as through childbirth or breastfeeding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Typically, older men and women maintaining interest in sexual interest and activity could be therapeutic; it is a way of expressing their love and care for one another. Factors such as biological and psychological factors, diseases, mental conditions, boredom with the relationship, and widowhood have been found to contribute with the common decrease in sexual interest and activity in old age. National sex surveys given in Finland in the 1990s revealed aging men had a higher incidence of sexual intercourse compared to aging women and that women were more likely to report a lack of sexual desire compared to men. Regression analysis, factors considered important to female sexual activity included: sexual desire, valuing sexuality, and a healthy partner, while high sexual self-esteem, good health, and active sexual history were important to male sexual activity. Both genders in the study agreed they needed good health, good sexual functioning, positive sexual self-esteem, and a sexually skilful partner to maintain sexual desire.", "qas": [{"question": "what did both genders and sexually do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 26, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Heterosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the opposite sex. Heterosexual sexual practices are subject to laws in many places. In some countries, mostly those where religion has a strong influence on social policy, marriage laws serve the purpose of encouraging people to have sex only within marriage. Sodomy laws were seen as discouraging same-sex sexual practices, but may affect opposite-sex sexual practices. Laws also ban adults from committing sexual abuse, committing sexual acts with anyone under an age of consent, performing sexual activities in public, and engaging in sexual activities for money (prostitution). Though these laws cover both same-sex and opposite-sex sexual activities, they may differ in regard to punishment, and may be more frequently (or exclusively) enforced on those who engage in same-sex sexual activities.", "qas": [{"question": "what is heterosexuality ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Different-sex sexual practices may be monogamous, serially monogamous, or polyamorous, and, depending on the definition of sexual practice, abstinent or autoerotic (including masturbation). Additionally, different religious and political movements have tried to influence or control changes in sexual practices including courting and marriage, though in most countries changes occur at a slow rate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Homosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the same sex. People with a homosexual orientation can express their sexuality in a variety of ways, and may or may not express it in their behaviors. Research indicates that many gay men and lesbians want, and succeed in having, committed and durable relationships. For example, survey data indicate that between 40% and 60% of gay men and between 45% and 80% of lesbians are currently involved in a romantic relationship.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the sex or sexual attraction to the same sex ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It is possible for a person whose sexual identity is mainly heterosexual to engage in sexual acts with people of the same sex. For example, mutual masturbation in the context of what may be considered normal heterosexual teen development. Gay and lesbian people who pretend to be heterosexual are often referred to as being closeted (hiding their sexuality in \"the closet\"). \"Closet case\" is a derogatory term used to refer to people who hide their sexuality. Making that orientation public can be called \"coming out of the closet\" in the case of voluntary disclosure or \"outing\" in the case of disclosure by others against the subject's wishes (or without their knowledge). Among some communities (called \"men on the DL\" or \"down-low\"), same-sex sexual behavior is sometimes viewed as solely for physical pleasure. Men who have sex with men, as well as women who have sex with women, or men on the \"down-low\" may engage in sex acts with members of the same sex while continuing sexual and romantic relationships with the opposite sex.", "qas": [{"question": "what is it possible for sexual identity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "People who engage exclusively in same-sex sexual practices may not identify themselves as gay or lesbian. In sex-segregated environments, individuals may seek relationships with others of their own gender (known as situational homosexuality). In other cases, some people may experiment or explore their sexuality with same (or different) sex sexual activity before defining their sexual identity. Despite stereotypes and common misconceptions, there are no forms of sexual acts exclusive to same-sex sexual behavior that cannot also be found in opposite-sex sexual behavior, except those involving the meeting of the genitalia between same-sex partners\u00a0\u2013 tribadism (generally vulva-to-vulva rubbing, commonly known by its \"scissoring\" position) and frot (generally penis-to-penis rubbing).", "qas": []}, {"context": "People who have a romantic or sexual attraction to both sexes are referred to as bisexual. People who have a distinct but not exclusive preference for one sex/gender over the other may also identify themselves as bisexual. Like gay and lesbian individuals, bisexual people who pretend to be heterosexual are often referred to as being closeted.", "qas": [{"question": "what are people who have a romantic or sexual attraction to both genders called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Pansexuality (also referred to as omnisexuality) may or may not be subsumed under bisexuality, with some sources stating that bisexuality encompasses sexual or romantic attraction to all gender identities. Pansexuality is characterized by the potential for aesthetic attraction, romantic love, or sexual desire towards people without regard for their gender identity or biological sex. Some pansexuals suggest that they are gender-blind; that gender and sex are insignificant or irrelevant in determining whether they will be sexually attracted to others. As defined in the \"Oxford English Dictionary,\" pansexuality \"encompasses all kinds of sexuality; not limited or inhibited in sexual choice with regards to gender or practice\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alex Comfort and others propose three potential social aspects of sexual intercourse in humans, which are not mutually exclusive: reproductive, relational, and recreational. The development of the contraceptive pill and other highly effective forms of contraception in the mid- and late 20th century has increased people's ability to segregate these three functions, which still overlap a great deal and in complex patterns. For example: A fertile couple may have intercourse while using contraception to experience sexual pleasure (recreational) and also as a means of emotional intimacy (relational), thus deepening their bonding, making their relationship more stable and more capable of sustaining children in the future (deferred reproductive). This same couple may emphasize different aspects of intercourse on different occasions, being playful during one episode of intercourse (recreational), experiencing deep emotional connection on another occasion (relational), and later, after discontinuing contraception, seeking to achieve pregnancy (reproductive, or more likely reproductive and relational).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most world religions have sought to address the moral issues that arise from people's sexuality in society and in human interactions. Each major religion has developed moral codes covering issues of sexuality, morality, ethics etc. Though these moral codes do not address issues of sexuality directly, they seek to regulate the situations which can give rise to sexual interest and to influence people's sexual activities and practices. However, the effect of religious teaching has at times been limited. For example, though most religions disapprove of extramarital sexual relations, it has always been widely practiced. Nevertheless, these religious codes have always had a strong influence on peoples' attitudes to issues of modesty in dress, behavior, speech etc.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the other hand, some people adopt the view that pleasure is its own justification for sexual activity. Hedonism is a school of thought which argues that pleasure is the only intrinsic good.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Human sexual activity, like many other kinds of activity engaged in by humans, is generally influenced by social rules that are culturally specific and vary widely. These social rules are referred to as sexual morality (what can and can not be done by society's rules) and sexual norms (what is and is not expected).", "qas": [{"question": "what are the social rules referred to as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 37, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Sexual ethics, morals, and norms relate to issues including deception/honesty, legality, fidelity and consent. Some activities, known as sex crimes in some locations, are illegal in some jurisdictions, including those conducted between (or among) consenting and competent adults (examples include sodomy law and adult-adult incest).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some people who are in a relationship but want to hide polygamous activity (possibly of opposite sexual orientation) from their partner, may solicit consensual sexual activity with others through personal contacts, online chat rooms, or, advertising in select media.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Swinging, on the other hand, involves singles or partners in a committed relationship engaging in sexual activities with others as a recreational or social activity. The increasing popularity of swinging is regarded by some as arising from the upsurge in sexual activity during the sexual revolution of the 1960s. Swinging sexual activity can take place in a sex club, also known as a swinger club (not to be confused with a strip club).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some people engage in various sexual activities as a business transaction. When this involves having sex with, or performing certain actual sexual acts for another person in exchange for money or something of value, it is called prostitution. Other aspects of the adult industry include phone sex operators, strip clubs, and pornography.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Social gender roles can influence sexual behavior as well as the reaction of individuals and communities to certain incidents; the World Health Organization states that, \"Sexual violence is also more likely to occur where beliefs in male sexual entitlement are strong, where gender roles are more rigid, and in countries experiencing high rates of other types of violence.\" Some societies, such as those where the concepts of family honor and female chastity are very strong, may practice violent control of female sexuality, through practices such as honor killings and female genital mutilation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The relation between gender equality and sexual expression is recognized, and promotion of equity between men and women is crucial for attaining sexual and reproductive health, as stated by the UN International Conference on Population and Development Program of Action:", "qas": []}, {"context": "BDSM is a variety of erotic practices or roleplaying involving bondage, dominance and submission, sadomasochism, and other interpersonal dynamics. Given the wide range of practices, some of which may be engaged in by people who do not consider themselves as practicing BDSM, inclusion in the BDSM community or subculture is usually dependent on self-identification and shared experience. BDSM communities generally welcome anyone with a non-normative streak who identifies with the community; this may include cross-dressers, extreme body modification enthusiasts, animal players, latex or rubber aficionados, and others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "B/D, a form of BDSM, is bondage and discipline. Bondage includes the restraint of the body or mind. D/S means \"dominant and submissive.\" A dominant is someone who takes control of someone who wishes to give up control. A submissive is someone who gives up the control to a person who wishes to take control. S/M (sadism and masochism) means an individual who takes pleasure in the humiliation or pain of others. Masochism means an individual who takes pleasure from their own pain or humiliation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unlike the usual \"power neutral\" relationships and play styles commonly followed by couples, activities and relationships within a BDSM context are often characterized by the participants' taking on complementary, but unequal roles; thus, the idea of informed consent of both the partners becomes essential. Participants who exert sexual dominance over their partners are known as dominants or tops, while participants who take the passive, receiving, or obedient role are known as submissives or bottoms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Individuals are also sometimes abbreviated when referred to in writing, so a dominant person may be referred to as a \"dom\" for a man or a woman. Sometimes a woman may choose to use the female specific term \"Domme\". Both terms are pronounced the same when spoken. Individuals who can change between top/dominant and bottom/submissive roles\u2014whether from relationship to relationship or within a given relationship\u2014are known as \"switches\". The precise definition of roles and self-identification is a common subject of debate within the community.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a 2013 study, the researchers state that BDSM is a sexual act where they play role games, use restraint, use power exchange,\nuse suppression and pain is sometimes involved depending on individual(s). The study serves to challenge the widespread notion that BDSM could be in some way linked to psychopathology. According to the findings, one who participates in BDSM may have greater strength socially and mentally as well as greater independence than those who do not practice BDSM. It suggests that people who participate in BDSM play have higher subjective well-being, and that this might be due to the fact that BDSM play requires extensive communication. Before any sexual act occurs, the partners must discuss their agreement of their relationship. They discuss how long the play will last, the intensity, their actions, what each participant needs or desires. The sexual acts are all recorded as consensual and pleasurable to both parties.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the sexual acts ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 48, 6)"}]}, {"context": "In a 2015 study, interviewed BDSM participants have mentioned that the activities have helped to create higher levels of connection, intimacy, trust and communication between partners. The study suggests that dominants and submissives exchange control for each other's pleasure and to satisfy a need. The participants have remarked that they enjoy pleasing their partner in any way they can and many surveyed have felt that this is one of the best things about BDSM. It gives a submissive pleasure to do things in general for their dominant. Where a Dominant enjoys making their encounters all about the submissive. They enjoy doing things that makes their submissive happy. The findings indicate that the surveyed submissives and dominants found BDSM play more pleasurable and fun. The participants have also mentioned improvements in their personal growth, romantic relationships, sense of community and self, the dominant's confidence, and their coping with everyday things by giving them a psychological release.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many laws and social customs which prohibit, or in some way affect sexual activities. These laws and customs vary from country to country, and have varied over time. They cover, for example, a prohibition to non-consensual sex, to sex outside marriage, to sexual activity in public, besides many others. Many of these restrictions are non-controversial, but some have been the subject of public debate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most societies consider it a serious crime to force someone to engage in sexual acts or to engage in sexual activity with someone who does not consent. This is called sexual assault, and if sexual penetration occurs it is called rape, the most serious kind of sexual assault. The details of this distinction may vary among different legal jurisdictions. Also, what constitutes effective consent in sexual matters varies from culture to culture and is frequently debated. Laws regulating the minimum age at which a person can consent to have sex (age of consent) are frequently the subject of debate, as is adolescent sexual behavior in general. Some societies have forced marriage, where consent may not be required.", "qas": [{"question": "what do most societies consider about sexual acts ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 51, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Many locales have laws that limit or prohibit same-sex sexual activity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the West, sex before marriage is not illegal. There are social taboos and many religions condemn pre-marital sex. In many Muslim countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Sudan, Yemen, any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal. Those found guilty, especially women, may be forced to wed the sexual partner, publicly beaten, or stoned to death. In many African and native tribes, sexual activity is not viewed as a privilege or right of a married couple, but rather as the unification of bodies and is thus not frowned upon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other studies have analyzed the changing attitudes about sex that American adolescents have outside marriage. Adolescents were asked how they felt about oral and vaginal sex in relation to their health, social, and emotional well-being. Overall, teenagers felt that oral sex was viewed as more socially positive amongst their demographic. Results stated that teenagers believed that oral sex for dating and non-dating adolescents was less threatening to their overall values and beliefs than vaginal sex was. When asked, teenagers who participated in the research viewed oral sex as more acceptable to their peers, and their personal values than vaginal sex.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The laws of each jurisdiction set the minimum age at which a young person is allowed to engage in sexual activity. This age of consent is typically between 14 and 18 years, but laws vary. In many jurisdictions, age of consent is a person's mental or functional age. As a result, those above the set age of consent may still be considered unable to legally consent due to mental immaturity. Many jurisdictions regard any sexual activity by an adult involving a child as child sexual abuse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Age of consent may vary by the type of sexual act, the sex of the actors, or other restrictions such as abuse of a position of trust. Some jurisdictions also make allowances for young people engaged in sexual acts with each other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most jurisdictions prohibit sexual activity between certain close relatives. These laws vary to some extent; such acts are called incestuous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Non-consensual sexual activity or subjecting an unwilling person to witnessing a sexual activity are forms of sexual abuse, as well as (in many countries) certain non-consensual paraphilias such as frotteurism, telephone scatophilia (indecent phonecalls), and non-consensual exhibitionism and voyeurism (known as \"indecent exposure\" and \"peeping tom\" respectively).", "qas": []}, {"context": "People sometimes exchange sex for money or access to other resources. This practice, called prostitution, takes place under many varied circumstances. The person who receives payment for sexual services is called a prostitute and the person who receives such services is known by a multitude of terms, including (and most commonly) \"john.\" Prostitution is one of the branches of the sex industry. The legal status of prostitution varies from country to country, from being a punishable crime to a regulated profession. Estimates place the annual revenue generated from the global prostitution industry to be over $100\u00a0billion. Prostitution is sometimes referred to as \"the world's oldest profession\". Prostitution may be a voluntary individual activity or facilitated or forced by pimps.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Survival sex is a form of prostitution engaged in by people in need, usually when homeless or otherwise disadvantaged people trade sex for food, a place to sleep, or other basic needs, or for drugs. The term is used by sex trade and poverty researchers and aid workers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hydraulic ram", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A hydraulic ram, or hydram, is a cyclic water pump powered by hydropower. It takes in water at one \"hydraulic head\" (pressure) and flow rate, and outputs water at a higher hydraulic head and lower flow rate. The device uses the water hammer effect to develop pressure that allows a portion of the input water that powers the pump to be lifted to a point higher than where the water originally started. The hydraulic ram is sometimes used in remote areas, where there is both a source of low-head hydropower and a need for pumping water to a destination higher in elevation than the source. In this situation, the ram is often useful, since it requires no outside source of power other than the kinetic energy of flowing water.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a cyclic ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1772, John Whitehurst of Cheshire, United Kingdom, invented a manually controlled precursor of the hydraulic ram called the \"pulsation engine\" and installed the first one at Oulton, Cheshire to raise water to a height of . In 1783, he installed another in Ireland. He did not patent it, and details are obscure, but it is known to have had an air vessel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first self-acting ram pump was invented by the Frenchman Joseph Michel Montgolfier (best known as a co-inventor of the hot air balloon) in 1796 for raising water in his paper mill at Voiron. His friend Matthew Boulton took out a British patent on his behalf in 1797. The sons of Montgolfier obtained a British patent for an improved version in 1816, and this was acquired, together with Whitehurst's design, in 1820 by Josiah Easton, a Somerset-born engineer who had just moved to London.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Easton's firm, inherited by his son James (1796\u20131871), grew during the nineteenth century to become one of the more important engineering manufacturers in the United Kingdom, with a large works at Erith, Kent. They specialised in water supply and sewerage systems worldwide, as well as land drainage projects. Eastons had a good business supplying rams for water supply purposes to large country houses, farms, and village communities. Some of their installations still survived as of 2004, one such example being at the hamlet of Toller Whelme, in Dorset. Until about 1958 when the mains water arrived, the hamlet of East Dundry just south of Bristol had three working rams \u2013 their noisy \"thump\" every minute or so resonated through the valley night and day: these rams served farms that needed much water for their dairy herds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The firm closed in 1909, but the ram business was continued by James R Easton. In 1929, it was acquired by Green & Carter of Winchester, Hampshire, who were engaged in the manufacturing and installation of Vulcan and Vacher Rams.\nThe first US patent was issued to Joseph Cerneau (or Curneau) and Stephen (\u00c9tienne) S. Hallet (1755-1825) in 1809. US interest in hydraulic rams picked up around 1840, as further patents were issued and domestic companies started offering rams for sale. Toward the end of the 19th century, interest waned as electricity and electric pumps became widely available.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the end of the twentieth century interest in hydraulic rams has revived, due to the needs of sustainable technology in developing countries, and energy conservation in developed ones. A good example is AID Foundation International in the Philippines, who won an Ashden Award for their work developing ram pumps that could be easily maintained for use in remote villages. The hydraulic ram principle has been used in some proposals for exploiting wave power, one of which was discussed as long ago as 1931 by Hanns G\u00fcnther in his book \"In hundert Jahren\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some later ram designs in the UK called compound rams were designed to pump treated water using an untreated drive water source, which overcomes some of the problems of having drinking water sourced from an open stream.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the problems in the uk used to pump ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1996 an English engineer, Frederick Philip Selwyn, patented a \u2018fluid pressure amplifier\u2019 which differed in many ways to the contemporary ram technology by the development of a venturi effect waste valve.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Known as the Papa pump, this utilises the low pressure generated by high velocity water flow around a curve-shaped elastomeric valve (with low pressure loss) to allow a valve design that enables rapid closure and with a relatively small cross sectional area and low weight. The venturi valve is configured as a ring section positioned around the supply inlet of the pump with the delivery outlet of the pump being directly in line. The design allowed the pump structure to be concentric and therefore inherently strong and upon closure of the valve, permits efficient water delivery by acting in line with the supply via a second smaller venturi effect delivery non return valve. The elastomeric material and operation of these valves also allows them to self-return without weight or spring assistance. A pressure vessel installed on a tee connected to the delivery port of the pump provides the pulsed flow accumulation means. This unique technology and design dramatically reduced the weight, manufacturing cost and number of components required - as well as provided an overall improvement in efficiency.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Additional patents granted to Selwyn have since been developed by UK companies Papa Ltd and Water Powered Technologies Ltd of Bude, Cornwall, further enhancing the technology to include a composite material injection-moulded pump allowing for relatively low cost mass production whilst maintaining high strength, low weight and high performance previously only attainable with metal units.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other novel developments include an automatic regulator valve which can be simply installed to the pumps to allow the maximum utilisation of water supply from low or seasonally variable water sources without the need to manually adjust the pumps - as well as much larger pump versions with diameter inlets for large river, marine tidal and flood applications. Systems have also been developed and utilised for rainwater harvesting, water treatment and other water utility applications.\nA traditional hydraulic ram has only two moving parts, a spring or weight loaded \"waste\" valve sometimes known as the \"clack\" valve and a \"delivery\" check valve, making it cheap to build, easy to maintain, and very reliable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Papa hydraulic ram pump also has only two moving parts. However, these are not mechanical but instead rely on the elastomeric properties of the main valve and non-return valve which are low-cost, reliable and easy to replace. In addition, there is a drive pipe supplying water from an elevated source and a delivery pipe, taking a portion of the water that comes through the drive pipe to an elevation higher than the source.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the purpose of a load pipe ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 11, 2)"}]}, {"context": "A simplified hydraulic ram is shown in Figure\u00a02. Initially, the waste valve [4] is open (i.e. lowered) because of its own weight, and the delivery valve [5] is closed under the pressure caused by the water column from the outlet [3]. The water in the inlet pipe [1] starts to flow under the force of gravity and picks up speed and kinetic energy until the increasing drag force lifts the waste valve's weight and closes it. The momentum of the water flow in the inlet pipe against the now closed waste valve causes a water hammer that raises the pressure in the pump beyond the pressure caused by the water column pressing down from the outlet. This pressure differential now opens the delivery valve [5], and forces some water to flow into the delivery pipe [3]. Because this water is being forced uphill through the delivery pipe farther than it is falling downhill from the source, the flow slows; when the flow reverses, the delivery check valve [5] closes. Meanwhile, the water hammer from the closing of the waste valve also produces a pressure pulse which propagates back up the inlet pipe to the source where it converts to a suction pulse that propagates back down the inlet pipe. This suction pulse, with the weight or spring on the valve, pulls the waste valve back open and allows the process to begin again.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A pressure vessel [6] containing air cushions the hydraulic pressure shock when the waste valve closes, and it also improves the pumping efficiency by allowing a more constant flow through the delivery pipe. Although the pump could in theory work without it, the efficiency would drop drastically and the pump would be subject to extraordinary stresses that could shorten its life considerably. One problem is that the pressurized air will gradually dissolve into the water until none remains. One solution to this problem is to have the air separated from the water by an elastic diaphragm (similar to an expansion tank); however, this solution can be problematic in developing countries where replacements are difficult to procure. Another solution is to have a mechanism such as a snifting valve that automatically inserts a small bubble of air when the suction pulse described above reaches the pump. Another solution is to insert an inner tube of a car or bicycle tire into the pressure vessel with some air in it and the valve closed. This tube is in effect the same as the diaphragm, but it is implemented with more widely available materials. The air in the tube cushions the shock of the water the same as the air in other configurations does.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the air in the tube cushions the air ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 13, 7)"}]}, {"context": "A typical energy efficiency is 60%, but up to 80% is possible. This should not be confused with the volumetric efficiency, which relates the volume of water delivered to total water taken from the source. The portion of water available at the delivery pipe will be reduced by the ratio of the delivery head to the supply head. Thus if the source is 2 meters above the ram and the water is lifted to 10 meters above the ram, only 20% of the supplied water can be available, the other 80% being spilled via the waste valve. These ratios assume 100% energy efficiency. Actual water delivered will be further reduced by the energy efficiency factor. In the above example, if the energy efficiency is 70%, the water delivered will be 70% of 20%, i.e. 14%. Assuming a 2-to-1 supply head to delivery head ratio and 70% efficiency, the delivered water would be 70% of 50%, i.e. 35%. Very high ratios of delivery to supply head usually result in lowered energy efficiency. Suppliers of rams often provide tables giving expected volume ratios based on actual tests.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since both efficiency and reliable cycling depend on water hammer effects, the drive pipe design is important. It should be between 3 and 7 times longer than the vertical distance between the source and the ram. Commercial rams may have an input fitting designed to accommodate this optimum slope. The diameter of the supply pipe would normally match the diameter of the input fitting on the ram, which in turn is based on its pumping capacity. The drive pipe should be of constant diameter and material, and should be as straight as possible. Where bends are necessary, they should be smooth, large diameter curves. Even a large spiral is allowed, but elbows are to be avoided. PVC will work in some installations, but steel pipe is preferred, although much more expensive. If valves are used they should be a free flow type such as a ball valve or gate valve.", "qas": [{"question": "what is important for the drive pipe design ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The delivery pipe is much less critical since the pressure vessel prevents water hammer effects from traveling up it. Its overall design would be determined by the allowable pressure drop based on the expected flow. Typically the pipe size will be about half that of the supply pipe, but for very long runs a larger size may be indicated. PVC pipe and any necessary valves are not a problem.", "qas": [{"question": "what is more critical since the pressure pump ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A ram newly placed into operation or which has stopped cycling must be started as follows: If the waste valve is in the raised (closed) position, which is most common, it must be pushed down manually into the open position and released. If the flow is sufficient, it will then cycle at least once. If it does not continue to cycle, it must be pushed down repeatedly until it cycles continuously on its own, usually after three or four manual cycles. If the ram stops with the waste valve in the down (open) position it must be lifted manually and kept up for as long as necessary for the supply pipe to fill with water and for any air bubbles to travel up the pipe to the source. This may take a minute or more. Then it can be started manually by pushing it down a few times as described above. Having a valve on the delivery pipe at the ram makes starting easier. Close the valve until the ram starts cycling, then gradually open it to fill the delivery pipe. If opened too quickly it will stop the cycling. Once the delivery pipe is full the valve can be left open.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Failure to deliver sufficient water may be due to improper adjustment of the waste valve, having too little air in the pressure vessel, or simply attempting to raise the water higher than the level of which the ram is capable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ram may be damaged by freezing in winter, or loss of air in the pressure vessel leading to excess stress on the ram parts. These failures will require welding or other repair methods and perhaps parts replacement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is not uncommon for an operating ram to require occasional restarts. The cycling may stop due to poor adjustment of the waste valve, or insufficient water flow at the source. Air can enter if the supply water level is not at least a few inches above the input end of the supply pipe. Other problems are blockage of the valves with debris, or improper installation, such as using a supply pipe of non uniform diameter or material, having sharp bends or a rough interior, or one that is too long or short for the drop, or is made of an insufficiently rigid material. A PVC supply pipe will work in some installations but is not as optimal as steel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An alternative to the hydraulic ram is the water-powered pump. It can be used if a high flow rate at high head ratio is required. A water-powered pump unit is a hydraulic turbine coupled to a water pump. The motive power needed by the pump is generated by the hydraulic turbine from the available low head water energy.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an alternative to the hydraulic pump ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 21, 0)"}, {"question": "how is the hydraulic pump generated ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 21, 3)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Homininae", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Homininae, also called \"African hominids\" or \"African apes\", is a subfamily of Hominidae. It includes two tribes, with their extant as well as extinct species: 1) the Hominini tribe (with the genus \"Homo\" including modern humans, Australopithecina, comprising at least three extinct or, fossil genera, and the genus \"Pan\" [including common chimpanzees and bonobos]); 2) the Gorillini tribe (gorillas). It comprises all hominids that arose after orangutans (subfamily Ponginae) split from the line of great apes. The Homininae cladogram has three main branches, which lead to gorillas (through the tribe Gorillini), and to humans and chimpanzees via the tribe Hominini and subtribes Hominina and Panina (see the evolutionary tree below). There are two living species of Panina (chimpanzees and bonobos) and two living species of gorillas, but only one extant human species. Traces of hypothetical \"Homo\" species, including \"Homo floresiensis\" and \"Homo denisova\", have been found with dates as recent as 40,000 years ago. Organisms in this subfamily are described as hominine or hominines (not to be confused with the terms hominins or hominini).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until 1980, the family (and term) Hominidae meant humans only; the non-human great apes were assigned to the family Pongidae. Later discoveries led to revised classifications, with the great apes then united with humans (now in subfamily Homininae) as members of family Hominidae Further discoveries indicated that gorillas and chimpanzees are more closely related to humans than they are to orangutans, leading to their (gorillas and chimpanzees) placement in subfamily Homininae as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The subfamily Homininae can be further subdivided into three branches: the tribe Gorillini (gorillas), and the tribe Hominini with subtribes Panina (chimpanzees) and Hominina (humans and their extinct relatives). The Late Miocene fossil \"Nakalipithecus nakayamai\", described in 2007, is a basal member of this clade, as is, perhaps, its contemporary \"Ouranopithecus\"; that is, they are not assignable to any of the three extant branches. Their existence suggests that the Homininae tribes diverged not earlier than about 8 million years ago (see Human evolutionary genetics).", "qas": [{"question": "how many branches: are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 2, 0)"}, {"question": "how long ago did the homininae tribes evolve ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Today, chimpanzees and gorillas live in tropical forests with acid soils that rarely preserve fossils. Although no fossil gorillas have been reported, four chimpanzee teeth about 500,000 years old have been discovered in the East-African rift valley (Kapthurin Formation, Kenya), where many fossils from the human lineage (hominins) have been found. This shows that some chimpanzees lived close to \"Homo\" (\"H. erectus\" or \"H. rhodesiensis\") at the time; the same is likely true for gorillas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Homininae", "qas": []}, {"context": "The age of the subfamily Homininae (of the Homininae-Ponginae last common ancestor) is estimated at some 14 to 12.5 million years (\"Sivapithecus\"). \nIts separation into Gorillini and Hominini (the \"gorilla-human last common ancestor\", GHLCA) is estimated to have occurred at about (T) during the late Miocene, close to the age of \"Nakalipithecus nakayamai\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is evidence there was interbreeding of Gorillas and the Pan-Homo ancestors until right up to the Pan-Homo split.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Recent studies of \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" (4.4 million years old) and \"Orrorin tugenensis\" (6 million years old) suggest some degree of bipedalism. \"Australopithecus\" and early \"Paranthropus\" may have been bipedal. Very early hominins such as \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" may have possessed an arboreal type of bipedalism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There has been a gradual increase in brain volume (brain size) as the ancestors of modern humans progressed along the timeline of human evolution, starting from about 600\u00a0cm in \"Homo habilis\" up to 1500\u00a0cm in \"Homo neanderthalensis\". However, modern \"Homo sapiens\" have a brain volume slightly smaller (1250\u00a0cm) than Neanderthals, women have a brain slightly smaller than men and the Flores hominids (\"Homo floresiensis\"), nicknamed hobbits, had a cranial capacity of about 380\u00a0cm (considered small for a chimpanzee), about a third of the \"Homo erectus\" average. It is proposed that they evolved from \"H. erectus\" as a case of insular dwarfism. In spite of their smaller brain, there is evidence that \"H. floresiensis\" used fire and made stone tools at least as sophisticated as those of their proposed ancestors \"H. erectus\". In this case, it seems that for intelligence, the structure of the brain is more important than its size.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sexuality is related to family structure and partly shapes it. The involvement of fathers in education is quite unique to humans, at least when compared to other Homininae. Concealed ovulation and menopause in women both also occur in a few other primates however, but are uncommon in other species. Testis and penis size seems to be related to family structure: monogamy or promiscuity, or harem, in humans, chimpanzees or gorillas, respectively. The levels of sexual dimorphism are generally seen as a marker of sexual selection. Studies have suggested that the earliest hominins were dimorphic and that this lessened over the course of the evolution of the genus \"Homo\", correlating with humans becoming more monogamous, whereas gorillas, who live in harems, show a large degree of sexual dimorphism. Concealed (or \"hidden\") ovulation means that the phase of fertility is not detectable in women, whereas chimpanzees advertise ovulation via an obvious swelling of the genitals. Women can be partly aware of their ovulation along the menstrual phases, but men are essentially unable to detect ovulation in women. Most primates have semi-concealed ovulation, thus one can think that the common ancestor had semi-concealed ovulation, that was inherited by gorillas, and that later evolved in concealed ovulation in humans and advertised ovulation in chimpanzees. Menopause also occurs in rhesus monkeys, and possibly in chimpanzees, but does not in gorillas and is quite uncommon in other primates (and other mammal groups).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Homo habilis", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Homo habilis is a proposed archaic species of \"Homo\", which lived between roughly 2.1 and 1.5 million years ago, during the Gelasian and early Calabrian stages of the Pleistocene geological epoch.\nThe type specimen is OH 7, discovered in 1960 at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, associated with the Oldowan lithic industry; the fossils were identified as a separate species of \"Homo\" with the proposed binomial name of \"H. habilis\" (\"handy man\") in 1964.\nIn its appearance and morphology, \"H. habilis\" is intermediate between \"Australopithecus\" and the somewhat younger \"Homo erectus\" and its classification in the \"Homo\" genus has been the subject of controversial debate since its original proposal.\nA main argument for its classification as the first \"Homo\" (\"human\") species was its use of flaked stone tools. \nHowever, evidence for earlier tool use (3.39 million years ago) by undisputed members of \"Australopithecus\" has been found in the 1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In January 2019, scientists reported that \"Australopithecus sediba\" is distinct from, but shares anatomical similarities to, both the older \"Australopithecus africanus\", and the younger \"Homo habilis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There has been scholarly debate regarding its placement in the genus \"Homo\" rather than the genus \"Australopithecus\". The small size and rather primitive attributes have led some experts (Richard Leakey among them) to propose excluding \"H. habilis\" from the genus \"Homo\" and placing them instead in \"Australopithecus\" as \"Australopithecus habilis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Louis Leakey (father of Richard Leakey), the British-Kenyan paleoanthropologist who was the first to suggest the existence of \"H. habilis\", and his wife, Mary Leakey, found the first trace of \"H. habilis\" in 1955: two hominin teeth. These were later classified as \"milk teeth\", and therefore considered difficult to link to taxa, unlike permanent teeth.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the father of louis ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"H. habilis\" was short and had disproportionately long arms compared to modern humans; however, it had a less protruding face than the australopithecines from which it is thought to have descended. \"H. habilis\" had a cranial capacity slightly less than half of the size of modern humans. Despite the ape-like morphology of the bodies, \"H. habilis\" remains are often accompanied by primitive stone tools (e.g. Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania and Lake Turkana, Kenya).", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Homo habilis\" has often been thought to be the ancestor of the more gracile and sophisticated \"Homo ergaster\", which in turn gave rise to the more human-appearing species, \"Homo erectus\". Debates continue over whether all of the known fossils are properly attributed to the species, and some paleoanthropologists regard the taxon as invalid, made up of fossil specimens of \"Australopithecus\" and \"Homo\". New findings in 2007 seemed to confirm the view that \"H. habilis\" and \"H. erectus\" coexisted, representing separate lineages from a common ancestor instead of \"H. erectus\" being descended from \"H. habilis\". An alternative explanation would be that any ancestral relationship from \"H. habilis\" to \"H. erectus\" would have to have been cladogenetic rather than anagenetic (meaning that if an isolated subgroup population of \"H. habilis\" became the ancestor of \"H. erectus\", other subgroups remained as unchanged \"H. habilis\" until their much later extinction).", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for `` erectus '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 5, 3)"}, {"question": "what does ''homo mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Discoveries at Dmanisi, Georgia, which had diverse physical traits and differences in tooth wear, suggest to some scholars that all the contemporary groups of early \"Homo\" in Africa, including \"Homo ergaster\", \"Homo habilis\", and \"Homo rudolfensis\" are of the same species and should be assigned to \"Homo erectus\", with the implication that variation between these \u201cspecies\u201d represents the prolonged evolution of one lineage, rather than interspecific differences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"H. habilis\" brain size has been shown to range from to , rather than from to as previously thought.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for `` brain '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A virtual reconstruction published in 2015 estimated the endocranial volume at between and , larger than any previously published value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"H. habilis\"' brain capacity of around 640\u00a0cm\u00b3 was on average 50% larger than australopithecines, but considerably smaller than the to range of modern \"Homo sapiens\". These hominins were smaller than modern humans, on average standing no more than .", "qas": [{"question": "what was the size of the brain capacity of the `` homo sapiens '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The body proportions for \"H. habilis\" are in accordance with craniodental evidence, suggesting closer association with \"H. erectus\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for `` h '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Based on dental microwear-texture analysis, \"Homo habilis\" (as well as other early \"Homo\"-class hominins) likely did not specialize on particularly tough foods. Microwear-texture complexity is, on average, somewhere between that of tough-food feeders and leaf feeders (folivores.) These measurements are analyses of the percentages of tooth surface structure containing \"pits\" (frequency and depth of dental damage resulting from consumption of certain foods across species). It is a heavily used, and henceforth widely accepted as reliable, measure of wear that a species, on average, endures from eating certain food. These measurements point to an increasingly generalized, and generally omnivorous diet in \"Homo habilis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Homo habilis\" is thought to have mastered the Lower Paleolithic Olduwan tool set, which used stone flakes. \"H. habilis\" used these stones to butcher and skin the animals. These stone flakes were more advanced than any tools previously used, and gave \"H. habilis\" the edge it needed to prosper in hostile environments previously too formidable for primates. Whether \"H. habilis\" was the first hominin to master stone tool technology remains controversial, as \"Australopithecus garhi\", dated to 2.6 million years ago, has been found along with stone tool implements.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most experts assume the intelligence and social organization of \"H. habilis\" were more sophisticated than typical australopithecines or chimpanzees. \"H. habilis\" used tools primarily for scavenging, such as cleaving meat off carrion, rather than defense or hunting. Yet, despite tool usage, \"H. habilis\" was not the master hunter its sister species (or descendants) proved to be, as ample fossil evidence indicates \"H. habilis\" was a staple in the diet of large predatory animals, such as \"Dinofelis\", a large scimitar-toothed predatory cat the size of a jaguar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Homo habilis\" coexisted with other \"Homo\"-like bipedal primates, such as \"Paranthropus boisei\", some of which prospered for many millennia. However, \"H. habilis\", possibly because of its early tool innovation and a less specialized diet, became the precursor of an entire line of new species, whereas \"Paranthropus boisei\" and its robust relatives disappeared from the fossil record. \"H. habilis\" may also have coexisted with \"H. erectus\" in Africa for a period of 500,000 years.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the period in africa for a period of time ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 14, 2)"}]}, {"context": "OH 7 dates to 1.75 million years old, and was discovered by Mary and Louis Leakey on November 4, 1960 at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. It is a lower jaw complete with teeth; due to the size of the small teeth, researchers estimate this juvenile individual had a brain volume of 363\u00a0cm\u00b3. In 1964, found were more than 20 fragments of the left hand. Leakey, paleontologist John Napier, and paleoanthropologist PhillipTobias identified these discoveries as Homo habilis and assisted in classifying OH 7 as the type fossil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The OH 7 hand of \"Homo habilis\" combines traits associated with a precision grip and adaptations related to climbing, which fits well with the semi-long, humanlike hindlimb proportions and a rather chimpanzee-like upper-to-lower arm ratio.", "qas": []}, {"context": "OH 24 (\"Twiggy\") is a roughly deformed cranium about 1.8 million years old discovered in October 1968 at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. The brain volume is just under 600\u00a0cm\u00b3; also, a reduction in the protruding face is present compared to members of more primitive australopithecines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "KNM ER 1813 is a relatively complete cranium, which dates to 1.9 million years old, discovered at Koobi Fora, Kenya by Kamoya Kimeu in 1973. The brain capacity is 510\u00a0cm\u00b3, not as impressive as other early specimen and forms of \"H. habilis\" discovered.", "qas": [{"question": "the brain capacity is what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 18, 1)"}]}, {"context": "KNM ER 1805 is a specimen of an adult \"H. habilis\" made of three pieces of cranium dating to 1.74 million years old from Koobi Fora, Kenya, discovered in 1974. Previous assumptions were that this specimen belongs to \"H. erectus\" based on the degree of prognathism and overall cranial shape.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One set of fossil remains (OH 62, for \"Olduvai Hominid specimen 62\"), discovered by Donald Johanson and Tim White in Olduvai Gorge in 1986, included the important upper and lower limbs, specifically the humerus and femur. Their finding stimulated some debate at the time.\nLocomotor affinities of OH 62 have been assessed primarily on the basis of its forelimb to hind limb proportions, which are known to be associated with locomotor behavior among living primates. Initial analyses concentrated on comparisons to the \"Australopithecus afarensis\" A.L. 288-1 (\"Lucy\"). In most dimensions\u2014measured or estimated\u2014the OH 62 upper limb remains equaled or exceeded those of A.L. 288-1, while its lower limb remains (principally the femur) appeared to be smaller. In particular, using a length estimate for the humerus of 264 mm, and a length estimate for the less complete femur of \u2018\u2018no greater than that of A.L. 288-1 (280 mm),<nowiki>\"</nowiki> a possible humerofemoral length index is close to 95%, which is more like that of modern chimpanzees (averaging about 1.00) than modern humans (averaging about 0.72). In this sense, it was more \u2018\u2018primitive<nowiki>\"</nowiki> than A.L. 288-1, with a length index of 0.85.\nLD 350-1 is a fossil jawbone fragment discovered in 2013, which has been dated to 2.8 million years ago and argued to be intermediate between \"Australopithecus\" and \"H. habilis\".\nThe fossil was claimed as the earliest evidence of the genus \"Homo\" known to date. \nThe individual in question lived just after a major climate shift in the region, when forests and waterways were rapidly replaced by arid savannah.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Harmonica", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The harmonica, also known as a French harp or mouth organ, is a free reed wind instrument used worldwide in many musical genres, notably in blues, American folk music, classical music, jazz, country, and rock and roll. There are many types of harmonica, including diatonic, chromatic, tremolo, octave, orchestral, and bass versions. A harmonica is played by using the mouth (lips and tongue) to direct air into or out of one or more holes along a mouthpiece. Behind each hole is a chamber containing at least one reed. A harmonica reed is a flat elongated spring typically made of brass, stainless steel, or bronze, which is secured at one end over a slot that serves as an airway. When the free end is made to vibrate by the player's air, it alternately blocks and unblocks the airway to produce sound.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Reeds are pre-tuned to individual pitches. Tuning may involve changing a reed\u2019s length, the weight near its free end, or the stiffness near its fixed end. Longer, heavier and springier reeds produce deeper, lower sounds; shorter, lighter and stiffer reeds make higher-pitched sounds. If, as on most modern harmonicas, a reed is affixed above or below its slot rather than in the plane of the slot, it responds more easily to air flowing in the direction that initially would push it into the slot, i.e., as a \"closing reed\". This difference in response to air direction makes it possible to include both a \"blow reed\" and a \"draw reed\" in the same air chamber and to play them separately without relying on flaps of plastic or leather (valves, wind-savers) to block the nonplaying reed.", "qas": [{"question": "what are reeds ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "An important technique in performance is bending: causing a drop in pitch by making embouchure adjustments. It is possible to bend isolated reeds, as on chromatic and other harmonica models with wind-savers, but also to both lower, and raise (\"overbend\", \"overblow\", \"overdraw\") the pitch produced by pairs of reeds in the same chamber, as on a diatonic or other unvalved harmonica. Such two-reed pitch changes actually involve sound production by the normally silent reed, the \"opening reed\" (for instance, the blow reed while the player is drawing).", "qas": []}, {"context": " The basic parts of the harmonica are the comb, reed plates and cover plates.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the basic parts of the harmonica ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The comb is the main body of the instrument, which, when assembled with the reedplates, forms air chambers for the reeds. The term \"comb\" may originate from the similarity between this part of a harmonica and a hair comb. Harmonica combs were traditionally made from wood but now are also made from plastic (ABS) or metal (including titanium for high-end instruments). Some modern and experimental comb designs are complex in the way that they direct the air.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is dispute among players about whether comb material affects the tone of a harmonica. Those saying no argue that, unlike the soundboard of a piano or the top piece of a violin or guitar, a harmonica's comb is neither large enough nor able to vibrate freely enough to substantially augment or change the sound. Among those saying yes are those who are convinced by their ears. Few dispute, however, that comb surface smoothness and air-tightness when mated with the reedplates can greatly affect tone and playability. The main advantage of a particular comb material over another one is its durability. In particular, a wooden comb can absorb moisture from the player's breath and contact with the tongue. This can cause the comb to expand slightly, making the instrument uncomfortable to play, and to then contract, potentially compromising air tightness. Various types of wood and treatments have been devised to reduce the degree of this problem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An even more serious problem with wood combs, especially in chromatic harmonicas (with their thin dividers between chambers), is that, as the combs expand and shrink over time, cracks can form in the combs, because the comb is held immobile by nails, resulting in disabling leakage. Much effort is devoted by serious players to restoring wood combs and sealing leaks. Some players used to soak wooden-combed harmonicas (diatonics, without windsavers) in water to cause a slight expansion, which they intended to make the seal between the comb, reed plates and covers more airtight. Modern wooden-combed harmonicas are less prone to swelling and contracting. Players still dip harmonicas in water for the way it affects tone and ease of bending notes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The reed plate is a grouping of several reeds in a single housing. The reeds are usually made of brass, but steel, aluminium and plastic are occasionally used. Individual reeds are usually riveted to the reed plate, but they may also be welded or screwed in place. Reeds fixed on the inner side of the reed plate (within the comb's air chamber) respond to blowing, while those fixed on the outer side respond to suction.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the reed plate a subset of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most harmonicas are constructed with the reed plates screwed or bolted to the comb or each other. A few brands still use the traditional method of nailing the reed plates to the comb. Some experimental and rare harmonicas also have had the reed plates held in place by tension, such as the WWII era all-American models. If the plates are bolted to the comb, the reed plates can be replaced individually. This is useful because the reeds eventually go out of tune through normal use, and certain notes of the scale can fail more quickly than others.", "qas": [{"question": "what are most harmonicas constructed with ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A notable exception to the traditional reed plate design is the all-plastic harmonicas designed by Finn Magnus in the 1950s, in which the reed and reed plate were molded out of a single piece of plastic. The Magnus design had the reeds, reed plates and comb made of plastic and either molded or permanently glued together.", "qas": [{"question": "who designed the mandolin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what type of design did the swan design have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 9, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Cover plates cover the reed plates and are usually made of metal, though wood and plastic have also been used. The choice of these is personal; because they project sound, they determine the tonal quality of the harmonica. There are two types of cover plates: traditional open designs of stamped metal or plastic, which are simply there to be held; and enclosed designs (such as the Hohner Meisterklasse and Super 64, Suzuki Promaster and SCX), which offer a louder tonal quality. From these two basic types, a few modern designs have been created, such as the Hohner CBH-2016 chromatic and the Suzuki Overdrive diatonic, which have complex covers that allow for specific functions not usually available in the traditional design. It was not unusual in the late 19th and early 20th centuries for harmonicas to have special features on the covers, such as bells, which could be rung by pushing a button.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Windsavers\" are one-way valves made from thin strips of plastic, knit paper, leather or Teflon glued to the reed plate. They are typically found in chromatic harmonicas, chord harmonicas and many octave-tuned harmonicas. Windsavers are used when two reeds share a cell and leakage through the nonplaying reed would be significant. For example, when a draw note is played, the valve on the blow reed-slot is sucked shut, preventing air from leaking through the inactive blow reed. An exception to this is the now-discontinued Hohner XB-40, on which valves are placed not to isolate single reeds but rather to isolate entire chambers from being active, a design that made it possible to play traditional blues bends on all reeds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The mouthpiece is placed between the air chambers of the instrument and the player's mouth. This can be integral with the comb (the diatonic harmonicas; the Hohner Chrometta); part of the cover (as in Hohner's CX-12); or may be a separate unit, secured by screws, which is typical of chromatics. In many harmonicas, the mouthpiece is purely an ergonomic aid designed to make playing more comfortable. However, in the traditional slider-based chromatic harmonica, it is essential to the functioning of the instrument because it provides a groove for the slide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 1950s, many blues harmonica players have amplified their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers. One of the early innovators of this approach was Marion \"Little Walter\" Jacobs, who played the harmonica near a \"Bullet\" microphone marketed for use by radio taxi dispatchers. This gave his harmonica tone a \"punchy\" midrange sound that could be heard above an electric guitar. As well, tube amplifiers produce a natural growling overdrive when cranked at higher volumes, which adds body, fullness and \"grit\" to the sound. Little Walter also cupped his hands around the instrument, tightening the air around the harp, giving it a powerful, distorted sound, somewhat reminiscent of a saxophone, hence the term \"Mississippi saxophone\". Some harmonica players in folk use a regular vocal mic, such as a Shure SM 58 for their harmonica, which gives a clean, natural sound.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As technology in amplification has progressed, harmonica players have introduced other effects units to their rigs as well, such as reverb, tremolo, delay, octave, additional overdrive pedals, and chorus effect. John Popper of Blues Traveler uses a customized microphone that encapsulates several of these effects into one handheld unit, as opposed to several units in sequence. Many harmonica players still prefer tube amplifiers to solid-state, owing to the perceived difference in tone generated by the vacuum tubes. Players perceive tubes as having a \"warmer\" tone and a more \"natural\" overdrive sound. Many amplifiers designed for electric guitar are also used by harmonica players, such as the Kalamazoo Model Two, Fender Bassman, and the Danelectro Commando. Some expensive, handmade boutique amplifiers, however, are built from the ground up with characteristics that are optimal for amplified harmonica.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Harmonica players who play the instrument while performing on another instrument with their hands (e.g., an acoustic guitar) often use an accessory called a \"neck rack\" or \"harmonica holder\" to position the instrument in front of their mouth. A harmonica holder clamps the harmonica between two metal brackets, which are attached to a curved loop of metal that rests on the shoulders. The original harmonica racks were made from wire or coat hangers. Models of harmonica racks vary widely by quality and ease of use, and it quite often takes experimenting with more than one model of harmonica rack to find one that feels suitable for each individual player. This device is used by folk musicians, one-man bands and singer-songwriters such as Bob Dylan, Tom Harmon, Neil Young, Eddie Vedder, Billy Joel, Bruce Springsteen and blues singers Jimmy Reed and John Hammond Jr. The HarpArm is a magnetic harmonica holder that is offered in two varieties: a standard neck rack version, and a model which attaches to standard straight or boom microphone stands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some advanced silencer can reduce the sound down to 20%. \nThe chromatic harmonica uses a button-activated sliding bar to redirect air from the hole in the mouthpiece to the selected reed-plate, though one design\u2014the \"Machino-Tone\"\u2014controlled airflow by means of a lever-operated flap on the rear of the instrument. Also, a \"hands-free\" modification to the Hohner 270 (12-hole) lets the player shift the tones by moving the mouthpiece up and down with the lips, leaving the hands free to play another instrument. While the Richter-tuned 10-hole chromatic is intended to play in only one key, the 12-, 14-, and 16-hole models (which are tuned to equal temperament) allow the musician to play in any key desired with only one harmonica. This harp can be used for any style, including Celtic, classical, jazz, or blues (commonly in third position).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Strictly speaking, diatonic denotes any harmonica designed to play in a single key\u2014though the standard Richter-tuned harmonica diatonic can play other keys by forcing its reeds to play tones that are not part of its basic scale. Depending on the country, \"diatonic harmonica\" may mean either the tremolo harmonica (in East Asia) or blues harp (In Europe and North America). Other diatonic harmonicas include octave harmonicas.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the octave ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 17, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Here is the note layout for a standard diatonic in the key of G major:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each hole is the same interval (here, a perfect fifth) from its key of C counterpart; on the diatonic scale, a G is a perfect fifth from C. The interval between keys can be used to find the note layout of any standard diatonic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The distinguishing feature of the tremolo-tuned harmonica is that it has two reeds per note, with one slightly sharp and the other slightly flat. This provides a unique wavering or warbling sound created by the two reeds being slightly out of tune with each other and the difference in their subsequent waveforms interacting with each other (its beat). The Asian version, which can produce all 12 semitones, is used often in East Asian rock and pop music.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Orchestral harmonicas are primarily designed for use in ensemble playing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are eight kinds of orchestral melody harmonica; the most common are the horn harmonicas often found in East Asia. These consist of a single large comb with blow-only reed-plates on the top and bottom. Each reed sits inside a single cell in the comb. One version mimics the layout of a piano or mallet instrument, with the natural notes of a C diatonic scale in the lower reed plate and the sharps and flats in the upper reed plate in groups of two and three holes with gaps in between like the black keys of a piano. Another version has one \"sharp\" reed directly above its \"natural\" on the lower plate, with the same number of reeds on both plates (therefore including E and B).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Horn harmonicas are available in several pitch ranges, with the lowest pitched starting two octaves below middle C and the highest beginning on middle C itself; they usually cover a two- or three-octave range. They are chromatic instruments and are usually played in an East Asian harmonica orchestra instead of the \"push-button\" chromatic harmonica that is more common in the European and American tradition. Their reeds are often larger, and the enclosing \"horn\" gives them a different timbre, so that they often function in place of a brass section. In the past, they were referred to as horn harmonicas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The other type of orchestral melodic harmonica is the polyphonia, (though some are marked \"chromatica\"). These have all twelve chromatic notes laid out on the same row. In most cases, they have both blow and draw of the same tone, though the No. 7 is blow only, and the No. 261, also blow only, has two reeds per hole, tuned an octave apart (all these designations refer to products of M. Hohner).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The chord harmonica has up to 48 chords: major, seventh, minor, augmented and diminished for ensemble playing. It is laid out in four-note clusters, each sounding a different chord on inhaling or exhaling. Typically each hole has two reeds for each note, tuned to one octave of each other. However, less expensive models often have only one reed per note. Quite a few orchestra harmonicas are also designed to serve as both bass and chord harmonica, with bass notes next to chord groupings. There are also other chord harmonicas, such as the Chordomonica (which operates similar to a chromatic harmonica), and the junior chord harmonicas (which typically provide six chords).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Suzuki SSCH-56 Compact Chord harmonica is a 48-chord harmonica built in a 14-hole chromatic harmonica enclosure. The first three holes play a major chord on blow and draw, with and without the slide. Holes 2, 3, and 4 play a diminished chord; holes 3, 4, and 5 play a minor chord; and holes 4, 5, and 6 play an augmented, for a total of sixteen chords. This pattern is repeated starting on hole 5, a whole step higher; and again starting on hole 9, for a total of 48 chords.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ChengGong harmonica has a main body, and a sliding mouthpiece. The body is a 24-hole diatonic harmonica that ranges from B to D (covering 3 octaves). Its 11-hole mouthpiece can slide along the front of the harmonica, which gives numerous chord choices and voicings (seven triads, three 6th chords, seven 7th chords, and seven 9th chords, for a total of 24 chords). As well, it is capable of playing single-note melodies and double stops over a range of three diatonic octaves. Unlike conventional harmonicas, blowing and drawing produce the same notes because its tuning is closer to the note layout of a typical Asian tremolo harmonica or the Polyphonias.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The pitch pipe is a simple specialty harmonica that provides a reference pitch to singers and other instruments. The only difference between some early pitch-pipes and harmonicas is the name of the instrument, which reflected the maker's target audience. Chromatic pitch pipes, which are used by singers and choirs, give a full chromatic (12-note) octave. Pitch pipes are also sold for string players, such as violinists and guitarists; these pitch pipes usually provide the notes corresponding to the open strings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vibrato is a technique commonly used while playing the harmonica and many other instruments, to give the note a 'shaking' sound. This technique can be accomplished in a number of ways. The most common way is to change how the harmonica is held. For example, the vibrato effect can be achieved by opening and closing the hands around the harmonica very rapidly. The vibrato might also be achieved via rapid glottal (vocal fold) opening and closing, especially on draws (inhalation) simultaneous to bending, or without bending. This obviates the need for cupping and waving the hands around the instrument during play. An effect similar to vibrato is that of the 'trill' (or 'roll', or 'warble, or 'shake'); this technique has the player move their lips between two holes very quickly, either by shaking the head in a rapid motion or moving the harmonica from side to side within the embouchure. This gives a quick pitch-alternating technique that is slightly more than vibrato and achieves the same aural effect on sustained notes, albeit by using two different tones instead of varying the amplitude of one.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to the 19 notes readily available on the diatonic harmonica, players can play other notes by adjusting their embouchure and forcing the reed to resonate at a different pitch. This technique is called bending, a term possibly borrowed from guitarists, who literally bend a string to subtly change the pitch. Bending also creates the glissandos characteristic of much blues harp and country harmonica playing. Bends are essential for most blues and rock harmonica due to the soulful sounds the instrument can bring out. The \"wail\" of the blues harp typically requires bending. In the 1970s, Howard Levy developed the over bending technique (also known as \"overblowing\" and \"overdrawing\".) Over Bending, combined with bending, allowed players to play the entire chromatic scale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to playing the diatonic harmonica in its original key, it is also possible to play it in other keys by playing in other \"positions\" using different keynotes. Using just the basic notes on the instrument would mean playing in a specific mode for each position. For example the Mixolydian mode (root note is the second draw or third blow), produces a major dominant seventh key that is frequently used by blues players because it contains the harmonically rich dominant seventh note, while the Dorian mode (root note is four draw) produces a minor dominant seventh key. Harmonica players (especially blues players) have developed terminology around different \"positions,\" which can be confusing to other musicians, for example the slang terminology for the most common positions (1st being 'straight', 2nd being 'cross', 3rd being 'slant', etc.).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another technique, seldom used to its full potential, is altering the size of the mouth cavity to emphasize certain natural overtones. When this technique is employed while playing chords, care must be taken in overtone selection as the overtones stemming from the non-root pitch can cause extreme dissonance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Harmonica players who amplify their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers, such as blues harp players, also have a range of techniques that exploit properties of the microphone and the amplifier, such as changing the way the hands are cupped around the instrument and the microphone or rhythmically breathing or chanting into the microphone while playing. Blues and folk players refer to the instrument with a range of less common names, including \"hand reed,\" \"Mississippi saxophone,\" \"licking stick,\" \"pocket sax,\" \"toe pickle,\" \"tin sandwich,\" \"ten-holed tin-can tongue twister,\" \"blues burger,\" \"harpoon,\" \"moothie,\" and \"French harp\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The harmonica was developed in Europe in the early part of the 19th century. Free-reed instruments like the Chinese sheng were fairly common in Asia since ancient times. They became relatively well known in Europe after being introduced by the French Jesuit Jean Joseph Marie Amiot (1718-1793), who lived in Qing-era China. Around 1820, free-reed designs began being created in Europe. Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann is often cited as the inventor of the harmonica in 1821, but other inventors developed similar instruments at the same time. Mouth-blown free-reed instruments appeared in the United States, South America, the United Kingdom and Europe at roughly the same time. These instruments were made for playing classical music.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The harmonica first appeared in Vienna, where harmonicas with chambers were sold before 1824 (see also Anton Reinlein and Anton Haeckl). Richter tuning, invented by Joseph Richter (who also is credited with inventing the blow and draw mechanism), was created in 1826 and was eventually adopted nearly universally. In Germany, violin manufacturer Mr. Meisel from Klingenthal bought a harmonica with chambers (Kanzellen) at the Exhibition in Braunschweig in 1824. He and the ironworker Langhammer copied the instruments in the Graslitz three miles away; by 1827 they had produced hundreds of harmonicas. Many others followed in Germany and also nearby in what would later become Czechoslovakia. In 1829, Johann Wilhelm Rudolph Glier also began making harmonicas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1830, Christian Messner, a cloth maker and weaver from Trossingen, copied a harmonica his neighbour had brought from Vienna. He had such success that eventually his brother and some relatives also started to make harmonicas. From 1840 onwards, his nephew Christian Weiss was also involved in the business. By 1855, there were at least three harmonica-making businesses: C. A. Seydel S\u00f6hne, Christian Messner & Co., and W\u00fcrtt. Harmonikafabrik Ch. Weiss. (Currently, only C.A. Seydel is still in business.) Owing to competition between the harmonica factories in Trossingen and Klingenthal, machines were invented to punch the covers for the reeds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1857, Matthias Hohner, a clockmaker from Trossingen, started producing harmonicas. Eventually he became the first to mass-produce them. He used a mass-produced wooden comb that he had made by machine-cutting firms. By 1868, he began supplying the United States. By the 1920s, the diatonic harmonica had largely reached its modern form. Other types followed soon thereafter, including the various tremolo and octave harmonicas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the late 19th century, harmonica production was a big business, having evolved into mass production. New designs were still developed in the 20th century, including the chromatic harmonica, first made by Hohner in 1924, the bass harmonica, and the chord harmonica. In the 21st century, radical new designs have been developed and are still being introduced into the market, such as the Suzuki Overdrive, Hohner XB-40, and the ill-fated Harrison B-Radical.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Diatonic harmonicas were designed primarily for playing German and other European folk music and have succeeded well in those styles. Over time, the basic design and tuning proved adaptable to other types of music such as the blues, country, old-time and more. The harmonica was a success almost from the very start of production, and while the center of the harmonica business has shifted from Germany, the output of the various harmonica manufacturers is still very high. Major companies are now found in Germany (, Bushman, Hohner \u2013 the dominant manufacturer in the world), Japan (Suzuki, Tombo \u2013 the manufacturer of the popular Lee Oskar harmonica, and Yamaha also made harmonicas until the 1970s), China (Huang, Easttop, Johnson, Leo Shi, Suzuki, Hohner, Swan, AXL), and Brazil (Hering, Bends). The United States had two significant harmonica manufacturers, and both were based in Union, New Jersey. One was Magnus Harmonica Corporation, whose founder Finn Magnus is credited with the development of plastic harmonica reeds. The other was Wm. Kratt Company, which, founded by German-American William Jacob \"Bill\" Kratt Sr., originally made pitch pipes and later, in 1952, secured a patent for combs made of plastic. Both companies ceased harmonica production. The only recent American contender in the harmonica market was Harrison Harmonicas, which folded in July 2011. It was announced soon thereafter that the rights to the Harrison design had been sold to another company to finish production of orders already placed. In October 2012, it was revealed that a Beloit, Wisconsin, investment corporation, R&R Opportunities, had bought the assets of Harrison Harmonicas and that a feasibility study was under way to assess the possibilities of continued production of the Harrison B-Radical harmonica. Recently, responding to increasingly demanding performance techniques, the market for high-quality instruments has grown.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some time before Hohner began manufacturing harmonicas in 1857, he shipped some to relatives who had emigrated to the United States. Its music rapidly became popular, and the country became an enormous market for Hohner's goods. President Abraham Lincoln carried a harmonica in his pocket, and harmonicas provided solace to soldiers on both the Union and Confederate sides of the American Civil War. Frontiersmen Wyatt Earp and Billy the Kid played the instrument, and it became a fixture of the American musical landscape.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Harmonicas were heard on a handful of recordings in the early 1900s, generally labeled as a \"mouth organ\". The first jazz or traditional music recordings of harmonicas were made in the U.S. in the mid-1920s. Recordings known at the time as \"race records\", intended for the black market of the southern states, included solo recordings by DeFord Bailey and duo recordings with a guitarist (Hammie Nixon, Walter Horton, or Sonny Terry). Hillbilly styles were also recorded, intended for white audiences, by Frank Hutchison, Gwen Foster and several other musicians. There are also recordings featuring the harmonica in jug bands, of which the Memphis Jug Band is the most famous. But the harmonica still represented a toy instrument in those years and was associated with the poor. It is also during those years that musicians started experimenting with new techniques such as tongue-blocking, hand effects and the most important innovation of all, the second position, or cross-harp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A significant contributor to the expanding popularity of the harmonica was a New York-based radio program called the \"Hohner Harmony Hour\", which taught listeners how to play. Listeners could play along with the program to increase their proficiency. The radio program gained wide popularity after the unveiling of the 1925 White House Christmas tree, which was adorned with fifty harmonicas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The harmonica's versatility brought it to the attention of classical musicians during the 1930s. American Larry Adler was one of the first harmonica players to perform major works written for the instrument by the composers Ralph Vaughan Williams, Malcolm Arnold, Darius Milhaud, and Arthur Benjamin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Harmonicas were in short supply in the United States during World War II. Wood and metal materials for harmonicas were in short supply because of military demand. Furthermore, the primary harmonica manufacturers were based in Germany and Japan, the enemies of the United States and the Allied forces in the war. During this time, Finn Haakon Magnus, a Danish-American factory worker and entrepreneur, developed and perfected the molded plastic harmonica. The plastic harmonica used molded plastic combs and far fewer pieces than traditional metal or wood harmonicas, which made the harmonica more economical to mass-produce and more sanitary. Though the plastic reeds in these harmonicas produced a less distinctive (and, to many ears, inferior) sound than their metallic counterparts, Magnus harmonicas and several imitators soon became commonplace, particularly among children. The patent for the plastic comb, however, was awarded to William Kratt of Wm. Kratt Company in 1952. During World War II, the War Department allotted a rationed supply of brass to Kratt's factory so they could continue to produce harmonicas that the Red Cross distributed to American troops overseas to boost morale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1898, the harmonica was brought to Japan, where the Tremolo harmonica was the most popular instrument. After about 30 years, the Japanese developed scale tuning and semitone harmonicas that could play Japanese folk songs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Europe and the United States, tremolo harmonica uses the Richter tuning, developed in Germany. In 1913, Sh\u014dgo Kawaguchi (), known in Japan as the \"Father of the harmonica\", devised an alternate tuning, which is more suited to playing Japanese folk tunes. This tuning is also suited to local music throughout East Asia, and harmonicas using the tuning became popular in the region.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Initial diatonic harmonica tunings were major key only. In 1931, Hider\u014d Sat\u014d () announced the development of a minor key harmonica. There are two types of minor key tunings, \"natural minor\" suitable for folk and contemporary music, and Latin American music, and the \"harmonic minor\" suitable for Japanese folk music.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The harmonica started to gain popularity in Hong Kong in the 1930s. Individual tremolo harmonica players from China moved to Hong Kong and established numerous harmonica organizations such as The Chinese Y.M.C.A. Harmonica Orchestra, the China Harmonica Society, and the Heart String Harmonica Society. During the 1950s, chromatic harmonica became popular in Hong Kong, and players such as Larry Adler and John Sebastian Sr. were invited to perform.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Local players such as Lau Mok () and Fung On () promoted the chromatic harmonica. The chromatic harmonica gradually became the main instrument used by the Chinese Y.M.C.A. Harmonica Orchestra. The Chinese YMCA Harmonica Orchestra started in the 1960s, with 100 members, most of whom played harmonicas. Non-harmonica instruments were also used, such as double bass, accordion, piano, and percussion such as timpani and xylophone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1970s, the Haletone Harmonica Orchestra () was set up at Wong Tai Sin Community Centre. Fung On and others continued to teach harmonica and also set up harmonica orchestras. In the 1980s, numbers of harmonica students steadily decreased. In the 1990s, harmonica players from Hong Kong began to participate in international harmonica competitions, including the World Harmonica Festival in Germany and the Asia Pacific Harmonica Festival. In the 2000s, the Hong Kong Harmonica Association (H.K.H.A.) () was established.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The history of the harmonica in Taiwan began around 1945. By the 1980s, though, as living standards improved, many instruments once beyond the budgets of most Taiwanese started to become more accessible and popular in preference to the harmonica.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Playing the harmonica requires inhaling and exhaling strongly against resistance. This action helps develop a strong diaphragm and deep breathing using the entire lung volume. Pulmonary specialists have noted that playing the harmonica resembles the kind of exercise used to rehabilitate COPD patients such as using a PFLEX inspiratory muscle trainer or the inspiratory spirometer. Learning to play a musical instrument also offers motivation in addition to the exercise component. Many pulmonary rehabilitation programs therefore have begun to incorporate the harmonica.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The concertina, diatonic and chromatic accordions and the melodica are all free-reed instruments that developed alongside the harmonica. Indeed, the similarities between harmonicas and so-called \"diatonic\" accordions or melodeons is such that in German the name for the former is \"Mundharmonika\" and the latter \"Handharmonika,\" which translate as \"mouth harmonica\" and \"hand harmonica.\" In Scandinavian languages, an accordion is called variants of \"trekkspill\" (pull play) or \"trekkharmonika\" whereas a harmonica is called \"munnspill\" (mouth play) or \"mundharmonika\" (mouth harmonica). The names for the two instruments in the Slavic languages are also either similar or identical. The harmonica shares similarities to all other free-reed instruments by virtue of the method of sound production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The glass harmonica has the word \"harmonica\" in its name, but it is not related to free-reed instruments. The glass harmonica is a musical instrument formed from a nested set of graduated glass cups mounted sideways on an axle. Each of the glass cups is tuned to a different note, and they are arranged in a scalar order. It is played by touching the rotating cups with wetted fingers, causing them to vibrate and produce a sustained \"singing\" tone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tablature notation (often abbreviated as \"tab\") is a method of writing melodies by indicating where the notes are played on the instrument, rather than by indicating the pitches with circles and note heads printed on a staff, as with standard notation. One of the advantages of tab is that it can be easier for performers without formal training to learn, because the notation directly indicates where to play the note.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While tab is most often associated with fretted stringed instruments such as the guitar, tab is also used with other instruments such as the organ and harmonica.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many harmonica tab systems in use. A simple tab system appears as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Diatonic Harmonica tab:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chords are shown by grouping notes with parentheses", "qas": []}, {"context": "(2 3) = blow the 2 hole and the 3 hole at the same time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chromatic Harmonica tab:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Harmonica tab is usually aligned with lyrics to show the tune and the timing, and usually states the key of the harmonica required for the song.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Complete example of harmonica tab:\nA number (sometimes inside a circle) appears below each note in otherwise conventional sheet music, and indicates which number hole to play. An up or down arrow beneath the number indicates whether to blow or draw. Up means blow and down means draw. A curved arrow indicates bend notes\u2014slightly to the left for a half step flat, and longer to the left to indicate a whole step flat. Right-pointing arrows indicate a sharp bend.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hops", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hops are the flowers (also called seed cones or strobiles) of the hop plant \"Humulus lupulus.\" They are used primarily as a bittering, flavouring, and stability agent in beer, to which they impart, in addition to bitterness, floral, fruity, or citric flavours and aromas. Hops are also used for various purposes in other beverages and herbal medicine. The hop plant is a vigorous, climbing, herbaceous perennial, usually trained to grow up strings in a field called a hopfield, hop garden (nomenclature in the South of England), or hop yard (in the West Country and US) when grown commercially. Many different varieties of hops are grown by farmers around the world, with different types used for particular styles of beer.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the flower cones called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first documented use of hops in beer is from the 9th century, though Hildegard of Bingen, 300 years later, is often cited as the earliest documented source. Before this period, brewers used a \"gruit\", composed of a wide variety of bitter herbs and flowers, including dandelion, burdock root, marigold, horehound (the old German name for horehound, \"Berghopfen\", means \"mountain hops\"), ground ivy, and heather. Early documents include mention of a hop garden in the will of Charlemagne's father, Pepin III.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hops are also used in brewing for their antibacterial effect over less desirable microorganisms and for purported benefits including balancing the sweetness of the malt with bitterness and a variety of flavours and aromas. Historically, traditional herb combinations for beers were believed to have been abandoned when beers made with hops were noticed to be less prone to spoilage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first documented hop cultivation was in 736, in the Hallertau region of present-day Germany, although the first mention of the use of hops in brewing in that country was 1079. However, in a will of Pepin the Short, the father of Charlemagne, hop gardens were left to the Cloister of Saint-Denis in 768. Not until the 13th century did hops begin to start threatening the use of gruit for flavouring. Gruit was used when the nobility levied taxes on hops. Whichever was taxed made the brewer then quickly switch to the other. In Britain, hopped beer was first imported from Holland around 1400, yet hops were condemned as late as 1519 as a \"wicked and pernicious weed\". In 1471, Norwich, England, banned use of the plant in the brewing of ale (\"beer\" was the name for fermented malt liquors bittered with hops; only in recent times are the words often used as synonyms).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Germany, using hops was also a religious and political choice in the early 16th century. There was no tax on hops to be paid to the Catholic church, unlike on gruit. For this reason the Protestants preferred hopped beer.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the protestants call the beer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 4, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Hops used in England were imported from France, Holland and Germany with import duty paid for those; it was not until 1524 that hops were first grown in the southeast of England (Kent) when they were introduced as an agricultural crop by Dutch farmers. Therefore, in the hop industry there are many words which originally were Dutch words (see oast house). Hops were then grown as far north as Aberdeen, near breweries for convenience of infrastructure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Thomas Tusser's 1557 \"Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry\":\n\"The hop for his profit I thus do exalt,It strengtheneth drink and it flavoureth malt;And being well-brewed long kept it will last,And drawing abide, if ye draw not too fast.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In England there were many complaints over the quality of imported hops, the sacks of which were often contaminated by stalks, sand or straw to increase their weight. As a result, in 1603, King James I approved an Act of Parliament banning the practice by which \"the Subjects of this Realm have been of late years abused &c. to the Value of \u00a320,000 yearly, besides the Danger of their Healths\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hop cultivation was begun in the present-day United States in 1629 by English and Dutch farmers. Before prohibition, cultivation was mainly centred around New York, California, Oregon, and Washington state. Problems with powdery mildew and downy mildew devastated New York's production by the 1920s, and California only produces hops on a small scale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hop bars were used before modern machinery was invented to make the holes for the hop poles.", "qas": [{"question": "what was used before modern machinery ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hops production is concentrated in moist temperate climates, with much of the world's production occurring near the 48th parallel north. Hop plants prefer the same soils as potatoes and the leading potato-growing states in the United States are also major hops-producing areas; however, not all potato-growing areas can produce good hops naturally: soils in the Maritime Provinces of Canada, for example, lack the boron that hops prefer. Historically, hops were not grown in Ireland, but were imported from England. In 1752 more than 500 tons of English hops were imported through Dublin alone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Important production centres today are the Hallertau in Germany, the \u017datec (Saaz) in the Czech Republic, the Yakima (Washington) and Willamette (Oregon) valleys, and western Canyon County, Idaho (including the communities of Parma, Wilder, Greenleaf, and Notus). The principal production centres in the UK are in Kent (which produces Kent Goldings hops), Herefordshire, and Worcestershire. Essentially all of the harvested hops are used in beer making.", "qas": [{"question": "where are most beers used in beer making beer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 11, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Although hops are grown in most of the continental United States and Canada, cultivation of hops for commercial production requires a particular environment. As hops are a climbing plant, they are trained to grow up trellises made from strings or wires that support the plants and allow them significantly greater growth with the same sunlight profile. In this way, energy that would have been required to build structural cells is also freed for crop growth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The hop plant's reproduction method is that male and female flowers develop on separate plants, although occasionally a fertile individual will develop which contains both male and female flowers. Because pollinated seeds are undesirable for brewing beer, only female plants are grown in hop fields, thus preventing pollination. Female plants are propagated vegetatively, and male plants are culled if plants are grown from seeds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hop plants are planted in rows about apart. Each spring, the roots send forth new bines that are started up strings from the ground to an overhead trellis. The cones grow high on the bine, and in the past, these cones were picked by hand. Harvesting of hops became much more efficient with the invention of the mechanical hops separator, patented by Emil Clemens Horst in 1909.", "qas": [{"question": "where are the roots of the soft plants found ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Harvest comes near the end of summer when the bines are pulled down and the flowers are taken to a hop house or oast house for drying. Hop houses are two-story buildings, of which the upper story has a slatted floor covered with burlap. Here the flowers are poured out and raked even. A heating unit on the lower floor is used to dry the hops. When dry, the hops are moved to a press, a sturdy box with a plunger. Two long pieces of burlap are laid into the hop press at right angles, the hops are poured in and compressed into bales.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hop cones contain different oils, such as lupulin, a yellowish, waxy substance, an oleoresin, that imparts flavour and aroma to beer. Lupulin contains lupulone and humulone, which possess antibiotic properties, suppressing bacterial growth favoring brewer's yeast to grow. After lupulin has been extracted in the brewing process the papery cones are discarded.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The need for massed labor at harvest time meant hop-growing had a big social impact. Around the world, the labor-intensive harvesting work involved large numbers of migrant workers who would travel for the annual hop harvest. Whole families would participate and live in hoppers' huts, with even the smallest children helping in the fields. The final chapters of W. Somerset Maugham's \"Of Human Bondage\" and a large part of George Orwell's \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" contain a vivid description of London families participating in this annual hops harvest. In England, many of those picking hops in Kent were from eastern areas of London. This provided a break from urban conditions that was spent in the countryside. People also came from Birmingham and other Midlands cities to pick hops in the Malvern area of Worcestershire. Some photographs have been preserved.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Particularly in Kent, because of a shortage of small-denomination coin of the realm, many growers issued their own currency to those doing the labor. In some cases, the coins issued were adorned with fanciful hops images, making them quite beautiful.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the US, Prohibition had a major impact on hops productions, but remnants of this significant industry in West and Northwest US are still noticeable in the form of old hop kilns that survive throughout Sonoma County, among others. Florian Dauenhauer, of Santa Rosa in Sonoma County, became a manufacturer of hop-harvesting machines in 1940, in part because of the hop industry's importance to the county. This mechanization helped destroy the local industry by enabling large-scale mechanized production, which moved to larger farms in other areas. Dauenhauer Manufacturing remains a current producer of hop harvesting machines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to water, cellulose, and various proteins, the chemical composition of hops consists of compounds important for imparting character to beer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Probably the most important chemical compound within hops are the alpha acids or humulones. During wort boiling, the humulones are thermally isomerized into iso-alpha acids or \"isohumulones\", which are responsible for the bitter taste of beer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hops contain beta acids or lupulones. These are desirable for their aroma contributions to beer.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the names of the beta ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 22, 0)"}, {"question": "how many contributions to beer are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 22, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The main components of hops essential oils are terpene hydrocarbons consisting of myrcene, humulene and caryophyllene. Myrcene is responsible for the pungent smell of fresh hops. Humulene and its oxidative reaction products may give beer its prominent hop aroma. Together, myrcene, humulene, and caryophyllene represent 80 to 90% of the total hops essential oil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Xanthohumol is the principal flavonoid in hops. The other well-studied prenylflavonoids are 8-prenylnaringenin and isoxanthohumol. Xanthohumol is under basic research for its potential properties, while 8-prenylnaringenin is a potent phytoestrogen.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the principal flavonoid in hops ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hops are usually dried in an oast house before they are used in the brewing process. \nUndried or \"wet\" hops are sometimes (since ca.1990) used.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The wort (sugar-rich liquid produced from malt) is boiled with hops before it is cooled down and yeast is added, to start fermentation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The effect of hops on the finished beer varies by type and use, though there are two main hop types: bittering and aroma. Bittering hops have higher concentrations of alpha acids, and are responsible for the large majority of the bitter flavour of a beer. European (so-called \"noble\") hops typically average 5\u20139% alpha acids by weight (AABW), and the newer American cultivars typically range from 8\u201319% AABW. Aroma hops usually have a lower concentration of alpha acids (~5%) and are the primary contributors of hop aroma and (nonbitter) flavour. Bittering hops are boiled for a longer period of time, typically 60\u201390 minutes, to maximize the isomerization of the alpha acids. They often have inferior aromatic properties, as the aromatic compounds evaporate during the boil.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the effect of hops on the finish beer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The degree of bitterness imparted by hops depends on the degree to which alpha acids are isomerized during the boil, and the impact of a given amount of hops is specified in International Bitterness Units. Unboiled hops are only mildly bitter. On the other hand, the nonbitter flavour and aroma of hops come from the essential oils, which evaporate during the boil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aroma hops are typically added to the wort later to prevent the evaporation of the essential oils, to impart \"hop taste\" (if during the final 30 minutes of boil) or \"hop aroma\" (if during the final 10 minutes, or less, of boil). Aroma hops are often added after the wort has cooled and while the beer ferments, a technique known as \"dry hopping\", which contributes to the hop aroma. Farnesene is a major component in some hops. The composition of hop essential oils can differ between varieties and between years in the same variety, having a significant influence on flavour and aroma.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the final half of boil ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Today, a substantial amount of \"dual-use\" hops are used, as well. These have high concentrations of alpha acids and good aromatic properties. These can be added to the boil at any time, depending on the desired effect. Hop acids also contribute to and stabilize the foam qualities of beer.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of acid can help and stabilize the board of beer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 30, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Flavours and aromas are described appreciatively using terms which include \"grassy\", \"floral\", \"citrus\", \"spicy\", \"piney\", \"lemony\", \"grapefruit\", and \"earthy\".\nMany pale lagers have fairly low hop influence, while lagers marketed as Pilsener or brewed in the Czech Republic may have noticeable noble hop aroma. Certain ales (particularly the highly hopped style known as India Pale Ale, or IPA) can have high levels of hop bitterness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brewers may use software tools to control the bittering levels in the boil and adjust recipes to account for a change in the hop bill or seasonal variations in the crop that may lead to the need to compensate for a difference in alpha acid contribution. Data may be shared with other brewers via BeerXML allowing the reproduction of a recipe allowing for differences in hop availability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many different varieties of hops used in brewing today. Historically, hops varieties were identified by geography (such as Hallertau, Spalt, and Tettnang from Germany), by the farmer who is recognized as first cultivating them (such as Goldings or Fuggles from England), or by their growing habit (e.g., Oregon Cluster).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Around 1900, a number of institutions began to experiment with breeding specific hop varieties. The breeding program at Wye College in Wye, Kent was started in 1904 and rose to prominence through the work of Prof. E. S. Salmon. Salmon released Brewer's Gold and Brewer's Favorite for commercial cultivation in 1934, and went on to release more than two dozen new cultivars before his death in 1959. Brewer's Gold has become the ancestor of the bulk of new hop releases around the world since its release.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wye College continued its breeding program and again received attention in the 1970s, when Dr. Ray A. Neve released Wye Target, Wye Challenger, Wye Northdown, Wye Saxon and Wye Yeoman. More recently, Wye College and its successor institution Wye Hops Ltd., have focused on breeding the first dwarf hop varieties, which are easier to pick by machine and far more economical to grow. Wye College have also been responsible for breeding hop varieties that will grow with only 12 hours of daily light for the South African hop farmers. Wye College was closed in 2009 but the legacy of their hop breeding programs, particularly that of the dwarf varieties, is continuing as already the US private and public breeding programs are using their stock material.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Particular hop varieties are associated with beer regions and styles, for example pale lagers are usually brewed with European (often German, Polish or Czech) noble hop varieties such as Saaz, Hallertau and Strissel Spalt. British ales use hop varieties such as Fuggles, Goldings and W.G.V. North American beers often use Cascade hops, Columbus hops, Centennial hops, Willamette, Amarillo hops and about forty more varieties as the US have lately been the more significant breeders of new hop varieties, including dwarf hop varieties.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the most significant variety of breeders ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 36, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Hops from New Zealand, such as Pacific Gem, Motueka and Nelson Sauvin, are used in a \"Pacific Pale Ale\" style of beer with increasing production in 2014.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term \"noble hops\" traditionally refers to varieties of hops which are low in bitterness and high in aroma. They are the European cultivars or races Hallertau, Tettnanger, Spalt, and Saaz.", "qas": [{"question": "what term refers to varieties of hops ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Their low relative bitterness but strong aroma are often distinguishing characteristics of European-style lagers, such as Pilsener, Dunkel, and Oktoberfest/M\u00e4rzen. In beer, they are considered aroma hops (as opposed to bittering hops); see Pilsner Urquell as a classic example of the Bohemian Pilsener style, which showcases noble hops.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of a popular example of the romantic pilsener style ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 39, 1)"}]}, {"context": "As with grapes, the location where hops are grown affects the hops' characteristics. Much as Dortmunder beer may within the EU be labelled \"Dortmunder\" only if it has been brewed in Dortmund, noble hops may officially be considered \"noble\" only if they were grown in the areas for which the hop varieties (races) were named.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of grapes are grown ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 40, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nEnglish noble varieties are Fuggle, East Kent Goldings and Goldings. They are characterized through analysis as having an alpha:beta ratio of 1:1, low alpha-acid levels (2\u20135%) with a low cohumulone content, low myrcene in the hop oil, high humulene in the oil, a ratio of humulene:caryophyllene above three, and poor storability resulting in them being more prone to oxidation. In reality, this means they have a relatively consistent bittering potential as they age, due to beta-acid oxidation, and a flavour that improves as they age during periods of poor storage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to beer, hops are used in herbal teas and in soft drinks. These soft drinks include Julmust (a carbonated beverage similar to soda that is popular in Sweden during December), Malta (a Latin American soft drink) and kvass. Hops can be eaten, the young shoots of the bine are edible and can be cooked similar to asparagus.", "qas": [{"question": "what are hops used for in beer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hops may be used in herbal medicine in a way similar to valerian, as a treatment for anxiety, restlessness, and insomnia. A pillow filled with hops is a popular folk remedy for sleeplessness, and animal research has shown a sedative effect. The relaxing effect of hops may be due, in part, to the specific degradation product from alpha acids, 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, as demonstrated from nighttime consumption of non-alcoholic beer. 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol is structurally similar to tert-amyl alcohol which was historically used as an anesthetic. Hops tend to be unstable when exposed to light or air and lose their potency after a few months' storage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hops are of interest for hormone replacement therapy and are under basic research for potential relief of menstruation-related problems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In preliminary veterinary research, hops compounds are under study for potential activity against pasture-associated laminitis in horses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dermatitis sometimes results from harvesting hops. Although few cases require medical treatment, an estimated 3% of the workers suffer some type of skin lesions on the face, hands, and legs. Hops are toxic to dogs.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the dogs that are toxic to dogs ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 46, 2)"}, {"question": "what kind of yeast results from barley ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 46, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck are triplet cartoon characters created in 1937 by writer Ted Osborne and cartoonist Al Taliaferro, and are owned by The Walt Disney Company. Huey, Dewey, and Louie are the nephews of Donald Duck and the grandnephews of Scrooge McDuck. Like their uncles, the boys are anthropomorphic white ducks with yellow-orange bills and feet. They typically wear shirts and colorful baseball caps, which are sometimes used to differentiate each character. Huey, Dewey and Louie have made several animated appearances in both films and television, but comics remain their primary medium. The trio are collectively the 11th most published comic book characters in the world, and outside of the superhero genre, second only to Donald.", "qas": [{"question": "which company owns dewey ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While the boys were originally created as mischief-makers to provoke Donald's famous temper, later appearances showed them to be valuable assets to him and Scrooge on their adventures. All three of the boys are members of the fictional scouting organization the Junior Woodchucks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie were the idea of Al Taliaferro, the artist for the \"Silly Symphonies\" comic strip, which featured Donald Duck. The Walt Disney Productions Story Dept. on February 5, 1937, sent Taliaferro a memo recognizing him as the source of the idea for the planned short, \"Donald's Nephews\". The nephews debuted in Taliaferro's comic strip, which by this time had been renamed \"Donald Duck\", on Sunday, October 17, 1937, beating the theatrical release of \"Donald's Nephews\" by almost six months. According to Don Rosa, Carl Barks has claimed that in fact they were his creation while working as a writer on Donald Duck animated cartoons in 1937. The names were devised by Disney gag man Dana Coty, who took them from Huey Long, Thomas Dewey, and Louis Schmitt, an animator at the Disney Studio in the 1930s and 1940s. Taliaferro's introduction of the nephews emulated the three nephews in the Happy Hooligan comic strip and was also influenced by Mickey Mouse's nephews, Morty and Ferdie Fieldmouse.", "qas": [{"question": "which artist featured the idea of ` silly symphonies ' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In translations of Disney works the nephews have different local-sounding names that often follow the repetition (parachesis) of the English names. Examples include Hugo, Paco and Luis (American Spanish); Jorgito, Juanito and Jaimito (European Spanish); and Tick, Trick and Track (German).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie are the sons of Donald's sister Della Duck; in \"Donald's Nephews\", their mother is instead named Dumbella. In the original theatrical shorts, they were originally sent to visit Donald for only one day; in the comics, the three were sent to stay with Donald on a temporary basis, until their father came back from the hospital (the boys ended up sending him there after a practical joke of putting firecrackers under his chair). In both the comics and animated shorts, the boys' parents were never heard from or mentioned again after these instances, with the boys ending up permanently living with Donald. All four of them live in the fictional city of Duckburg, in the fictional state of Calisota.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the parents of donald's sister ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The three ducklings are noted for their identical appearances and personalities. A running joke involves the three sometimes even finishing each other's sentences. In the theatrical shorts, Huey, Dewey, and Louie often behave in a rambunctious and mischievous manner, and they sometimes commit retaliation or revenge on their uncle Donald Duck. In the comics, however, as developed by Al Taliaferro and Carl Barks, the young ducks are more usually portrayed as well-behaved, preferring to assist their uncle Donald Duck and great-uncle Scrooge McDuck in the adventure at hand. In the early Barks comics, the ducklings were still wild and unruly, but their character improved considerably due to their membership in the Junior Woodchucks and the good influence of their wise old great-grandmother Elvira Coot \"Grandma\" Duck. According to Don Rosa, Huey, Dewey and Louie became members of the Junior Woodchucks when they were around 11 years old.", "qas": [{"question": "how old were dewey and louie when he became members ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 5, 5)"}]}, {"context": "In early comic books and shorts, the caps of Huey, Dewey, and Louie were colored randomly, depending on the whim of the colorist.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the players in early comic books ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On few occasions until 1945 and most every cartoon short afterward, all three nephews wore identical outfits (most commonly red). It wasn't until the 1980s when it became established that Huey is dressed in red, Dewey in blue, and Louie in green. Disney's archivist Dave Smith, in \"Disney A to Z,\" said, \"Note that the brightest hue of the three is red (Huey), the color of water, dew, is blue (Dewey), and that leaves Louie, and leaves are green.\" A few random combinations appear in early Disney merchandise and books, such as orange and yellow. Another combination that shows up from time to time is Huey in blue, Dewey in green, and Louie in red. In-story, this inconsistency is explained away as a result of the ducklings borrowing each other's clothes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Donald Duck and Uncle Scrooge comics the trio have occasionally been known to dress in their usual outfits, but rather than have their usual colors they all wear black (or the same dark color), rendering them visually identical, leaving their hat color available if they care to be distinguished.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One story in Donald Duck comics was based around Donald spending so much time trying to tell his three nephews apart that he developed a heightened sense of sight.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Clarence Nash, Donald's voice actor, gave the voices to the boys in the cartoon shorts, making them just as unintelligible as Donald's. Huey, Dewey, and Louie were all voiced by Russi Taylor in \"DuckTales\". In \"Quack Pack\", they were voiced by Jeannie Elias, Pamela Segall, and Elizabeth Daily, respectively. Tony Anselmo voiced the characters in \"Down and Out with Donald Duck\" (1987), \"Mickey Mouse Works\" and \"Disney's House of Mouse\", but Russi Taylor still voices the trio in other projects, such as the video games \"\" and \"Mickey's Speedway USA\", and the direct-to-video films \"Mickey's Once\" and \"Twice Upon a Christmas\". Russi Taylor also reprised her role as the nephews in the \"\" video game and the post-2013 \"Mickey Mouse\" shorts. Danny Pudi, Ben Schwartz and Bobby Moynihan voice the brothers in the 2017 reboot.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On a few occasions, an artist by error drew four nephews and the error was not noticed but was published. This fourth nephew has been named Phooey Duck by Disney comic editor Bob Foster.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One short Egmont-licensed Disney comic (called \"Much Ado About Phooey\" in the English-language version) used Phooey as a character and explained Phooey's sporadic appearances as a freak incident of nature. (The Swedish text in the two speech balloons says \"It is a fourth nephew! An exact copy of the others! / Yes, it's probably best that I explain\".)", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the era of theatrical shorts ended, they appeared in:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1988 film \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\", Huey, Dewey, and Louie appear in a picture on a newspaper in Eddie Valiant's office. In 1990, the boys also made an appearance in the anti-drug TV special \"Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue\". Furthermore, they also appeared in Duck Tales the movie where they go on a treasure hunt with their Uncle Scrooge and end befriending a kindhearted Genie. As the movie progresses, they make unimaginable wishes and end up having to help Uncle Scrooge face an old enemy. They also make a cameo in \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also appeared with Uncle Scrooge but without Donald in \"Scrooge McDuck and Money\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Within the comics, Huey, Dewey, and Louie often play a major role in most stories involving either their uncle Donald or great-uncle Scrooge McDuck, accompanying them on most of their adventures. Also seen in the comics is the boys' membership in the Boy Scouts of America-like organization, the Junior Woodchucks, including their use of the Junior Woodchucks Guidebook, a manual containing all manner of information on virtually every subject possible (however, there are some resources, such as the ancient libraries of Tralla La, that hold information not found in the guidebook). This excellent youth organization, which has twin goals of preserving knowledge and preserving the environment, was instrumental in transforming the three brothers from little hellions to upstanding young ducks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Disney comic writer Don Rosa's (unofficial) continuity, Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck were born around 1940 in Duckburg. True to his jocular style, Rosa occasionally makes subtle references to the untold mystery of the three boys' life: What became of their parents? In his epic comic series, \"Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", Rosa pictures how Scrooge first met Donald and his nephews, saying: \"I'm not used to relatives, either! The few I had seem to have... disappeared!\" Huey, Dewey, and Louie answer: \"We know how \"that\" feels, Unca Scrooge!\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Some Heir Over the Rainbow\" by Carl Barks, Huey, Dewey, and Louie, along with Donald Duck and Gladstone Gander, are tested by Scrooge McDuck, who wants to pick an heir to his fortune. Using the legend of a pot of gold at the end of a rainbow, Scrooge secretly gives US$ 3,000 (One thousand to Huey, Dewey, and Louie, another for Gladstone, and the last one for Donald). Donald uses his money for a down payment of a new car, now being $1,000 in debt. Gladstone, considering himself too lucky to need the money this soon, hides the money for when and if he needs it, causing Scrooge to consider him a better option than Donald. Huey, Dewey, and Louie lend their money to a man who claims to need the money to search for a treasure. Initially thinking they were tricked out of the money, Scrooge actually considers leaving his fortune to Gladstone, even though he sees that as \"\"an awful injustice to the world\"\", but the man actually finds the treasure and pays the kids back. Scrooge makes Huey, Dewey, and Louie his heirs. Although this is disregarded in a number of later comics, it seems to be the most solidly canon indication of Scrooge's plans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They later starred in the 1987 animated television series \"DuckTales\", in which they appeared in adventures with their great-uncle, Scrooge McDuck (Donald having enlisted in the U.S. Navy). The boys' personalities in this series were mainly based on their comic book appearances versus the theatrical shorts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A new adaptation of the series once again titled, \"DuckTales\" features the three brothers as well, albeit with distinct designs, voices, and personalities like in \"Quack Pack\", who move to Scrooge's house with Donald after the boat where they lived is destroyed by accident. In the new installment, the brothers also travel in adventures with Scrooge, now with Donald in tow. The first episode also shows an image of Della, the triplets' mother, who also traveled the world in adventures with Donald and Scrooge. This iteration also changed Dewey's real name to Dewford, while making Deuteronomy his middle name, and Louie's real name to Llywelyn, a fact which he seems to be embarrassed by.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie also starred in the 1990s series \"Quack Pack\", in which the three were portrayed as teenagers. In \"Quack Pack\", the boys were given distinct personalities, with Huey serving as the group's leader, Dewey as a computer whiz, and Louie as enjoying sports. After \"Quack Pack\", the boys were reverted to their original ages in future appearances, including 2000s series \"Mickey Mouse Works\", and then re-aged in \"House of Mouse\". On \"House of Mouse\", they served as the house band in a variety of different styles (most commonly as 'The Quackstreet Boys'). They also feature prominently, in a segment of the computer-animated film, \"Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas\" from 2004.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie appear in the third \"Magical Quest\" game. The object of the game is to rescue them from the clutches of the villainous King Pete. The trio also appear in \"Quackshot\" piloting Donald's plane as he travels the world in search of a lost treasure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also appear in \"The Lucky Dime Caper\" for the Sega Master system, where they are kidnapped by Magica De Spell. Donald must find Scrooge's lucky dime and barter for their safety.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also appear in \"\", aiding Donald to rescue Daisy and beat Gladstone to her, while he rescues their hexed play toys.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They even appear in \"Mickey's Speedway USA\" as unlockable lightweight characters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also appear in \"DuckTales\", aiding their Uncle Scrooge in finding treasure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "They also appear on \"\", where they appear as DJ's on certain music tracks", "qas": []}, {"context": "In \"Kingdom Hearts\" they work in the item shop in the First District of Traverse Town. In \"Kingdom Hearts II\", they individually run an item shop (Huey), a weapon shop (Louie), and an accessory shop (Dewey) in Hollow Bastion/Radiant Garden. In both endings, they are all seen going back to Disney Castle. They reappear in \"\" in Disney Town, recreating Ice Cream flavors, this time with a speaking role. They appear once more in the mobile game \"Kingdom Hearts Unchained\" as special Support medals that grant the player's other medals a set amount of experience points based on the medal's star value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey and Louie appear as characters only at Tokyo Disney and Disneyland Paris.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey and Louie only appeared in seasonal Parades Easter, Halloween and Christmas 2011 after a long absence. They also appeared in the Countdown Party Parade 2011.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huey, Dewey and Louie appear more regularly in Paris. They appeared during the Christmas season 2010 in their daytime and nighttime Parades at the Disneyland Park \"\"Disneyland Paris's Magic Kingdom\"\" Disney's Once Upon a Dream Parade and in the Disney's Fantillusion Parade in glittery outfits. They made another appearance at Disneyland Paris for meet and greet at the Disneyland Hotel on April 2, 2011 the day of the Press Event for the launch of their new season \"Magical Moments Festival\". They also appeared at the Disney's Once Upon a Dream Parade at the Disneyland Park in special outfits for the Parade and at the Disney's Stars 'n' Cars Parade at the Walt Disney Studios Park in a unique directors outfits.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Three Nephews appeared at Disneyland Paris's Halloween season 2011. they have their own show during \"Mickey's Not-So-Scary Halloween Parties\" at the Disneyland Park in Disneyland Paris, titled \"Huey, Dewey and Louie's Trick or Treat Party\". They also made an appearance for meet and greet at Disneyland Paris's \"Disney's Halloween Party\" on October 31, 2011. This is the first time ever that the three nephews appear for meet and greet at any of the Disney Parks for regular park guests. They were also part of the Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve 2011/2012 celebrations at the Disneyland Hotel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hammurabi", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hammurabi () was the sixth king of the First Babylonian Dynasty, reigning from 1792 BC to 1750 BC (according to the Middle Chronology). He was preceded by his father, Sin-Muballit, who abdicated due to failing health. During his reign, he conquered Elam and the city-states of Larsa, Eshnunna, and Mari. He ousted Ishme-Dagan I, the king of Assyria, and forced his son Mut-Ashkur to pay tribute, bringing almost all of Mesopotamia under Babylonian rule.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hammurabi is best known for having issued the Code of Hammurabi, which he claimed to have received from Shamash, the Babylonian god of justice. Unlike earlier Sumerian law codes, such as the Code of Ur-Nammu, which had focused on compensating the victim of the crime, the Law of Hammurabi was one of the first law codes to place greater emphasis on the physical punishment of the perpetrator. It prescribed specific penalties for each crime and is among the first codes to establish the presumption of innocence. Although its penalties are extremely harsh by modern standards, they were intended to limit what a wronged person was permitted to do in retribution. The Code of Hammurabi and the Law of Moses in the Torah contain numerous similarities, but these are probably due to shared background and oral tradition, and it is unlikely that Hammurabi's laws exerted any direct impact on the later Mosaic ones.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the code that is best known for the code ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hammurabi was seen by many as a god within his own lifetime. After his death, Hammurabi was revered as a great conqueror who spread civilization and forced all peoples to pay obeisance to Marduk, the national god of the Babylonians. Later, his military accomplishments became de-emphasized and his role as the ideal lawgiver became the primary aspect of his legacy. For later Mesopotamians, Hammurabi's reign became the frame of reference for all events occurring in the distant past. Even after the empire he built collapsed, he was still revered as a model ruler, and many kings across the Near East claimed him as an ancestor. Hammurabi was rediscovered by archaeologists in the late nineteenth century and has since become seen as an important figure in the history of law.", "qas": [{"question": "what was seen by many as a god within his own lifetime ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hammurabi was an Amorite First Dynasty king of the city-state of Babylon, and inherited the power from his father, Sin-Muballit, in . Babylon was one of the many largely Amorite ruled city-states that dotted the central and southern Mesopotamian plains and waged war on each other for control of fertile agricultural land. Though many cultures co-existed in Mesopotamia, Babylonian culture gained a degree of prominence among the literate classes throughout the Middle East under Hammurabi. The kings who came before Hammurabi had founded a relatively minor City State in 1894 BC which controlled little territory outside of the city itself. Babylon was overshadowed by older, larger and more powerful kingdoms such as Elam, Assyria, Isin, Eshnunna and Larsa for a century or so after its founding. However his father Sin-Muballit had begun to consolidate rule of a small area of south central Mesopotamia under Babylonian hegemony and, by the time of his reign, had conquered the minor city-states of Borsippa, Kish, and Sippar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus Hammurabi ascended to the throne as the king of a minor kingdom in the midst of a complex geopolitical situation. The powerful kingdom of Eshnunna controlled the upper Tigris River while Larsa controlled the river delta. To the east of Mesopotamia lay the powerful kingdom of Elam which regularly invaded and forced tribute upon the small states of southern Mesopotamia. In northern Mesopotamia, the Assyrian king Shamshi-Adad I, who had already inherited centuries old Assyrian colonies in Asia Minor, had expanded his territory into the Levant and central Mesopotamia, although his untimely death would somewhat fragment his empire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first few decades of Hammurabi's reign were quite peaceful. Hammurabi used his power to undertake a series of public works, including heightening the city walls for defensive purposes, and expanding the temples. In , the powerful kingdom of Elam, which straddled important trade routes across the Zagros Mountains, invaded the Mesopotamian plain. With allies among the plain states, Elam attacked and destroyed the kingdom of Eshnunna, destroying a number of cities and imposing its rule on portions of the plain for the first time.", "qas": [{"question": "what happened to the first few decades of hammurabi's rule ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In order to consolidate its position, Elam tried to start a war between Hammurabi's Babylonian kingdom and the kingdom of Larsa. Hammurabi and the king of Larsa made an alliance when they discovered this duplicity and were able to crush the Elamites, although Larsa did not contribute greatly to the military effort. Angered by Larsa's failure to come to his aid, Hammurabi turned on that southern power, thus gaining control of the entirety of the lower Mesopotamian plain by .", "qas": []}, {"context": "As Hammurabi was assisted during the war in the south by his allies from the north such as Yamhad and Mari, the absence of soldiers in the north led to unrest. Continuing his expansion, Hammurabi turned his attention northward, quelling the unrest and soon after crushing Eshnunna. Next the Babylonian armies conquered the remaining northern states, including Babylon's former ally Mari, although it is possible that the conquest of Mari was a surrender without any actual conflict.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hammurabi entered into a protracted war with Ishme-Dagan I of Assyria for control of Mesopotamia, with both kings making alliances with minor states in order to gain the upper hand. Eventually Hammurabi prevailed, ousting Ishme-Dagan I just before his own death. Mut-Ashkur, the new king of Assyria, was forced to pay tribute to Hammurabi.", "qas": [{"question": "who was forced to pay tribute to hammurabi ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In just a few years, Hammurabi succeeded in uniting all of Mesopotamia under his rule. The Assyrian kingdom survived but was forced to pay tribute during his reign, and of the major city-states in the region, only Aleppo and Qatna to the west in the Levant maintained their independence. However, one stele of Hammurabi has been found as far north as Diyarbekir, where he claims the title \"King of the Amorites\".", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did emperor huan rule ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Vast numbers of contract tablets, dated to the reigns of Hammurabi and his successors, have been discovered, as well as 55 of his own letters. These letters give a glimpse into the daily trials of ruling an empire, from dealing with floods and mandating changes to a flawed calendar, to taking care of Babylon's massive herds of livestock. Hammurabi died and passed the reins of the empire on to his son Samsu-iluna in , under whose rule the Babylonian empire began to quickly unravel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Code of Hammurabi is not the earliest surviving law code; it is predated by the Code of Ur-Nammu, the Laws of Eshnunna, and the Code of Lipit-Ishtar. Nonetheless, the Code of Hammurabi shows marked differences from these earlier law codes and ultimately proved more influential.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the code of hammurabi ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 11, 0)"}, {"question": "the code of hammurabi shows differences from what subject ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 11, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The Code of Hammurabi was inscribed on a stele and placed in a public place so that all could see it, although it is thought that few were literate. The stele was later plundered by the Elamites and removed to their capital, Susa; it was rediscovered there in 1901 in Iran and is now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. The code of Hammurabi contains 282 laws, written by scribes on 12 tablets. Unlike earlier laws, it was written in Akkadian, the daily language of Babylon, and could therefore be read by any literate person in the city. Earlier Sumerian law codes had focused on compensating the victim of the crime, but the Code of Hammurabi instead focused on physically punishing the perpetrator. The Code of Hammurabi was one of the first law code to place restrictions on what a wronged person was allowed to do in retribution.", "qas": [{"question": "what was one of the first law code to place restrictions on matter ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 12, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The structure of the code is very specific, with each offense receiving a specified punishment. The punishments tended to be very harsh by modern standards, with many offenses resulting in death, disfigurement, or the use of the \"Eye for eye, tooth for tooth\" (Lex Talionis \"Law of Retaliation\") philosophy. The code is also one of the earliest examples of the idea of presumption of innocence, and it also suggests that the accused and accuser have the opportunity to provide evidence. However, there is no provision for extenuating circumstances to alter the prescribed punishment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A carving at the top of the stele portrays Hammurabi receiving the laws from Shamash, the Babylonian god of justice, and the preface states that Hammurabi was chosen by Shamash to bring the laws to the people. Parallels between this narrative and the giving of the Covenant Code to Moses by Yahweh atop Mount Sinai in the Biblical Book of Exodus and similarities between the two legal codes suggest a common ancestor in the Semitic background of the two. Nonetheless, fragments of previous law codes have been found and it is unlikely that the Mosaic laws were directly inspired by the Code of Hammurabi. Some scholars have disputed this; David P. Wright argues that the Jewish Covenant Code is \"directly, primarily, and throughout\" based upon the Laws of Hammurabi. In 2010, a team of archaeologists from Hebrew University discovered a cuneiform tablet dating to the eighteenth or seventeenth century BC at Hazor in Israel containing laws clearly derived from the Code of Hammurabi.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hammurabi was honored above all other kings of the second millennium BC and he received the unique honor of being declared to be a god within his own lifetime. The personal name \"Hammurabi-ili\" meaning \"Hammurabi is my god\" became common during and after his reign. In writings from shortly after his death, Hammurabi is commemorated mainly for three achievements: bringing victory in war, bringing peace, and bringing justice. Hammurabi's conquests came to be regarded as part of a sacred mission to spread civilization to all nations. A stele from Ur glorifies him in his own voice as a mighty ruler who forces evil into submission and compels all peoples to worship Marduk. The stele declares: \"The people of Elam, Gutium, Subartu, and Tukrish, whose mountains are distant and whose languages are obscure, I placed into [Marduk's] hand. I myself continued to put straight their confused minds.\" A later hymn also written in Hammurabi's own voice extols him as a powerful, supernatural force for Marduk:", "qas": []}, {"context": "<poem>\nI am the king, the brace that grasps wrongdoers, that makes people of one mind,\nI am the great dragon among kings, who throws their counsel in disarray,\nI am the net that is stretched over the enemy,\nI am the fear-inspiring, who, when lifting his fierce eyes, gives the disobedient the death sentence,\nI am the great net that covers evil intent,\nI am the young lion, who breaks nets and scepters,\nI am the battle net that catches him who offends me.\n</poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "After extolling Hammurabi's military accomplishments, the hymn finally declares: \"I am Hammurabi, the king of justice.\" In later commemorations, Hammurabi's role as a great lawgiver came to be emphasized above all his other accomplishments and his military achievements became de-emphasized. Hammurabi's reign became the point of reference for all events in the distant past. A hymn to the goddess Ishtar, whose language suggests it was written during the reign of Ammisaduqa, Hammurabi's fourth successor, declares: \"The king who first heard this song as a song of your heroism is Hammurabi. This song for you was composed in his reign. May he be given life forever!\" For centuries after his death, Hammurabi's laws continued to be copied by scribes as part of their writing exercises and they were even partially translated into Sumerian.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the king of justice ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the reign of Hammurabi, Babylon usurped the position of \"most holy city\" in southern Mesopotamia from its predecessor, Nippur. Under the rule of Hammurabi's successor Samsu-iluna, the short-lived Babylonian Empire began to collapse. In northern Mesopotamia, both the Amorites and Babylonians were driven from Assyria by Puzur-Sin a native Akkadian-speaking ruler, . Around the same time, native Akkadian speakers threw off Amorite Babylonian rule in the far south of Mesopotamia, creating the Sealand Dynasty, in more or less the region of ancient Sumer. Hammurabi's ineffectual successors met with further defeats and loss of territory at the hands of Assyrian kings such as Adasi and Bel-ibni, as well as to the Sealand Dynasty to the south, Elam to the east, and to the Kassites from the northeast. Thus was Babylon quickly reduced to the small and minor state it had once been upon its founding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"coup de grace\" for the Hammurabi's Amorite Dynasty occurred in 1595 BC, when Babylon was sacked and conquered by the powerful Hittite Empire, thereby ending all Amorite political presence in Mesopotamia. However, the Indo-European-speaking Hittites did not remain, turning over Babylon to their Kassite allies, a people speaking a language isolate, from the Zagros mountains region. This Kassite Dynasty ruled Babylon for over 400 years and adopted many aspects of the Babylonian culture, including Hammurabi's code of laws. Even after the fall of the Amorite Dynasty, however, Hammurabi was still remembered and revered. When the Elamite king Shutruk-Nahhunte I raided Babylon in 1158 BC and carried off many stone monuments, he had most of the inscriptions on these monuments erased and new inscriptions carved into them. On the stele containing Hammurabi's laws, however, only four or five columns were wiped out and no new inscription was ever added. Over a thousand years after Hammurabi's death, the kings of Suhu, a land along the Euphrates river, just northwest of Babylon, claimed him as their ancestor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late nineteenth century, the Code of Hammurabi became a major center of debate in the heated \"Babel und Bibel\" (\"Babylon and Bible\") controversy in Germany over the relationship between the Bible and ancient Babylonian texts. In January 1902, the German Assyriologist Friedrich Delitzsch gave a lecture at the Sing-Akademie zu Berlin in front of the Kaiser and his wife, in which he argued that the Mosaic Laws of the Old Testament were directly copied off the Code of Hammurabi. Delitzsch's lecture was so controversial that, by September 1903, he had managed to collect 1,350 short articles from newspapers and journals, over 300 longer ones, and twenty-eight pamphlets, all written in response to this lecture, as well as the preceding one about the Flood story in the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\". These articles were overwhelmingly critical of Delitzsch, though a few were sympathetic. The Kaiser distanced himself from Delitzsch and his radical views and, in fall of 1904, Delitzsch was forced to give his third lecture in Cologne and Frankfurt am Main rather than in Berlin. The putative relationship between the Mosaic Law and the Code of Hammurabi later became a major part of Delitzsch's argument in his 1920-21 book \"Die gro\u00dfe T\u00e4uschung\" (\"The Great Deception\") that the Hebrew Bible was irredeemably contaminated by Babylonian influence and that only by eliminating the human Old Testament entirely could Christians finally believe in the true, Aryan message of the New Testament. In the early twentieth century, many scholars believed that Hammurabi was Amraphel, the King of Shinar in the Book of Genesis 14:1. This view has now been largely rejected, and Amraphael's existence is not attested in any writings from outside the Bible.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of Hammurabi's reputation as a lawgiver, his depiction can be found in several U.S. government buildings. Hammurabi is one of the 23 lawgivers depicted in marble bas-reliefs in the chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives in the United States Capitol. A frieze by Adolph Weinman depicting the \"great lawgivers of history\", including Hammurabi, is on the south wall of the U.S. Supreme Court building. At the time of Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi Army's 1st Hammurabi Armoured Division was named after the ancient king as part of an effort to emphasize the connection between modern Iraq and the pre-Arab Mesopotamian cultures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle (named after Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens and French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel) is a method of analysis applied to problems of wave propagation both in the far-field limit and in near-field diffraction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It states that every point on a wavefront is itself the source of spherical wavelets. The sum of these spherical wavelets forms the wavefront.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1678, Huygens proposed that every point to which a luminous disturbance reaches becomes a source of a spherical wave; the sum of these secondary waves determines the form of the wave at any subsequent time. He assumed that the secondary waves travelled only in the \"forward\" direction and it is not explained in the theory why this is the case. He was able to provide a qualitative explanation of linear and spherical wave propagation, and to derive the laws of reflection and refraction using this principle, but could not explain the deviations from rectilinear propagation that occur when light encounters edges, apertures and screens, commonly known as diffraction effects. The resolution of this error was finally explained by David A.B. Miller in 1991. The resolution is that the source is a dipole (not the monopole assumed by Huygens), which cancels in the reflected direction.", "qas": [{"question": "who proposed that every point would be a source of the wave ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1818, Fresnel showed that Huygens' principle, together with his own principle of interference could explain both the rectilinear propagation of light and also diffraction effects. To obtain agreement with experimental results, he had to include additional arbitrary assumptions about the phase and amplitude of the secondary waves, and also an obliquity factor. These assumptions have no obvious physical foundation but led to predictions that agreed with many experimental observations, including the Arago spot.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Poisson was a member of the French Academy, which reviewed Fresnel's work. He used Fresnel's theory to predict that a bright spot ought to appear in the center of the shadow of a small disc, and deduced from this that the theory was incorrect. However, Arago, another member of the committee, performed the experiment and showed that the prediction was correct. (Lisle had observed this fifty years earlier.) This was one of the investigations that led to the victory of the wave theory of light over the then predominant corpuscular theory.", "qas": [{"question": "what theory of light did the victory effect ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 4, 4)"}]}, {"context": "The Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle provides a reasonable basis for understanding and predicting the classical wave propagation of light. However, there are limitations to the principle, and not all experts agree that it is an accurate representation of reality\u2014for instance, Melvin Schwartz argued that \"Huygens' principle actually does give the right answer but for the wrong reasons\". See Huygens' Theory and the Modern Photon Wavefunction below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kirchhoff's diffraction formula provides a rigorous mathematical foundation for diffraction, based on the wave equation. The arbitrary assumptions made by Fresnel to arrive at the Huygens\u2013Fresnel equation emerge automatically from the mathematics in this derivation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A simple example of the operation of the principle can be seen when an open doorway connects two rooms and a sound is produced in a remote corner of one of them. A person in the other room will hear the sound as if it originated at the doorway. As far as the second room is concerned, the vibrating air in the doorway is the source of the sound.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Consider the case of a point source located at a point P, vibrating at a frequency \"f\". The disturbance may be described by a complex variable \"U\" known as the complex amplitude. It produces a spherical wave with wavelength \u03bb, wavenumber \"k\" = 2\u03c0/\u03bb. The complex amplitude of the primary wave at the point Q located at a distance \"r\" from P is given by:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the complex waves of the primary wave at the point q ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 8, 3)"}, {"question": "what is the frequency source of a point source ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "since the magnitude decreases in inverse proportion to the distance travelled, and the phase changes as \"k\" times the distance travelled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Using Huygens' theory and the principle of superposition of waves, the complex amplitude at a further point P is found by summing the contributions from each point on the sphere of radius \"r\". In order to get agreement with experimental results, Fresnel found that the individual contributions from the secondary waves on the sphere had to be multiplied by a constant, \u2212\"i\"/\u03bb, and by an additional inclination factor, \"K\"(\u03c7). The first assumption means that the secondary waves oscillate at a quarter of a cycle out of phase with respect to the primary wave, and that the magnitude of the secondary waves are in a ratio of 1:\u03bb to the primary wave. He also assumed that \"K\"(\u03c7) had a maximum value when \u03c7 = 0, and was equal to zero when \u03c7 = \u03c0/2. The complex amplitude at P is then given by:", "qas": [{"question": "how is the complex impedance at a further ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 10, 0)"}, {"question": "at what temperature is the complex resonance at h2 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 10, 4)"}]}, {"context": "where \"S\" describes the surface of the sphere, and \"s\" is the distance between Q and P. \nFresnel used a zone construction method to find approximate values of \"K\" for the different zones, which enabled him to make predictions that were in agreement with experimental results.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The various assumptions made by Fresnel emerge automatically in Kirchhoff's diffraction formula, to which the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle can be considered to be an approximation. Kirchhoff gave the following expression for \"K\"(\u03c7):", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"K\" has a maximum value at \u03c7 = 0 as in the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle; however, \"K\" is not equal to zero at \u03c7 = \u03c0/2.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huygens' theory served as a fundamental explanation of the wave nature of light interference and was further developed by Fresnel and Young but did not fully resolve all observations such as the low-intensity double-slit experiment that was first performed by G. I. Taylor in 1909, see double-slit experiment. It was not until the early, and mid-1900s that quantum theory discussions, particularly the early discussions at the 1927 Brussels Solvay Conference, where Louis de Broglie proposed his de Broglie hypothesis that the photon is guided by a wavefunction. The wavefunction presents a much different explanation of the observed light and dark bands in a double slit experiment. In this conception, the photon follows a path which is a random choice of one of many possible paths. These possible paths form the pattern: in dark areas, no photons are landing, and in bright areas, many photons are landing. The set of possible photon paths is determined by the surroundings: the photon's originating point (atom), the slit, and the screen. The wavefunction is a solution to this geometry. The wavefunction approach was further proven by additional double-slit experiments in Italy and Japan in the 1970s and 1980s with electrons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Huygens' principle can be seen as a consequence of the homogeneity of space\u2014space is uniform in all locations. Any disturbance created in a sufficiently small region of homogenous space (or in a homogenous medium) propagates from that region in all geodesic directions. The waves produced by this disturbance, in turn, create disturbances in other regions, and so on. The superposition of all the waves results in the observed pattern of wave propagation.", "qas": [{"question": "the superposition of all waves results in the observed pattern of what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 15, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Homogeneity of space is fundamental to quantum field theory (QFT) where the wave function of any object propagates along all available unobstructed paths. When integrated along all possible paths, with a phase factor proportional to the action, the interference of the wave-functions correctly predicts observable phenomena. Every point on the wavefront acts as the source of secondary wavelets that spread out in the light cone with the same speed as the wave. The new wavefront is found by constructing the surface tangent to the secondary wavelets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1900, Jacques Hadamard observed that Huygens' principle was broken when the number of spatial dimensions is even. From this, he developed a set of conjectures that remain an active topic of research. In particular, it has been discovered that Huygens' principle holds on a large class of homogenous spaces derived from the Coxeter group (so, for example, the Weyl groups of simple Lie algebras).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The traditional statement of Huygens' principle for the D'Alembertian gives rise to the KdV hierarchy; analogously, the Dirac operator gives rise to the AKNS hierarchy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Honey", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Honey is a sweet, viscous food substance produced by bees and some related insects. Bees produce honey from the sugary secretions of plants (floral nectar) or from secretions of other insects (such as honeydew), by regurgitation, enzymatic activity, and water evaporation. Bees store honey in wax structures called honeycombs. The variety of honey produced by honey bees (the genus \"Apis\") is the best-known, due to its worldwide commercial production and human consumption. Honey is collected from wild bee colonies, or from hives of domesticated bees, a practice known as beekeeping.\nHoney gets its sweetness from the monosaccharides fructose and glucose, and has about the same relative sweetness as sucrose (granulated sugar). It has attractive chemical properties for baking and a distinctive flavor when used as a sweetener. Most microorganisms do not grow in honey, so sealed honey does not spoil, even after thousands of years.\nHoney provides 46 calories in a serving of one tablespoon (15 ml). Although generally safe, honey may potentially have adverse effects or interactions upon excessive consumption, existing disease conditions, or use of prescription drugs.\nHoney use and production have a long and varied history as an ancient activity. Cave paintings in Cuevas de la Ara\u00f1a, Spain, depict humans foraging for honey at least 8,000 years ago.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Honey is produced by bees collecting nectar for use as sugars consumed to support metabolism of muscle activity during foraging or to be stored as a long-term food supply. During foraging, bees access part of the nectar collected to support metabolic activity of flight muscles, with the majority of collected nectar destined for regurgitation, digestion, and storage as honey. In cold weather or when other food sources are scarce, adult and larval bees use stored honey as food.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By contriving for bee swarms to nest in human-made hives, people have been able to semidomesticate the insects and harvest excess honey. In the hive or in a wild nest, the three types of bees are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Leaving the hive, a foraging bee collects sugar-rich flower nectar, sucking it through its proboscis and placing it in its proventriculus (honey stomach or crop), which lies just dorsal to its food stomach. The honey stomach holds about 40 mg of nectar, or roughly 50% of the bee's unloaded weight, which can require over a thousand flowers and more than an hour to fill. The nectar generally begins with a water content of 70 to 80%. Salivary enzymes and proteins from the bee's hypopharyngeal gland are added to the nectar to begin breaking down the sugars, raising the water content slightly. The forager bees then return to the hive, where they regurgitate and transfer nectar to the hive bees. The hive bees then use their honey stomachs to ingest and regurgitate the nectar, forming bubbles between their mandibles, repeatedly until it is partially digested. The bubbles create a large surface area per volume and a portion of the water is removed through evaporation. Bee digestive enzymes hydrolyze sucrose to a mixture of glucose and fructose, and break down other starches and proteins, increasing the acidity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The bees work together as a group with the regurgitation and digestion for as long as 20 minutes, passing the nectar from one bee to the next, until the product reaches the honeycombs in storage quality. It is then placed in honeycomb cells and left unsealed while still high in water content (about 50 to 70%) and natural yeasts which, unchecked, would cause the sugars in the newly formed honey to ferment. Bees are some of the few insects that can generate large amounts of body heat, thus the hive bees constantly regulate the hive temperature, either heating with their bodies or cooling with water evaporation, to maintain a fairly constant temperature in the honey-storage areas around . The process continues as hive bees flutter their wings constantly to circulate air and evaporate water from the honey to a content around 18%, raising the sugar concentration beyond the saturation point and preventing fermentation. The bees then cap the cells with wax to seal them. As removed from the hive by a beekeeper, honey has a long shelf life and will not ferment if properly sealed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another source of honey is from a number of wasp species, such as \"Brachygastra lecheguana\" and \"Brachygastra mellifica\", which are found in South and Central America. These species are known to feed on nectar and produce honey.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the species that is known as feed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 5, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Some wasps, such as \"Polistes versicolor\", even consume honey themselves, alternating between feeding on pollen in the middle of their lifecycles and feeding on honey, which can better provide for their energy needs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Honey is collected from wild bee colonies or from domesticated beehives. On average, a hive will produce about of honey per year. Wild bee nests are sometimes located by following a honeyguide bird.", "qas": [{"question": "from where does barley originate ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "To safely collect honey from a hive, beekeepers typically pacify the bees using a bee smoker. The smoke triggers a feeding instinct (an attempt to save the resources of the hive from a possible fire), making them less aggressive and the smoke obscures the pheromones the bees use to communicate. The honeycomb is removed from the hive and the honey may be extracted from that, either by crushing or by using a honey extractor. The honey is then usually filtered to remove beeswax and other debris.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the process called when the sweet is removed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 8, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Before the invention of removable frames, bee colonies were often sacrificed to conduct the harvest. The harvester would take all the available honey and replace the entire colony the next spring. Since the invention of removable frames, the principles of husbandry led most beekeepers to ensure that their bees have enough stores to survive the winter, either by leaving some honey in the beehive or by providing the colony with a honey substitute such as sugar water or crystalline sugar (often in the form of a \"candyboard\"). The amount of food necessary to survive the winter depends on the variety of bees and on the length and severity of local winters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many species other than humans are attracted to wild or domestic sources of honey.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of its composition and chemical properties, honey is suitable for long-term storage, and is easily assimilated even after long preservation. Honey, and objects immersed in honey, have been preserved for centuries. The key to preservation is limiting access to humidity. In its cured state, honey has a sufficiently high sugar content to inhibit fermentation. If exposed to moist air, its hydrophilic properties pull moisture into the honey, eventually diluting it to the point that fermentation can begin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Long shelf life of honey is attributed to an enzyme found in the stomach of bees. The bees mix glucose oxidase with expelled nectar they previously consumed, which then creates two byproducts: gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide, partially responsible for honey's acidity and ability to suppress bacterial growth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adulteration of honey is the addition of other sugars, syrups, or compounds into honey to change its flavor or viscosity, make it cheaper to produce, or increase the fructose content to stave off crystallization. According to the Codex Alimentarius of the United Nations, any product labeled as honey or pure honey must be a wholly natural product, although different nations have their own laws concerning labeling. Adulteration of honey is sometimes used as a method of deception when buyers are led to believe that the honey is pure. The practice was common dating back to ancient times, when honey was sometimes blended with plant syrups such as maple, birch, or sorghum and sold to unsuspecting customers. Sometimes, crystallized honey was mixed with flour or other fillers, hiding the adulteration from buyers until the honey was liquefied. In modern times, the most common adulteration ingredient became clear, almost-flavorless corn syrup, which when mixed with honey, is often very difficult to distinguish from unadulterated honey.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Isotope ratio mass spectrometry can be used to detect addition of corn syrup and cane sugar by the carbon isotopic signature. Addition of sugars originating from corn or sugar cane (C4 plants, unlike the plants used by bees, and also sugar beet, which are predominantly C3 plants) skews the isotopic ratio of sugars present in honey, but does not influence the isotopic ratio of proteins. In an unadulterated honey, the carbon isotopic ratios of sugars and proteins should match. Levels as low as 7% of addition can be detected.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the United States, according to the National Honey Board (an organization supervised by the United States Department of Agriculture), \"honey stipulates a pure product that does not allow for the addition of any other substance... this includes, but is not limited to, water or other sweeteners\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2016, global production of honey was 1.8 million tonnes, led by China with 27% of the world total (table). Other major producers were Turkey, United States, Russia and India.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over its history as a food, the main uses of honey are in cooking, baking, desserts, such as \"mel i mat\u00f3\", as a spread on bread, as an addition to various beverages, such as tea, and as a sweetener in some commercial beverages. Honey barbecue and honey mustard are other common flavors used in sauces.", "qas": [{"question": "what is . used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Possibly the world's oldest fermented beverage dating to 9,000 years ago, mead (\"honey wine\") is the alcoholic product made by adding yeast to the honey\u2013water must, followed by weeks or months of fermentation. In modern mead production, the yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" is commonly used.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Primary fermentation usually takes 28 to 56 days, after which the must is placed in a secondary fermentation vessel for 6 to 9 months of aging. Durations of primary and secondary fermentation producing satisfactory mead may vary considerably according to numerous factors, such as floral origin of the honey and its natural sugar and microorganism contents, must water percentage, pH, additives used, and strain of yeast, among others. Although supplementation of the must with nitrogen, salt, or vitamins has been tested to improve mead qualities, no evidence suggests that adding nutrients reduced fermentation time or improved quality. Cell immobilization methods, however, proved effective for enhancing mead quality.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mead varieties include drinks called metheglin (with spices or herbs), melomel (with fruit juices, such as grape, specifically called pyment), hippocras (with cinnamon), and sack mead (high concentration of honey), many of which have been developed as commercial products numbering in the hundreds in the United States as of 2014. Honey is also used to make mead beer, called \"braggot\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is honey ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 20, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The physical properties of honey vary, depending on water content, the type of flora used to produce it (pasturage), temperature, and the proportion of the specific sugars it contains. Fresh honey is a supersaturated liquid, containing more sugar than the water can typically dissolve at ambient temperatures. At room temperature, honey is a supercooled liquid, in which the glucose will precipitate into solid granules. This forms a semisolid solution of precipitated glucose crystals in a solution of fructose and other ingredients.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the temperature of 20\u00b0C, density of honey typically ranges between 1.38 and 1.45\u00a0kg/l.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the density of fat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The melting point of crystallized honey is between , depending on its composition. Below this temperature, honey can be either in a metastable state, meaning that it will not crystallize until a seed crystal is added, or, more often, it is in a \"labile\" state, being saturated with enough sugars to crystallize spontaneously. The rate of crystallization is affected by many factors, but the primary factor is the ratio of the main sugars: fructose to glucose. Honeys that are supersaturated with a very high percentage of glucose, such as brassica honey, crystallize almost immediately after harvesting, while honeys with a low percentage of glucose, such as chestnut or tupelo honey, do not crystallize. Some types of honey may produce very large but few crystals, while others produce many small crystals.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the melting point of crystallized barley mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Crystallization is also affected by water content, because a high percentage of water inhibits crystallization, as does a high dextrin content. Temperature also affects the rate of crystallization, with the fastest growth occurring between . Crystal nuclei (seeds) tend to form more readily if the honey is disturbed, by stirring, shaking, or agitating, rather than if left at rest. However, the nucleation of microscopic seed-crystals is greatest between . Therefore, larger but fewer crystals tend to form at higher temperatures, while smaller but more-numerous crystals usually form at lower temperatures. Below 5\u00b0C, the honey will not crystallize, thus the original texture and flavor can be preserved indefinitely.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since honey normally exists below its melting point, it is a supercooled liquid. At very low temperatures, honey does not freeze solid. Instead, as the temperatures become lower, the viscosity of honey increases. Like most viscous liquids, the honey becomes thick and sluggish with decreasing temperature. At , honey may appear or even feel solid, but it continues to flow at very low rates. Honey has a glass transition between . Below this temperature, honey enters a glassy state and becomes an amorphous solid (noncrystalline).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The viscosity of honey is affected greatly by both temperature and water content. The higher the water percentage, the more easily honey flows. Above its melting point, however, water has little effect on viscosity. Aside from water content, the composition of honey also has little effect on viscosity, with the exception of a few types. At , honey with 14% water content generally has a viscosity around 400 poise, while a honey containing 20% water has a viscosity around 20 poise. Viscosity increase due to cooling occurs very slowly at first. A honey containing 16% water, at , has a viscosity around 2 poise, while at , the viscosity is around 70 poise. As cooling progresses, honey becomes more viscous at an increasingly rapid rate, reaching 600 poise around . However, while honey is very viscous, it has rather low surface tension of 50--60 mJ/m, thus the wettability of honey is on the same order as water, glycerin, or most other liquids. The high viscosity and wettability of honey lead to the phenomenon of stickiness, which is a time-dependent process in supercooled liquids between the glass-transition temperature (T) and the crystalline-melting temperature.", "qas": [{"question": "what causes the viscosity of fat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A few types of honey have unusual viscous properties. Honeys from heather or manuka display thixotropic properties. These types of honey enter a gel-like state when motionless, but then liquify when stirred.", "qas": [{"question": "what are some types of fat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Because honey contains electrolytes, in the form of acids and minerals, it exhibits varying degrees of electrical conductivity. Measurements of the electrical conductivity are used to determine the quality of honey in terms of ash content.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The effect honey has on light is useful for determining the type and quality. Variations in its water content alter its refractive index. Water content can easily be measured with a refractometer. Typically, the refractive index for honey ranges from 1.504 at 13% water content to 1.474 at 25%. Honey also has an effect on polarized light, in that it rotates the polarization plane. The fructose gives a negative rotation, while the glucose gives a positive one. The overall rotation can be used to measure the ratio of the mixture. Honey may vary in color between pale yellow and dark brown, but other bright colors may occasionally be found, depending on the source of the sugar harvested by the bees.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the effect of the effects of fat and quality ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Honey has the ability to absorb moisture directly from the air, a phenomenon called hygroscopy. The amount of water the honey absorbs is dependent on the relative humidity of the air. Because honey contains yeast, this hygroscopic nature requires that honey be stored in sealed containers to prevent fermentation, which usually begins if the honey's water content rises much above 25%. Honey tends to absorb more water in this manner than the individual sugars allow on their own, which may be due to other ingredients it contains.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fermentation of honey usually occurs after crystallization, because without the glucose, the liquid portion of the honey primarily consists of a concentrated mixture of fructose, acids, and water, providing the yeast with enough of an increase in the water percentage for growth. Honey that is to be stored at room temperature for long periods of time is often pasteurized, to kill any yeast, by heating it above .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like all sugar compounds, honey caramelizes if heated sufficiently, becoming darker in color, and eventually burns. However, honey contains fructose, which caramelizes at lower temperatures than glucose. The temperature at which caramelization begins varies, depending on the composition, but is typically between . Honey also contains acids, which act as catalysts for caramelization. The specific types of acids and their amounts play a primary role in determining the exact temperature. Of these acids, the amino acids, which occur in very small amounts, play an important role in the darkening of honey. The amino acids form darkened compounds called melanoidins, during a Maillard reaction. The Maillard reaction occurs slowly at room temperature, taking from a few to several months to show visible darkening, but speeds up dramatically with increasing temperatures. However, the reaction can also be slowed by storing the honey at colder temperatures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unlike many other liquids, honey has very poor thermal conductivity of 0.5 W/(m\u22c5K) at 13% water content (compared to 401 W/(m\u22c5K) of copper), taking a long time to reach thermal equilibrium. Melting crystallized honey can easily result in localized caramelization if the heat source is too hot, or if it is not evenly distributed. However, honey takes substantially longer to liquify when just above the melting point than at elevated temperatures. Melting 20\u00a0kg of crystallized honey, at , can take up to 24 hours, while 50\u00a0kg may take twice as long. These times can be cut nearly in half by heating at . However, many of the minor substances in honey can be affected greatly by heating, changing the flavor, aroma, or other properties, so heating is usually done at the lowest temperature possible for the shortest amount of time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The average pH of honey is 3.9, but can range from 3.4 to 6.1. Honey contains many kinds of acids, both organic and amino. However, the different types and their amounts vary considerably, depending on the type of honey. These acids may be aromatic or aliphatic (nonaromatic). The aliphatic acids contribute greatly to the flavor of honey by interacting with the flavors of other ingredients.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the average ph of fat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Organic acids comprise most of the acids in honey, accounting for 0.17\u20131.17% of the mixture, with gluconic acid formed by the actions of glucose oxidase as the most prevalent. Other organic acids are minor, consisting of formic, acetic, butyric, citric, lactic, malic, pyroglutamic, propionic, valeric, capronic, palmitic, and succinic, among many others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Honey is classified by its floral source, and divisions are made according to the packaging and processing used. Also, regional honeys are identified. In the USA, honey is also graded on its color and optical density by USDA standards, graded on the Pfund scale, which ranges from 0 for \"water white\" honey to more than 114 for \"dark amber\" honey.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the pfund scale in the usa ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 36, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Generally, honey is classified by the floral source of the nectar from which it was made. Honeys can be from specific types of flower nectars or can be blended after collection. The pollen in honey is traceable to floral source and therefore region of origin. The rheological and melissopalynological properties of honey can be used to identify the major plant nectar source used in its production.", "qas": [{"question": "what is pork classified by ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 37, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most commercially available honey is blended, meaning it is a mixture of two or more honeys differing in floral source, color, flavor, density, or geographic origin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Polyfloral honey, also known as wildflower honey, is derived from the nectar of many types of flowers. The taste may vary from year to year, and the aroma and the flavor can be more or less intense, depending on which bloomings are prevalent.", "qas": [{"question": "what is wildflower barley known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 39, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Monofloral honey is made primarily from the nectar of one type of flower. Monofloral honeys have distinctive flavors and colors because of differences between their principal nectar sources. To produce monofloral honey, beekeepers keep beehives in an area where the bees have access to only one type of flower. In practice, because of the difficulties in containing bees, a small proportion of any honey will be from additional nectar from other flower types. Typical examples of North American monofloral honeys are clover, orange blossom, blueberry, sage, tupelo, buckwheat, fireweed, mesquite, and sourwood. Some typical European examples include thyme, thistle, heather, acacia, dandelion, sunflower, lavender, honeysuckle, and varieties from lime and chestnut trees. In North Africa (e.g. Egypt), examples include clover, cotton, and citrus (mainly orange blossoms). The unique flora of Australia yields a number of distinctive honeys, with some of the most popular being yellow box, blue gum, ironbark, bush mallee, Tasmanian leatherwood, and macadamia.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of juice is made from the nectar of one type of flower ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 40, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Instead of taking nectar, bees can take honeydew, the sweet secretions of aphids or other plant sap-sucking insects. Honeydew honey is very dark brown in color, with a rich fragrance of stewed fruit or fig jam, and is not as sweet as nectar honeys. Germany's Black Forest is a well-known source of honeydew-based honeys, as well as some regions in Bulgaria, Tara (mountain) in Serbia, and Northern California in the United States. In Greece, pine honey (a type of honeydew honey) constitutes 60\u201365% of the annual honey production. Honeydew honey is popular in some areas, but in other areas, beekeepers have difficulty selling the stronger-flavored product.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The production of honeydew honey has some complications and dangers. This honey has a much larger proportion of indigestibles than light floral honeys, thus causing dysentery to the bees, resulting in the death of colonies in areas with cold winters. Good beekeeping management requires the removal of honeydew prior to winter in colder areas. Bees collecting this resource also have to be fed protein supplements, as honeydew lacks the protein-rich pollen accompaniment gathered from flowers.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the production of honeydew skin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Generally, honey is bottled in its familiar liquid form, but it is sold in other forms, and can be subjected to a variety of processing methods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the US, honey grading is performed voluntarily (USDA does offer inspection and grading \"as on-line (in-plant) or lot inspection...upon application, on a fee-for-service basis.\") based upon USDA standards. Honey is graded based upon a number of factors, including water content, flavor and aroma, absence of defects, and clarity. Honey is also classified by color, though it is not a factor in the grading scale.\nThe honey grade scale is:\nOther countries may have differing standards on the grading of honey. India, for example, certifies honey grades based on additional factors, such as the Fiehe's test, and other empirical measurements.", "qas": []}, {"context": "High-quality honey can be distinguished by fragrance, taste, and consistency. Ripe, freshly collected, high-quality honey at should flow from a knife in a straight stream, without breaking into separate drops. After falling down, the honey should form a bead. The honey, when poured, should form small, temporary layers that disappear fairly quickly, indicating high viscosity. If not, it indicates excessive water content (over 20%)\nof the product. Honey with excessive water content is not suitable for long-term preservation.", "qas": [{"question": "what is not ideal for permanent conservation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 45, 5)"}, {"question": "what can be distinguished by fragrance ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 45, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In jars, fresh honey should appear as a pure, consistent fluid, and should not set in layers. Within a few weeks to a few months of extraction, many varieties of honey crystallize into a cream-colored solid. Some varieties of honey, including tupelo, acacia, and sage, crystallize less regularly. Honey may be heated during bottling at temperatures of to delay or inhibit crystallization. Overheating is indicated by change in enzyme levels, for instance, diastase activity, which can be determined with the Schade or the Phadebas methods. A fluffy film on the surface of the honey (like a white foam), or marble-colored or white-spotted crystallization on a container's sides, is formed by air bubbles trapped during the bottling process.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 2008 Italian study determined nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy can be used to distinguish between different honey types, and can be used to pinpoint the area where it was produced. Researchers were able to identify differences in acacia and polyfloral honeys by the differing proportions of fructose and sucrose, as well as differing levels of aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. This ability allows greater ease of selecting compatible stocks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a 100-gram serving, honey provides 304 kilocalories with no essential nutrients in significant content. Composed of 17% water and 82% carbohydrates, honey has low content of fat, dietary fiber, and protein.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A mixture of sugars and other carbohydrates, honey is mainly fructose (about 38%) and glucose (about 32%), with remaining sugars including maltose, sucrose, and other complex carbohydrates. Its glycemic index ranges from 31 to 78, depending on the variety. The specific composition, color, aroma, and flavor of any batch of honey depend on the flowers foraged by bees that produced the honey.", "qas": [{"question": "what is produced by bees that produced grapes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 49, 2)"}]}, {"context": "One 1980 study found that mixed floral honey from several United States regions typically contains:", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 2013 NMR spectroscopy study of 20 different honeys from Germany found that their sugar contents comprised:\nThe average ratio was 56% fructose to 44% glucose, but the ratios in the individual honeys ranged from a high of 64% fructose and 36% glucose (one type of flower honey; table 3 in reference) to a low of 50% fructose and 50% glucose (a different floral source). This NMR method was not able to quantify maltose, galactose, and the other minor sugars as compared to fructose and glucose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some evidence shows that sterilized honey may help healing in skin wounds after surgery and mild (partial thickness) burns when used in a dressing, but in general, the evidence for the use of honey in wound treatment is of such low quality that firm conclusions cannot be drawn. Evidence does not support the use of honey-based products in the treatment of venous stasis ulcers or ingrown toenail.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Components of honey under preliminary research for their potential antibacterial properties include methylglyoxal, hydrogen peroxide, and royalisin (also called defensin-1).", "qas": []}, {"context": "For chronic and acute coughs, a Cochrane review found no strong evidence for or against the use of honey. For treating children, the systematic review concluded with moderate to low evidence that honey probably helps more than no treatment, diphenhydramine, and placebo at giving relief from coughing. Honey does not appear to work better than dextromethorphan at relieving coughing in children.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency recommends avoiding giving over the counter cough and common cold medication to children under six, and suggests \"a homemade remedy containing honey and lemon is likely to be just as useful and safer to take\", but warns that honey should not be given to babies because of the risk of infant botulism. The World Health Organization recommends honey as a treatment for coughs and sore throats, including for children, stating that no reason exists to believe it is less effective than a commercial remedy. Honey is recommended by one Canadian physician for children over the age of one for the treatment of coughs, as it is deemed as effective as dextromethorphan and more effective than diphenhydramine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The use of honey has been recommended as a temporary intervention for known or suspected button cell ingestions to reduce the risk and severity of injury to the esophagus caused by the battery prior to its removal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "No evidence shows the benefit of using honey to treat cancer, although honey may be useful for controlling side effects of radiation therapy or chemotherapy applied in cancer treatment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Consumption is sometimes advocated as a treatment for seasonal allergies due to pollen, but scientific evidence to support the claim is inconclusive. Honey is generally considered ineffective for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis.", "qas": [{"question": "what is considered unacceptable for the treatment of medications ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 58, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Although the majority of calories in honey is from fructose, honey does not cause increased weight gain and fructose by itself is not an independent factor for weight gain.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the effect of fat in fat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 59, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Honey is generally safe when taken in typical food amounts, but it may have various, potential adverse effects or interactions in combination with excessive consumption, existing disease conditions, or drugs. Included among these are mild reactions to high intake, such as anxiety, insomnia, or hyperactivity in about 10% of children, according to one study. No symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, or hyperactivity were detected with honey consumption compared to placebo, according to another study. Honey consumption may interact adversely with existing allergies, high blood sugar levels (as in diabetes), or anticoagulants used to control bleeding, among other clinical conditions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "People who have a weakened immune system may be at risk of bacterial or fungal infection from eating honey, although there is no high-quality clinical evidence that this occurs commonly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Infants can develop botulism after consuming honey contaminated with \"Clostridium botulinum\" endospores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Infantile botulism shows geographical variation. In the UK, only six cases have been reported between 1976 and 2006, yet the U.S. has much higher rates: 1.9 per 100,000 live births, 47.2% of which are in California. While the risk honey poses to infant health is small, taking the risk is not recommended until after one year of age, and then giving honey is considered safe.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the risk of the poor diet to birth health ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 63, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Mad honey intoxication is a result of eating honey containing grayanotoxins. Honey produced from flowers of rhododendrons, mountain laurels, sheep laurel, and azaleas may cause honey intoxication. Symptoms include dizziness, weakness, excessive perspiration, nausea, and vomiting. Less commonly, low blood pressure, shock, heart rhythm irregularities, and convulsions may occur, with rare cases resulting in death. Honey intoxication is more likely when using \"natural\" unprocessed honey and honey from farmers who may have a small number of hives. Commercial processing, with pooling of honey from numerous sources, is thought to dilute any toxins.", "qas": [{"question": "what is mad ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 64, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Toxic honey may also result when bees are proximate to tutu bushes (\"Coriaria arborea\") and the vine hopper insect (\"Scolypopa australis\"). Both are found throughout New Zealand. Bees gather honeydew produced by the vine hopper insects feeding on the tutu plant. This introduces the poison tutin into honey. Only a few areas in New Zealand (the Coromandel Peninsula, Eastern Bay of Plenty and the Marlborough Sounds) frequently produce toxic honey. Symptoms of tutin poisoning include vomiting, delirium, giddiness, increased excitability, stupor, coma, and violent convulsions. To reduce the risk of tutin poisoning, humans should not eat honey taken from feral hives in the risk areas of New Zealand. Since December 2001, New Zealand beekeepers have been required to reduce the risk of producing toxic honey by closely monitoring tutu, vine hopper, and foraging conditions within of their apiary. Intoxication is rarely dangerous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Honey use and production has a long and varied history. In many cultures, honey has associations that go beyond its use as a food. It is frequently used as a talisman and symbol of sweetness.", "qas": [{"question": "along with production and production , what is a notable history that has a long and varied history ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 66, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Honey collection is an ancient activity. Humans apparently began hunting for honey at least 8,000 years ago, as evidenced by a cave painting in Valencia, Spain. The painting is a Mesolithic rock painting, showing two honey hunters collecting honey and honeycomb from a wild bee nest. The figures are depicted carrying baskets or gourds, and using a ladder or series of ropes to reach the wild nest.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the ancient activity of coconut ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 67, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The greater honeyguide bird guides humans to wild bee hives and this behavior may have evolved with early hominids.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The oldest known honey remains were found in the country of Georgia. Archaeologists found honey remains on the inner surface of clay vessels unearthed in an ancient tomb, dating back some 4,700\u20135,500 years. In ancient Georgia, several types of honey were buried with a person for their journey into the afterlife, including linden, berry, and meadow-flower varieties.", "qas": [{"question": "where were the oldest known vegetable remains in tennessee ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 69, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In ancient Egypt, honey was used to sweeten cakes and biscuits, and was used in many other dishes. Ancient Egyptian and Middle Eastern peoples also used honey for embalming the dead. The fertility god of Egypt, Min, was offered honey.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the fertility god of egypt ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 70, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In ancient Greece, honey was produced from the Archaic to the Hellenistic periods. In 594 BC, beekeeping around Athens was so widespread that Solon passed a law about it: \"He who sets up hives of bees must put them away from those already installed by another\". Greek archaeological excavations of pottery located ancient hives. According to Columella, Greek beekeepers of the Hellenistic period did not hesitate to move their hives over rather long distances to maximise production, taking advantage of the different vegetative cycles in different regions.", "qas": [{"question": "from what period was barley produced ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 71, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the absence of sugar, honey was an integral sweetening ingredient in Greek and Roman cuisine. During Roman times, honey was part of many recipes and it is mentioned in the work of many authors, such as Virgil, Pliny, Cicero, and others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The spiritual and therapeutic use of honey in ancient India is documented in both the Vedas and the Ayurveda texts, which were both composed at least 4,000 years ago.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beekeeping in ancient China has existed since ancient times and appears to be untraceable to its origin. In the book \"Golden Rules of Business Success\" written by Fan Li (or Tao Zhu Gong) during the Spring and Autumn period, some parts mention the art of beekeeping and the importance of the quality of the wooden box for beekeeping that can affect the quality of its honey.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Honey was also cultivated in ancient Mesoamerica. The Maya used honey from the stingless bee for culinary purposes, and continue to do so today. The Maya also regard the bee as sacred (see Mayan stingless bees of Central America).", "qas": [{"question": "what ancient civilization was cultivated in ancient mesopotamia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 75, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Some cultures believed honey had many practical health uses. It was used as an ointment for rashes and burns, and to help soothe sore throats when no other practices were available.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of health uses did some cultures living in ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 76, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In myths and folk medicine, honey has been used both orally and topically to treat various ailments including gastric disturbances, ulcers, skin wounds, and skin burns by ancient Greeks and Egyptians, and in Ayurveda and traditional Chinese medicine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Proposed for treating wounds and burns, honey may have antimicrobial properties as first reported in 1892 and be useful as a safe, improvisational wound treatment. Though its supposed antimicrobial properties may be due to high osmolarity even when diluted with water, it is more effective than plain sugar water of a similar viscosity. Definitive clinical conclusions about the efficacy and safety of treating wounds, however, are not possible from this limited research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The flora that bees use to make the honey may have a role in its properties, particularly by bees foraging from the manuka myrtle, \"Leptospermum scoparium\", as proposed in one study.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ancient Greek Religion\nIn ancient Greek religion, the food of Zeus and the 12 Gods of Olympus was honey in the form of nectar and ambrosia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hinduism\nIn Hinduism, honey (\"Madhu\") is one of the five elixirs of immortality (\"Panchamrita\"). In temples, honey is poured over the deities in a ritual called \"Madhu abhisheka\". The \"Vedas\" and other ancient literature mention the use of honey as a great medicinal and health food.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Judaism\nIn Jewish tradition, honey is a symbol for the new year, \"Rosh Hashanah\". At the traditional meal for that holiday, apple slices are dipped in honey and eaten to bring a sweet new year. Some \"Rosh Hashanah\" greetings show honey and an apple, symbolizing the feast. In some congregations, small straws of honey are given out to usher in the new year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hebrew Bible contains many references to honey. In the Book of Judges, Samson found a swarm of bees and honey in the carcass of a lion (14:8). In Old Testament law, offerings were made in the temple to God. The Book of Leviticus says that \"Every grain offering you bring to the Lord must be made without yeast, for you are not to burn any yeast or honey in a food offering presented to the Lord\" (2:11). In the Books of Samuel, Jonathan is forced into a confrontation with his father King Saul after eating honey in violation of a rash oath Saul has made. Proverbs 16:24 in the JPS Tanakh 1917 version says \"Pleasant words are as a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.\" Book of Exodus famously describes the Promised Land as a \"land flowing with milk and honey\" (33:3). However, most Biblical commentators write that the original Hebrew in the Bible (\u05d3\u05d1\u05e9 \"devash\") refers to the sweet syrup produced from the juice of dates (\"silan\"). In 2005 an apiary dating from the 10th century B.C. was found in Tel Rehov, Israel that contained 100 hives and is estimated to produce half a ton of honey annually. Pure honey is considered kosher, though it is produced by a flying insect, a non-kosher creature; other products of non-kosher animals are not kosher.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the hebrew bible ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 83, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Buddhism\nIn Buddhism, honey plays an important role in the festival of \"Madhu Purnima\", celebrated in India and Bangladesh. The day commemorates Buddha's making peace among his disciples by retreating into the wilderness. The legend has it that while he was there, a monkey brought him honey to eat. On \"Madhu Purnima\", Buddhists remember this act by giving honey to monks. The monkey's gift is frequently depicted in Buddhist art.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Christianity\nIn the Christian New Testament, , John the Baptist is said to have lived for a long period of time in the wilderness on a diet consisting of locusts and wild honey.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Islam\nIn Islam, an entire chapter (Surah) in the Qur'an is called \"an-Nahl\" (the Bees). According to his teachings (\"hadith\"), Muhammad strongly recommended honey for healing purposes. The Qur'an promotes honey as a nutritious and healthy food. Below is an English translation of those specific verses:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hengist and Horsa", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hengist and Horsa are legendary brothers said to have led the Angles, Saxons and Jutes in their invasion of Britain in the 5th century. Tradition lists Hengist as the first of the Jutish kings of Kent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to early sources, Hengist and Horsa arrived in Britain at Ebbsfleet on the Isle of Thanet. For a time, they served as mercenaries for Vortigern, King of the Britons, but later they turned against him (British accounts have them betraying him in the Treachery\nof the Long Knives). Horsa was killed fighting the Britons, but Hengist successfully conquered Kent, becoming the forefather of its kings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A figure named Hengest, who may be identifiable with the leader of British legend, appears in the \"Finnsburg Fragment\" and in \"Beowulf\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Legends of horse-associated founding brothers are attested among other Germanic peoples and appear in other Indo-European cultures. As a result, scholars have theorized a pan-Germanic mythological origin for Hengist and Horsa, stemming originally from divine twins found in Proto-Indo-European religion. Other scholars, including J. R. R. Tolkien, have argued for a historical basis for Hengist and Horsa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Old English names \"Hengest\" and \"Horsa\" mean \"stallion\" and \"horse\" respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The original Old English word for a horse was \"eoh\". \"Eoh\" derives from the Proto-Indo-European base \"*ekwo\", hence Latin \"equus\" which gave rise to the modern English words \"equine\" and \"equestrian\". \"Hors\" is derived from the Proto-Indo-European base \"*kurs\", to run, which also gave rise to \"hurry, carry\" and \"current\" (the latter two are borrowings from French). \"Hors\" eventually replaced \"eoh\", fitting a pattern elsewhere in Germanic languages where the original names of sacred animals are abandoned in favour of adjectives; for example, the word \"bear\". While the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" refer to the brother as \"Horsa\", in the \"History of the Britons\" his name is simply \"Hors\". It has been suggested that \"Horsa\" may be a pet form of a compound name with the first element \"horse\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The name \"Hengest\" is derived from Proto-Germanic *\"hangistaz\" (\"horse\", \"stallion\"), from Proto-Indo-European *\"\u1e31an\u1e31est-\" (\"horse\"). It is cognate with Modern German \"Hengst\", \"stallion.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his 8th century \"Ecclesiastical History\", Bede records that the first chieftains among the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes in England were said to have been Hengist and Horsa. He relates that Horsa was killed in battle against the Britons and was thereafter buried in East Kent, where at the time of writing a monument still stood to him. According to Bede, Hengist and Horsa were the sons of Wictgils, son of Witta, son of Wecta, son of Woden.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the son of wictgils ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 7, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", which exists in nine manuscripts and fragments, compiled from the 9th to the 12th centuries, records that in the year 449 Hengist and Horsa were invited to Britain by Vortigern to assist his forces in fighting the Picts. They landed at Eopwinesfleot (Ebbsfleet), and went on to defeat the Picts wherever they fought them. Hengist and Horsa sent word home to Germany describing \"the worthlessness of the Britons, and the richness of the land\" and asked for assistance. Their request was granted and support arrived. Afterward, more people arrived in Britain from \"the three powers of Germany; the Old Saxons, the Angles, and the Jutes\". The Saxons populated Essex, Sussex, and Wessex; the Jutes Kent, the Isle of Wight, and part of Hampshire; and the Angles East Anglia, Mercia, and Northumbria (leaving their original homeland, Angeln, deserted). The Worcester Chronicle (Chronicle D, compiled in the 11th century), and the Peterborough Chronicle (Chronicle E, compiled in the 12th century), include the detail that these forces were led by the brothers Hengist and Horsa, sons of Wihtgils, son of Witta, son of Wecta, son of Woden, but this information is not included in the A, B, C, or F versions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the entry for the year 455 the \"Chronicle\" details that Hengist and Horsa fought with Vortigern at Aylesford and that Horsa died there. Hengist took control of the kingdom with his son Esc. In 457, Hengist and Esc fought against British forces in Crayford \"and there slew four thousand men\". The Britons left the land of Kent and fled to London. In 465, Hengest and Esc fought again at the Battle of Wippedesfleot, probably near Ebbsfleet, and slew twelve British leaders. In the year 473, the final entry in the \"Chronicle\" mentioning Hengist or Horsa, Hengist and Esc are recorded as having taken \"immense booty\" and the Britons having \"fled from the English like fire\".", "qas": [{"question": "what did the `` chronicles '' show ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The 9th century \"History of the Britons\", attributed to the Briton Nennius, records that, during the reign of Vortigern in Britain, three vessels that had been exiled from Germany arrived in Britain, commanded by Hengist and Horsa. The narrative then gives a genealogy of the two: Hengist and Horsa were sons of Guictglis, son of Guicta, son of Guechta, son of Vouden, son of Frealof, son of Fredulf, son of Finn, son of Foleguald, son of Geta. Geta was said to be the son of a god, yet \"not of the omnipotent God and our Lord Jesus Christ,\" but rather \"the offspring of one of their idols, and whom, blinded by some demon, they worshipped according to the custom of the heathen.\" In 447 AD, Vortigern received Hengist and Horsa \"as friends\" and gave to the brothers the Isle of Thanet.", "qas": [{"question": "who received hengist and gave to the brothers of thanet ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 10, 3)"}]}, {"context": "After the Saxons had lived on Thanet for \"some time\" Vortigern promised them supplies of clothing and other provisions on condition that they assist him in fighting the enemies of his country. As the Saxons increased in number the Britons became unable to keep their agreement, and so told them their assistance was no longer needed and they should go home.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vortigern allowed Hengist to send for more of his countrymen to come over to fight for him. Messengers were sent to \"Scythia\", where \"a number\" of warriors were selected, and, with sixteen ships, the messengers returned. With the men came Hengist's beautiful daughter. Hengist prepared a feast, inviting Vortigern, Vortigern's officers, and Ceretic, his translator. Prior to the feast, Hengist enjoined his daughter to serve the guests plenty of wine and ale so that they would become drunk. At the feast Vortigern became enamored with her and promised Hengist whatever he liked in exchange for her betrothal. Hengist, having \"consulted with the Elders who attended him of the Angle race,\" demanded Kent. Without the knowledge of the then-ruler of Kent, Vortigern agreed.", "qas": [{"question": "who allowed to send for more of his admirers to fight for him ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hengist's daughter was given to Vortigern, who slept with her and deeply loved her. Hengist told him that he would now be both his father and adviser and that he would know no defeat with his counsel, \"for the people of my country are strong, warlike, and robust.\" With Vortigern's approval, Hengist would send for his son and his brother to fight against the Scots and those who dwelt near the wall. Vortigern agreed and Ochta and Ebissa arrived with 40 ships, sailed around the land of the Picts, conquered \"many regions,\" and assaulted the Orkney Islands. Hengist continued to send for more ships from his country, so that some islands where his people had previously dwelt are now free of inhabitants.", "qas": [{"question": "who was given to vortigern ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Vortigern had meanwhile incurred the wrath of Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre (by taking his own daughter for a wife and having a son by her) and had gone into hiding at the advice of his counsel. But at length his son Vortimer engaged Hengist and Horsa and their men in battle, drove them back to Thanet and there enclosed them and beset them on the western flank. The war waxed and waned; the Saxons repeatedly gained ground and were repeatedly driven back. Vortimer attacked the Saxons four times: first enclosing the Saxons in Thanet, secondly fighting at the river Derwent, the third time at Epsford, where both Horsa and Vortigern's son Catigern died, and lastly \"near the stone on the shore of the Gallic sea,\" where the Saxons were defeated and fled to their ships.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After a \"short interval\" Vortimer died and the Saxons became established, \"assisted by foreign pagans.\" Hengist convened his forces and sent to Vortigern an offer of peace. Vortigern accepted, and Hengist prepared a feast to bring together the British and Saxon leaders. However, he instructed his men to conceal knives beneath their feet. At the right moment, Hengist shouted \"nima der sexa\" (get your knives) and his men massacred the unsuspecting Britons. However, they spared Vortigern, who ransomed himself by giving the Saxons Essex, Sussex, Middlesex, and other unnamed districts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Germanus of Auxerre was acclaimed as commander of the British forces. By praying, singing hallelujah and crying to God, the Saxons were driven to the sea. Germanus then prayed for three days and nights at Vortigern's castle and fire fell from heaven and engulfed the castle. Vortigern, Hengist's daughter, Vortigern's other wives, and all other inhabitants burned to death. Potential alternate fates for Vortigern are provided. However, the Saxons continued to increase in numbers, and after Hengist died his son Ochta succeeded him.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his pseudo-historical twelfth century work \"The History of the Kings of Britain\", Geoffrey of Monmouth adapted and greatly expanded the account in the \"History of the Britons\". Hengist and Horsa appear in books 6 and 8:", "qas": [{"question": "hengist and horsa appear in books 6 and what else ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Geoffrey records that three brigandines or long galleys arrived in Kent, full of armed men and commanded by two brothers, Hengist and Horsa. Vortigern was then staying at Dorobernia (Canterbury), and ordered that the \"tall strangers\" be received peacefully and brought to him. When Vortigern saw the company, he immediately observed that the brothers \"excelled all the rest both in nobility and in gracefulness of person.\" He asked what country they had come from and why they had come to his kingdom. Hengist (\"whose years and wisdom entitled him to precedence\") replied that they had left their homeland of Saxony to offer their services to Vortigern or some other prince, as part of a Saxon custom in which, when the country became overpopulated, able young men were chosen by lot to seek their fortunes in other lands. Hengist and Horsa were made generals over the exiles, as befitted their noble birth.", "qas": [{"question": "who were the generals of the captives ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 18, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Vortigern was aggrieved when he learned that the strangers were pagans, but nonetheless rejoiced at their arrival, since he was surrounded by enemies. He asked Hengist and Horsa if they would help him in his wars, offering them land and \"other possessions.\" They accepted the offer, settled on an agreement, and stayed with Vortigern at his court. Soon after, the Picts came from Alba with an immense army and attacked the northern parts of Vortigern's kingdom. In the ensuing battle \"there was little occasion for the Britons to exert themselves, for the Saxons fought so bravely, that the enemy, formerly victorious, were speedily put to flight.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In gratitude Vortigern increased the rewards he had promised to the brothers. Hengist was given \"large possessions of lands in Lindsey for the subsistence of himself and his fellow-soldiers.\" A \"man of experience and subtilty,\" Hengist told Vortigern that his enemies assailed him from every quarter, and that his subjects wished to depose him and make Aurelius Ambrosius king. He asked the king to allow him to send word to Saxony for more soldiers. Vortigern agreed, adding that Hengist could invite over whom he pleased and that \"you shall have no refusal from me in whatever you shall desire.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hengist bowed low in thanks, and made a further request, that he be made a consul or prince, as befitted his birth. Vortigern responded that it was not in his power to do this, reasoning that Hengist was a foreign pagan and would not be accepted by the British lords. Hengist asked instead for leave to build a fortress on a piece of land small enough that it could be encircled by a leather thong. Vortigern granted this and ordered Hengist to invite more Saxons.", "qas": [{"question": "who ordered the order to organize more intermarried ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 21, 3)"}]}, {"context": "After executing Vortigern's orders, Hengist took a bull's hide and made it into a single thong, which he used to encircle a carefully chosen rocky place (perhaps at Caistor in Lindsey). Here he built the castle of \"Kaercorrei\", or in Saxon \"Thancastre\": \"thong castle.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The messengers returned from Germany with eighteen ships full of the best soldiers they could get, as well as Hengist's beautiful daughter Rowena. Hengist invited Vortigern to see his new castle and the newly arrived soldiers. A banquet was held in Thancastre, at which Vortigern drunkenly asked Hengist to let him marry Rowena. Horsa and the men all agreed that Hengist should allow the marriage, on the condition that Vortigern give him Kent.", "qas": [{"question": "who stated that hengist should allow the marriage ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 23, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Vortigern and Rowena were immediately married and Hengist was given Kent. The king was delighted with his new wife, but he incurred the hatred of his nobles and of his three sons.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the duke who married kent ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As his new father-in-law, Hengist made further demands of Vortigern:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vortigern agreed. Upon receiving the invitation, Octa, Ebissa, and another lord, Cherdich, immediately left for Britain with three hundred ships. Vortigern received them kindly, and gave them ample gifts. With their assistance, Vortigern defeated his enemies in every engagement. All the while Hengist continued inviting over yet more ships, adding to his numbers daily. Witnessing this, the Britons tried to get Vortigern to banish the Saxons, but on account of his wife he would not. Consequently, his subjects turned against him and took his son Vortimer for their king. The Saxons and the Britons, led by Vortimer, met in four battles. In the second, Horsa and Vortimer's brother, Catigern, slew one another. By the fourth battle, the Saxons had fled to Thanet, where Vortimer besieged them. When the Saxons could no longer bear the British onslaughts, they sent out Vortigern to ask his son to allow them safe passage back to Germany. While discussions were taking place, the Saxons boarded their ships and left, leaving their wives and children behind.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The victorious Vortimer was poisoned by Rowena, and Vortigern returned to the throne. At his wife's request he invited Hengist back to Britain, but instructed him to bring only a small retinue. Hengist, knowing Vortimer to be dead, instead raised an army of 300,000 men. When Vortigern caught word of the imminent arrival of the vast Saxon fleet, he resolved to fight them. Rowena alerted her father of this, who, after considering various strategies, resolved to make a show of peace and sent ambassadors to Vortigern.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ambassadors informed Vortigern that Hengist had only brought so many men because he did not know of Vortimer's death and feared further attacks from him. Now that there was no threat, Vortigern could choose from among the men the ones he wished to return to Germany. Vortigern was greatly pleased by these tidings, and arranged to meet Hengist on the first of May at the monastery of Ambrius.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before the meeting, Hengist ordered his soldiers to carry long daggers beneath their clothing. At the signal \"Nemet oure Saxas\" (get your knives), the Saxons fell upon the unsuspecting Britons and massacred them, while Hengist held Vortigern by his cloak. 460 British barons and consuls were killed, as well as some Saxons whom the Britons beat to death with clubs and stones. Vortigern was held captive and threatened with death until he resigned control of Britain's chief cities to Hengist. Once free, he fled to Cambria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Cambria, Merlin prophesied to Vortigern that the brothers Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon, who had fled to Armorica as children after Vortigern killed their brother and father, would return to have their revenge and defeat the Saxons. They arrived the next day, and, after rallying the dispersed Britons, Aurelius was proclaimed king. Aurelius marched into Cambria and burned Vortigern alive in his tower, before setting his sights upon the Saxons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hengist was struck by terror at the news of Vortigern's death and fled with his army beyond the Humber. He took courage at the approach of Aurelius and selected the bravest among his men to defend. Hengist told these chosen men not to be afraid of Aurelius, for he had brought less than 10,000 Armorican Britons (the native Britons were hardly worth taking into account), while there were 200,000 Saxons. Hengist and his men advanced towards Aurelius in a field called Maisbeli (probably Ballifield, near Sheffield), intending to take the Britons by surprise, but Aurelius anticipated them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As they marched to meet the Saxons, Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, told Aurelius that he greatly wished to meet Hengist in combat, noting that \"one of the two of us should die before we parted.\" He explained that he had been at the Treachery of the Long Knives, but had escaped when God threw him a stake to defend himself with, making him the only Briton present to survive. Meanwhile, Hengist was placing his troops into formation, giving directions, and walking through the lines of troops, \"the more to spirit them up.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the armies in formation, battle began between the Britons and Saxons, both sides shedding \"no small loss of blood.\" Eldol focused on attempting to find Hengist, but had no opportunity to fight him. \"By the especial favour of God,\" the Britons took the upper hand, and the Saxons withdrew and made for Kaerconan (Conisbrough). Aurelius pursued them, killing or enslaving any Saxon he met on the way. Realizing Kaerconan would not hold against Aurelius, Hengist stopped outside the town and ordered his men to make a stand, \"for he knew that his whole security now lay in his sword.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aurelius reached Hengist, and a \"most furious\" fight ensued, with the Saxons maintaining their ground despite heavy losses. They came close to winning before a detachment of horses from the Armorican Britons arrived. When Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, arrived, Eldol knew the day was won and grabbed Hengist's helmet, dragging him into the British ranks. The Saxons fled. Hengist's son Octa retreated to York and his kinsman Eosa to Alclud (Dumbarton).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Three days after the battle, Aurelius called together a council of principal officers to decide what would be done with Hengist. Eldol's brother Eldad, Bishop of Gloucester, said:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Consequently, Eldol drew Hengist out of the city and cut off his head. Aurelius, \"who showed moderation in all his conduct,\" arranged for him to be buried and for a mound to be raised over his corpse, according to the custom of pagans. Octa and Eosa surrendered to Aurelius, who granted them the country bordering Scotland and made a firm covenant with them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hengist is briefly mentioned in \"Prologue\", the first book of the \"Prose Edda\", written by the Icelander Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century. In \"Prologue\", a euhemerized account of Germanic history is given, including that Woden put three of his sons in charge of Saxony. The ruler of eastern Saxony was Veggdegg, one of whose sons was Vitrgils, the father of Vitta, the father of Hengist.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On farmhouses in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, horse-head gables were referred to as \"Hengst und Hors\" as late as around 1875. Rudolf Simek notes that these horse-head gables can still be seen today, and says that the horse-head gables confirm that Hengist and Horsa were originally considered mythological, horse-shaped beings. Martin Litchfield West comments that the horse heads may have been remnants of pagan religious practices in the area. Organisations in (or originating in) the Raiffeisen farmers' co-operative movement use designs based on the horse-head gable in their trade-marks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A Hengest appears in line 34 of the \"Finnsburg Fragment\", which describes the legendary Battle of Finnsburg. In \"Beowulf\", a scop recites a composition summarizing the Finnsburg events, including information not provided in the fragment. Hengest is mentioned in lines 1082 and 1091.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some scholars have proposed that the figure mentioned in both of these references is one and the same as the Hengist of the Hengist and Horsa accounts, though Horsa is not mentioned in either source. In his work \"Finn and Hengest\", Tolkien argued that Hengist was a historical figure, and that Hengist came to Britain after the events recorded in the \"Finnsburg Fragment\" and \"Beowulf\". Patrick Sims-Williams is more skeptical of the account, suggesting that Bede's Canterbury source, which he relied on for his account of Hengist and Horsa in the \"Ecclesiastical History\", had confused two separate traditions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several sources attest that the Germanic peoples venerated a divine pair of twin brothers. The earliest reference to this practice derives from Timaeus (c. 345 \u2013 c. 250 BC). Timeaus records that the Celts of the North Sea were especially devoted to what he describes as Castor and Pollux. In his work \"Germania\", Tacitus records the veneration of the Alcis, whom he identifies with Castor and Pollux. Germanic legends mention various brothers as founding figures. The 1st- or 2nd-century historian Cassius Dio cites the brothers Raos and Raptos as the leaders of the Astings. According to Paul the Deacon's 8th century \"History of the Lombards\", the Lombards migrated southward from Scandinavia led by Ibur and Aio, while Saxo Grammaticus records in his 12th century \"Deeds of the Danes\" that this migration was prompted by Aggi and Ebbi. In related Indo-European cultures, similar traditions are attested, such as the Dioscuri. Scholars have theorized that these divine twins in Indo-European cultures stem from divine twins in prehistoric Proto-Indo-European culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "J. P. Mallory comments on the great importance of the horse in Indo-European religion, as exemplified \"most obviously\" by various mythical brothers appearing in Indo-European legend, including Hengist and Horsa:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his 17th century work \"Monumenta Britannica\", John Aubrey ascribes the Uffington White Horse hill figure to Hengist and Horsa, stating that \"the White Horse was their Standard at the Conquest of Britain\". However, elsewhere he ascribes the origins of the horse to the pre-Roman Britons, reasoning that the horse resembles certain Iron Age British coins. As a result, advocates of a Saxon origin of the figure debated with those favoring an ancient British origin for three centuries after Aubrey's findings. In 1995, using optically stimulated luminescence dating, David Miles and Simon Palmer of the Oxford Archaeological Unit assigned the Uffington White Horse to the late Bronze Age.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Brothers Grimm identified Hengist with Aschanes, mythical first King of the Saxons, in their notes for legend number 413 of their \"German Legends\". Editor and translator Donald Ward, in his commentary on the tale, regards the identification as untenable on linguistic grounds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hengist and Horsa have appeared in a variety of media in the modern period. Written between 1616 and 1620, Thomas Middleton's play \"Hengist, King of Kent\" features portrayals of both Hengist and Horsa (as \"Hersus\"). On July 6, 1776, the first committee for the production of the Great Seal of the United States convened. One of three members of the committee, Thomas Jefferson, proposed that one side of the seal feature Hengist and Horsa, \"the Saxon chiefs from whom we claim the honor of being descended, and whose political principles and form of government we assumed\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Hengist and Horsus\" appear as antagonists in William Henry Ireland's play \"Vortigern and Rowena\", which was touted as a newly discovered work by William Shakespeare in 1796, but was soon revealed as a hoax. The pair have plaques in the Walhalla Temple at Regensburg, Bavaria, which honours distinguished figures of German history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During World War II, two British military gliders took their names from the brothers: the Slingsby Hengist and the Airspeed Horsa. The 20th-century American poet Robinson Jeffers composed a poem titled \"Ode to Hengist and Horsa\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1949, Prince Georg of Denmark came to Pegwell Bay in Kent to dedicate the longship \"Hugin\", commemorating the landing of Hengest and Horsa at nearby Ebbsfleet 1500 years earlier in 449 AD.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though Hengist and Horsa are not referenced in the medieval tales of King Arthur, some modern Arthurian tales do link them. For example, in Mary Stewart's \"Merlin Trilogy\" it is King Arthur who kills Hengist. In Alfred Duggan's \"Conscience of the King\", Hengist plays a major role in the early career of Cerdic Elesing, legendary founder of the kingdom of Wessex.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hero System", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Hero System is a generic role-playing game system that was developed from the superhero RPG \"Champions\". After \"Champions\" fourth edition was released in 1989, a stripped-down version of its ruleset with no superhero or other genre elements was released as \"The Hero System Rulesbook\" in 1990. As a spinoff of \"Champions\", the \"Hero System\" is considered to have started with 4th edition (as it is mechanically identical to \"Champions\" 4th edition), rather than on its own with a 1st edition. However, the first three editions of the game are typically referred to as \"Champions\", rather than the Hero System, as the game for its first three editions was not sold as a universal toolkit, instead largely focusing on superheroes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Hero System\" is used as the underlying mechanics of other Hero Games role-playing games such as \"Fantasy Hero\", \"Star Hero\", and \"Pulp Hero\". It is characterized by point-based character creation and the rigor with which it measures character abilities. It uses only six-sided dice.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the `` hero system '' used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The \"Hero System\" uses \"Champions\"' key system features. Tasks are resolved using three six-sided dice and power effects (especially damage) are resolved by rolling a number of dice based on the power's strength.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the `` hero system '' use ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Like \"Champions\", it uses tool-kit approach to creating effects. While the system does have more typical features of many RPGs, such as a skill system, most abilities in the \"Hero System\" rules are listed as a generic \"powers\". Most powers are meant to be able to model a vast number of potential effects. When creating a character, a player decides on what effect they wish to create, then constructs this effect by consulting the powers in the rulebook. Most powers have a set of modifiers that alter its base performance to more finely-tune its representation of the effect desired. Each such modifier makes the power more or less capable, and correspondingly more or less expensive to purchase with character points (the \"currency\" used to buy powers; see the section following). The result is that many effects are possible from the exact same base power. For example, while systems such as Dungeons & Dragons would list a wide variety of separate ranged attack powers that deal damage (such as a fireball, a lightning bolt, an acid spray, a magic missile, and dozens more), the vast majority of such effects in the \"Hero System\" would be constructed out of the same base two powers, \"Blast\" or \"Killing Attack\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Hero System\" rules only define an ability's very basic mechanical effects\u2014the player is the one who defines what the ability looks like when used. For example, if a player wishes to model the ability to project a jet of fire, they could choose the \"Blast\" power. However, the power's text has no mention of what it looks like or how it operates beyond some very base notes concerning damage and range. To make it a jet of fire, the player simply states that this Blast is a jet of fire. To some degree this is simply cosmetic. However, in the game, that power now is treated as a fire attack, with all that implies as decided by the gamemaster in each situation: it has the possibility of starting secondary fires; it looks, smells and sounds like a jet of fire; will not work in water; will terrify people with a phobia of fire; etc. The system does have mechanical effect alterations as well: a Blast could be altered by any number of power modifiers such as \"Explosion\", \"Area of Effect\", \"Megascale\", etc.: both advantages and disadvantages are available. As players are typically attempting to model something with at least a partial real-life analogue, limitations on a power are as much about making it more accurate a representation as they are making it less expensive to purchase (for example, to model a firearm, the limitation that it requires ammunition is expected, regardless of the fact that this happens to make a firearm cost fewer character points). The system also allows players to construct very exacting modifiers not specifically detailed in the base rules. For example, a player could define one or more powers as not working when the moon is full, or when it is Tuesday, or any other limitation that the player can imagine and the gamemaster feels is applicable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also like \"Champions\", the \"Hero System\" uses a point-based system for character creation. Instead of templates which define what a character is, how it performs mechanically, and the new abilities gained after a certain amount of play, a player is given a fixed number of points and allowed to create what they want. As this is a much more freeform process than in most games, the system encourages close involvement between players and gamemasters to ensure that all participants have the same understanding regarding the type of effects permitted, relative power levels, and the like.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the `` hero system '' use ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Each player creates his character starting with a pool of points to buy abilities (such as the aforementioned \"Energy Blast\" and \"Armor\"), increase characteristics (such as \"Strength\" and \"Intelligence\") and buy skills (such as \"Computer Programming\" and \"Combat Driving\"). This pool can be increased by taking disadvantages for your character (such as being hunted by an enemy, a dependency of some sort or having people who depend on your character in some way). The initial pool, as well as the final pool size, is determined by the Game Master (GM), as well as the point limits on each individual ability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Unlike the d20 System and many other game systems, experience awards are in the form of character points, which have the same value as those used in character creation and can be applied directly to the character's abilities upon receipt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The advantages of the \"Hero System \"are commonly considered to be:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe primary disadvantages are sometimes considered to be:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe \"large number of dice required at high power levels\" has been called both an advantage and a disadvantage. The original designers, and some contemporary players, have cited a \"feeling of power\" when rolling large numbers of dice and counting off huge amounts of damage. On the other hand, rolling such a large load of dice can be physically unwieldy and take a long time to add up.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The powers system is divided into a set of standard powers, and a list of advantages and limitations that can be applied to each power. Many of the powers have specific advantages and limitations that apply only to that power. The powers in the Hero System are categorized roughly as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Within each of these categories are multiple Powers that have more specialized effects. Thus for the movement category there are powers that can be used for Running, Swimming, Climbing, Leaping, Gliding, Flying, Tunneling through solid surfaces, and even Teleportation. For certain game genres there are even powers for traveling to other dimensions or moving faster than light.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also, many Powers appear in at least two categories. For example, most Attack Powers are also Standard Powers, and Size Powers are basically just a subcategory of Body-Affecting Powers. Darkness is in three categories \u2014 Standard, Attack, and Sense-Affecting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each power has a base point cost for a given effect. This could be, for example, a certain number of points per six-sided-die (or \"d6\") of damage inflicted upon a foe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Powers can have both advantages and limitations. Both are modifiers applied at different stages in calculating cost. These modifiers are typically changes of \u00b1\u00bc, but can range up to \u00b12 or even higher.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the base cost is calculated, advantages are applied. These, which can make a power more useful, typically expand its effectiveness or make it more powerful, and thus make it more expensive. Once advantages are applied, the base cost becomes the Active Cost.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Active Cost is calculated as an intermediate step as it is required to calculate certain figures, such as range, END usage, difficulty of activation rolls, and other things.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The formula for calculating the Active Cost is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Once Active Cost is calculated, limitations are applied. These represent shortcomings in the power, lessened reliability or situations in which the power can not be used. Limitations are added separately as positive numbers, even though they are listed as negative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Real Cost of the power is then determined by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Real Cost is the amount the character must actually pay for the Power.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rules also include schemes for providing a larger number of powers to a character for a given cost. These power frameworks reduce the cost either by requiring the group of powers to have a common theme as in an Elemental Control Framework, or by limiting the number of powers that can be active at one time with a Multipower Framework. Powers within a framework can share common limitations, further reducing the cost. A third type of power framework, the Variable Power Pool (VPP), trades thrift for flexibility. With it, powers can be arbitrarily chosen on the fly, granting enhanced in-game flexibility. The price is a premium on points, called the Control Cost. Additionally, it is marked as potentially unbalancing, so not all GMs will permit VPP's.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Elemental Controls were eliminated in the Sixth Edition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the criticisms leveled at the \"Hero System\" almost since its inception is the relatively large amount of computation involved in its use, particularly during character creation. While almost none of this math goes beyond the basic functions of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, this can seem daunting to newcomers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a result, software has been created to automate the bookkeeping involved. \"Heromaker\", an MS-DOS program, was distributed with some versions of Champions. Today, \"Hero Designer\" for the Fifth and Sixth Editions is available on several platforms, and is supported by numerous character packs and other extensions linked to Hero Games book releases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although several games based on what would become known as the \"Hero System\" were published in the 1980s, including \"Champions\", \"Danger International\", \"Justice, Inc.\", \"Robot Warriors\" and the original versions of \"Fantasy Hero\" and \"Star Hero\", each of the RPGs was self-contained, much as Chaosium's Basic Role-Playing games are. The \"Hero System\" itself was not released as an independent entity until 1990, as Steve Jackson Games' \"GURPS\" (\"Generic Universal Roleplaying System\") became more popular. As a joint venture between Hero Games and Iron Crown Enterprises, a stand-alone \"Hero System Rulebook\" was published alongside the fourth edition of Champions. The content was identical to the opening sections of the Champions rules, but all genre-related material was removed. Afterward, genre books such as \"Ninja Hero\" (written by Aaron Allston) and \"Fantasy Hero\" were published as sourcebooks for the \"Hero System Rulebook\" as opposed to being independent games.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the collapse of the Hero-ICE alliance, the \"Hero System\" went into limbo for several years. The \"Champions\" franchise released a new version under the Fuzion system, which had been a joint development with R. Talsorian Games, called \"Champions: the New Millennium\". Although two editions were published, it was very poorly received by \"Champions\" fans. In 2001, a reconstituted Hero Games was formed under the leadership of Steven S. Long, who had written several books for the earlier version of the system. It regained the rights to the \"Hero System\" and to the \"Champions\" trademark.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2001, the Fifth Edition of the \"Hero System Rulebook\" was released, incorporating heavy revisions by Long. A large black hardcover, it was critically well received and attained a degree of commercial success. (Following problems with fragile bindings on Fourth Edition rulebooks, the planned binding for the larger Fifth Edition was tested using a clothes dryer.) The Fifth Edition is often referred to as \"FREd\", which is a backronym for \"Fifth Rules Edition\". The name actually comes from Steve S. Long's reply when asked what the standard abbreviation for the Fifth Edition would be: \"I don't care if you call it 'Fred', as long as you buy it.\" This was made the unofficial nickname by several replies on the same board affirming it after a reply from Willpower, who coined the backronym by saying, \"OK. FREd it is, \"Fifth Rules Edition\"!\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "A revised version () was issued in 2004, along with \"Hero System Sidekick\", a condensed version of the rulebook with a cover price of under $10. Fans often call the revised Fifth Edition \"Fiver,\" ReFREd,\" or \"5ER\" (from \"Fifth Edition revised\"; \"Fiver\" also alludes to \"Watership Down\"). This rulebook is so big (592 pages) that some fans speculated that it might be bulletproof, and it did indeed stop some bullets when tested by Hero Games staffers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On February 28, 2008, Cryptic Studios purchased the \"Champions\" intellectual property, and sold the rights back to Hero Games to publish the 6th edition books. One of the new features will be to allow players to adapt their \"Champions Online\" characters to the pen-and-paper game.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In late 2008, Hero released a licensed RPG for Aaron Williams's popular comic PS238 using a simplified version of the Fifth Edition rules.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In late 2009, Hero Games released the 6th Edition of the Hero System. The game has so far had a mostly positive reception, with little in the way of 'Edition Wars'. The largest rules change was the removal of Figured Characteristics (meaning that character stats that were previously linked intrinsically\u2014such as Speed automatically increasing when sufficient amounts of Dexterity were purchased\u2014were no longer connected, and instead bought entirely separately). Other, more minor rules changes include folding Armor and Force field into Resistant Defense and reestablishing Regeneration as a separate power. The rules were released in two volumes, with the first covering character creation in depth and the second describing campaigns and the running of games. The new genre book for Champions came out shortly thereafter, and a new \"Fantasy Hero\" was released in the summer of 2010. A new version of Sidekick was released in late 2009 under the title \"The Hero System Basic Rulebook\", while an \"Advanced Player Guide\" was published that had additional options for character creation. Other recent releases included a large book of pre-constructed Powers, a set of pre-generated Martial Arts styles, abilities and skills, a large bestiary, a new grimoire for Fantasy Hero and a three-volume set of villains for \"Champions\". A new edition of \"Star Hero\" was released in 2011, along with a second \"Advanced Player Guide\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 28 November 2011, Hero Games announced a restructuring, with Darren Watts and long-time developer Steven S. Long relinquishing their full-time statuses to work freelance. In late 2012 \"Champions Complete\" was released, which contained all of the core 6th edition rules as well as enough information to play a superhero campaign in a single 240-page book. This compact presentation reflected criticism that the 6th edition rules had become too unwieldy.\nHero Games now maintains an irregular release schedule, with a minimal staff, and has successfully used Kickstarter to raise funds for new projects. One of these new products, \"Fantasy Hero Complete\", was released in early 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Humphry Davy", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Sir Humphry Davy, 1st Baronet (17 December 177829 May 1829) was a Cornish chemist and inventor, who is best remembered today for isolating, using electricity, a series of elements for the first time: potassium and sodium in 1807 and calcium, strontium, barium, magnesium and boron the following year, as well as discovering the elemental nature of chlorine and iodine. He also studied the forces involved in these separations, inventing the new field of electrochemistry. In 1799 Davy experimented with nitrous oxide and became astonished that it made him laugh, so he nicknamed it \"laughing gas\", and wrote about its potential anaesthetic properties in relieving pain during surgery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Berzelius called Davy's 1806 Bakerian Lecture \"On Some Chemical Agencies of Electricity\" \"one of the best memoirs which has ever enriched the theory of chemistry.\"\nDavy was a baronet, President of the Royal Society (PRS), Member of the Royal Irish Academy (MRIA), and Fellow of the Geological Society (FGS). He also invented the Davy lamp and a very early form of arc lamp.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of lamp did bell create ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 1, 2)"}]}, {"context": "He joked that his assistant Michael Faraday was his greatest discovery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy was born in Penzance, Cornwall in England on 17 December 1778. Davy's brother, John, writes that the society of their hometown was characterised by \"an almost unbounded credulity respecting the supernatural and monstrous ... Amongst the middle and higher classes, there was little taste for literature, and still less for science ... Hunting, shooting, wrestling, cockfighting, generally ending in drunkenness, were what they most delighted in\". At the age of six, Davy was sent to the grammar school at Penzance. Three years later, his family moved to Varfell, near Ludgvan, and subsequently, in term-time Davy boarded with John Tonkin, his godfather and later his guardian. On leaving Penzance grammar school in 1793, Tonkin paid for Davy to attend Truro Grammar School in 1793 to finish his education under the Rev Dr Cardew, who, in a letter to Davies Gilbert, said dryly: \"I could not discern the faculties by which he was afterwards so much distinguished.\" Yet, Davy entertained his school friends with writing poetry, Valentines, and telling stories from One Thousand and One Nights. Reflecting on his school days, in a letter to his mother, Davy wrote: \"Learning naturally is a true pleasure; how unfortunate then it is that in most schools it is made a pain.\" Davy said: \"I consider it fortunate I was left much to myself as a child, and put upon no particular plan of study ... What I am I made myself.\" Davy's brother praises his \"native vigour\": \"there belonged, however, to his mind, it cannot be doubted, the genuine quality of genius, or of that power of intellect which exalts its possessor above the crowd.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "After Davy's father died in 1794, Tonkin apprenticed him to John Bingham Borlase, a surgeon with a practice in Penzance. Davy's indenture is dated 10 February 1795. In the apothecary's dispensary, Davy became a chemist, and conducted his earliest chemical experiments in a garret in Tonkin's house. Davy's friends said: \"This boy Humphry is incorrigible. He will blow us all into the air.\" His elder sister complained of the ravages made on her dresses by corrosive substances. Davy was taught French by a refugee priest, and in 1797 read Lavoisier's \"Trait\u00e9 \u00e9l\u00e9mentaire de chimie\": much of his future work can be seen as reacting against Lavoisier's work and the dominance of French chemists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a poet, over one hundred and sixty manuscript poems were written by Davy, the majority of which are found in his personal notebooks. Most of his written poems were not published, and he chose instead to share a few of them with his friends. Eight of his known poems were published. His poems reflected his views on both his career and also his pereception of certain aspects of human life. He wrote on human endeavours and aspects of life like death, metaphysics, geology, natural theology and chemistry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "John Ayrton Paris remarked that poetry written by the young Davy \"bear the stamp of lofty genius\". Davy's first preserved poem entitled \"The Sons of Genius\" is dated 1795 and marked by the usual immaturity of youth. Other poems written in the following years, especially \"On the Mount's Bay\" and \"St Michael's Mount\", are descriptive verses, showing sensibility but no true poetic imagination. Three of Davy's paintings from around 1796 have been donated to the Penlee House museum at Penzance. One is of the view from above Gulval showing the church, Mount's Bay and the Mount, while the other two depict Loch Lomond in Scotland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While writing verses at the age of 17 in honour of his first love, he was eagerly discussing the question of the materiality of heat with his Quaker friend and mentor Robert Dunkin. Dunkin remarked: 'I tell thee what, Humphry, thou art the most quibbling hand at a dispute I ever met with in my life.' One winter day he took Davy to the Larigan River, To show him that rubbing two plates of ice together developed sufficient energy by motion, to melt them, and that after the motion was suspended, the pieces were united by regelation. It was a crude form of analogous experiment exhibited by Davy in the lecture-room of the Royal Institution that elicited considerable attention. As professor at the Royal Institution, Davy repeated many of the ingenious experiments he learned from his friend and mentor, Robert Dunkin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even though he initially started writing his poems albeit haphazardly, as a reflection of his views on his career, and on life generally, most of his final poems concentrated more on immortality and death. This was after he started experiencing failing health and a decline both in health and career.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davies Giddy met Davy in Penzance carelessly swinging on the half-gate of Dr Borlase's house, and interested by his talk invited him to his house at Tredrea and offered him the use of his library. This led to an introduction to Dr Edwards, who lived at Hayle Copper House. Edwards was a lecturer in chemistry in the school of St. Bartholomew's Hospital. He permitted Davy to use his laboratory and possibly directed his attention to the floodgates of the port of Hayle, which were rapidly decaying as a result of the contact between copper and iron under the influence of seawater. Galvanic corrosion was not understood at that time, but the phenomenon prepared Davy's mind for subsequent experiments on ship's copper sheathing. Gregory Watt, son of James Watt, visited Penzance for his health's sake, and while lodging at the Davy's house became a friend and gave him instructions in chemistry. Davy was acquainted with the Wedgwood family, who spent a winter at Penzance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thomas Beddoes and John Hailstone were engaged in a geological controversy on the rival merits of the Plutonian and Neptunist hypotheses. They travelled together to examine the Cornish coast accompanied by Davies Gilbert and made Davy's acquaintance. Beddoes, who had established at Bristol a 'Pneumatic Institution,' needed an assistant to superintend the laboratory. Gilbert recommended Davy, and in 1798 Gregory Watt showed Beddoes the \"Young man's Researches on Heat and Light\", which were subsequently published by him in the first volume of \"West-Country Contributions\". After prolonged negotiations, mainly by Gilbert, Mrs Davy and Borlase consented to Davy's departure, but Tonkin wished him to remain in his native town as a surgeon, and altered his will when he found that Davy insisted on going to Dr Beddoes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1802, Humphry Davy had what was then, the most powerful electrical battery in the world at the Royal Institution. With it, Davy created the first incandescent light by passing electric current through a thin strip of platinum, chosen because the metal had an extremely high melting point. It was neither sufficiently bright nor long lasting enough to be of practical use, but demonstrated the principle. By 1806 he was able to demonstrate a much more powerful form of electric lighting to the Royal Society in London. It was an early form of arc light which produced its illumination from an electric arc created between two charcoal rods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 2 October 1798, Davy joined the Pneumatic Institution at Bristol. It had been established to investigate the medical powers of factitious airs and gases (gases produced experimentally or artificially), and Davy was to superintend the various experiments. The arrangement agreed between Dr Beddoes and Davy was generous, and enabled Davy to give up all claims on his paternal property in favour of his mother. He did not intend to abandon the medical profession and was determined to study and graduate at Edinburgh, but he soon began to fill parts of the institution with voltaic batteries. While living in Bristol, Davy met the Earl of Durham, who was a resident in the institution for his health, and became close friends with Gregory Watt, James Watt, Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Robert Southey, all of whom became regular users of nitrous oxide (laughing gas), to which Davy became addicted. The gas was first synthesized in 1772 by the natural philosopher and chemist Joseph Priestley, who called it \"phlogisticated nitrous air\" (see phlogiston). Priestley described his discovery in the book \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)\", in which he described how to produce the preparation of \"nitrous air diminished\", by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid.", "qas": []}, {"context": "James Watt built a portable gas chamber to facilitate Davy's experiments with the inhalation of nitrous oxide. At one point the gas was combined with wine to judge its efficacy as a cure for hangover (his laboratory notebook indicated success). The gas was popular among Davy's friends and acquaintances, and he noted that it might be useful for performing surgical operations. Anesthetics were not regularly used in medicine or dentistry until decades after Davy's death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy threw himself energetically into the work of the laboratory and formed a long romantic friendship with Mrs Anna Beddoes, the novelist Maria Edgeworth's sister, who acted as his guide on walks and other fine sights of the locality. The critic Maurice Hindle was the first to reveal that Davy and Anna had written poems for each other. Wahida Amin has transcribed and discussed a number of poems written between 1803 and 1808 to \"Anna\" and one to her infant child. In December 1799 Davy visited London for the first time and extended his circle of friends. Davy features in the diary of William Godwin, with their first meeting recorded for 4 December 1799.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the gas experiments Davy ran considerable risks. His respiration of nitric oxide which may have combined with air in the mouth to form nitric acid (HNO), severely injured the mucous membrane, and in Davy's attempt to inhale four quarts of \"pure hydrocarbonate\" gas in an experiment with carbon monoxide he \"seemed sinking into annihilation.\" On being removed into the open air, Davy faintly articulated, \"I do not think I shall die,\" but some hours elapsed before the painful symptoms ceased. Davy was able to take his own pulse as he staggered out of the laboratory and into the garden, and he described it in his notes as \"threadlike and beating with excessive quickness\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this year the first volume of the \"West-Country Collections\" was issued. Half consisted of Davy's essays \"On Heat, Light, and the Combinations of Light\", \"On Phos-oxygen and its Combinations\", and on the \"Theory of Respiration\". On 22 February 1799 Davy, wrote to Davies Gilbert, \"I am now as much convinced of the non-existence of caloric as I am of the existence of light.\" In another letter to Gilbert, on 10 April, Davy informs him: \"I made a discovery yesterday which proves how necessary it is to repeat experiments. The gaseous oxide of azote (the laughing gas) is perfectly respirable when pure. It is never deleterious but when it contains nitrous gas. I have found a mode of making it pure.\" He said that he breathed sixteen quarts of it for nearly seven minutes, and that it \"absolutely intoxicated me.\" \nDavy became increasingly well known in 1799 due to his experiments with the physiological action of some gases, including laughing gas (nitrous oxide). In addition to himself, his enthusiastic experimental subjects included his poet friends Robert Southey and Samuel Taylor Coleridge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During 1799, Beddoes and Davy published \"Contributions to physical and medical knowledge, principally from the west of England\" and \"Essays on heat, light, and the combinations of light, with a new theory of respiration. On the generation of oxygen gas, and the causes of the colors of organic beings.\" Their experimental work was poor, and the publications were harshly criticized. In after years Davy regretted he had ever published these immature hypotheses, which he subsequently designated \"the dreams of misemployed genius which the light of experiment and observation has never conducted to truth.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "These criticisms, however, led Davy to refine and improve his experimental techniques, spending his later time at the institution increasingly in experimentation.\nIn 1800, Davy informed Gilbert that he had been \"repeating the galvanic experiments with success\" in the intervals of the experiments on the gases, which \"almost incessantly occupied him from January to April.\" In 1800, Davy published his \"Researches, Chemical and Philosophical, chiefly concerning Nitrous Oxide and its Respiration\", and received a more positive response.", "qas": []}, {"context": "William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge moved to the Lake District in 1800, and asked Davy to deal with the Bristol publishers of the Lyrical Ballads, Biggs & Cottle. Coleridge asked Davy to proofread the second edition of the Lyrical Ballads, the first to contain Wordsworth's Preface in a letter dated 16 July 1800: \"Will you be so kind as just to look over the sheets of the lyrical Ballads\". Wordsworth subsequently wrote to Davy on 29 July 1800, sending him the first manuscript sheet of poems and asking him specifically to correct: \"any thing you find amiss in the punctuation a business at which I am ashamed to say I am no adept\". Wordsworth was ill in the autumn of 1800 and slow in sending poems for the second edition; the volume appeared on 26 January 1801 even though it was dated 1800. While it is impossible to know whether Davy was at fault, this edition of the Lyrical Ballads contained many errors, including the poem \"Michael\" being left incomplete. In a personal notebook marked on the front cover \"Clifton 1800 From August to Novr\", Davy wrote his own Lyrical Ballad: \"As I was walking up the street\". Wordsworth features in Davy's poem as the recorder of ordinary lives in the line: \"By poet Wordsworths Rymes\" [sic].", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1799, Count Rumford had proposed the establishment in London of an 'Institution for Diffusing Knowledge', i.e. the Royal Institution. The house in Albemarle Street was bought in April 1799. Rumford became secretary to the institution, and Dr Thomas Garnett was the first lecturer.\nIn February 1801 Davy was interviewed by the committee of the Royal Institution, comprising Joseph Banks, Benjamin Thompson (who had been appointed Count Rumford) and Henry Cavendish. Davy wrote to Davies Gilbert on 8 March 1801 about the offers made by Banks and Thompson, a possible move to London and the promise of funding for his work in galvanism. He also mentioned that he might not be collaborating further with Beddoes on therapeutic gases. The next day Davy left Bristol to take up his new post at the Royal Institution, it having been resolved 'that Humphry Davy be engaged in the service of the Royal Institution in the capacity of assistant lecturer in chemistry, director of the chemical laboratory, and assistant editor of the journals of the institution, and that he be allowed to occupy a room in the house, and be furnished with coals and candles, and that he be paid a salary of 100l. per annum.'", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 25 April 1801, Davy gave his first lecture on the relatively new subject of 'Galvanism'. He and his friend Coleridge had had many conversations about the nature of human knowledge and progress, and Davy's lectures gave his audience a vision of human civilisation brought forward by scientific discovery. \"It [science] has bestowed on him powers which may almost be called creative; which have enabled him to modify and change the beings surrounding him, and by his experiments to interrogate nature with power, not simply as a scholar, passive and seeking only to understand her operations, but rather as a master, active with his own instruments.\" The first lecture garnered rave reviews, and by the June lecture Davy wrote to John King that his last lecture had attendance of nearly 500 people. \"There was Respiration, Nitrous Oxide, and unbounded Applause. Amen!\"\nDavy revelled in his public status.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy's lectures included spectacular and sometimes dangerous chemical demonstrations along with scientific information, and were presented with considerable showmanship by the young and handsome man. \nDavy also included both poetic and religious commentary in his lectures, emphasizing that God's design was revealed by chemical investigations. Religious commentary was in part an attempt to appeal to women in his audiences. Davy, like many of his enlightenment contemporaries, supported female education and women's involvement in scientific pursuits, even proposing that women be admitted to evening events at the Royal Society.\nDavy acquired a large female following around London. In a satirical cartoon by Gillray, nearly half of the attendees pictured are female. His support of women caused Davy to be subjected to considerable gossip and innuendo, and to be criticized as unmanly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Davy's lecture series on Galvanism ended, he progressed to a new series on Agricultural Chemistry, and his popularity continued to skyrocket. By June 1802, after just over a year at the Institution and at the age of\u00a023, Davy was nominated to full lecturer at the Royal Institution of Great Britain. Garnett quietly resigned, citing health reasons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 1804 Davy became a Fellow of the Royal Society, over which he would later preside. He was one of the founding members of the Geological Society in 1807 and was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1810 and a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy was a pioneer in the field of electrolysis using the voltaic pile to split common compounds and thus prepare many new elements. He went on to electrolyse molten salts and discovered several new metals, including sodium and potassium, highly reactive elements known as the alkali metals. Davy discovered potassium in 1807, deriving it from caustic potash (KOH). Before the 19th century, no distinction had been made between potassium and sodium. Potassium was the first metal that was isolated by electrolysis. Davy isolated sodium in the same year by passing an electric current through molten sodium hydroxide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the first half of 1808, Davy conducted a series of further electrolysis experiments on alkaline earths including lime, magnesia, strontites and barytes. At the beginning of June, Davy received a letter from the Swedish chemist Berzelius claiming that he, in conjunction with Dr. Pontin, had successfully obtained amalgams of calcium and barium by electrolysing lime and barytes using a mercury cathode. Davy managed to successfully repeat these experiments almost immediately and expanded Berzelius' method to strontites and magnesia. He noted that while these amalgams oxidated in only a few minutes when exposed to air they could be preserved for lengthy periods of time when submerged in naphtha before becoming covered with a white crust.\nOn 30 June 1808 Davy reported to the Royal Society that he had successfully isolated four new metals which he named barium, calcium, strontium and magnium (later changed to magnesium) which were subsequently published in the \"Philosophical Transactions\". Although Davy conceded magnium was an \"undoubtedly objectionable\" name he argued the more appropriate name magnesium was already being applied to metallic manganese and wished to avoid creating an equivocal term.\nThe observations gathered from these experiments also led to Davy isolating boron in 1809.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chlorine was discovered in 1774 by Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele, who called it \"\"dephlogisticated marine acid\"\" (see phlogiston theory) and mistakenly thought it contained oxygen. Davy showed that the acid of Scheele's substance, called at the time oxymuriatic acid, contained no oxygen. This discovery overturned Lavoisier's definition of acids as compounds of oxygen. In 1810, chlorine was given its current name by Humphry Davy, who insisted that chlorine was in fact an element. The name chlorine, chosen by Davy for \"one of [the substance's] obvious and characteristic properties - its colour\", comes from the Greek \u03c7\u03bb\u03c9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (chl\u014dros), meaning green-yellow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy seriously injured himself in a laboratory accident with nitrogen trichloride. French chemist Pierre Louis Dulong had first prepared this compound in 1811, and had lost two fingers and an eye in two separate explosions with it. In a letter to John Children, on 16 November 1812, Davy wrote: \"It must be used with great caution. It is not safe to experiment upon a globule larger than a pin's head. I have been severely wounded by a piece scarcely bigger. My sight, however, I am informed, will not be injured\". Davy's accident induced him to hire Michael Faraday as a co-worker, particularly for assistance with handwriting and record keeping. He had recovered from his injuries by April 1813.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1812, Davy was knighted and gave up his lecturing position at the Royal Institution. He was given the title of Honorary Professor of Chemistry. He gave a farewell lecture to the Institution, and married a wealthy widow, Jane Apreece. (While Davy was generally acknowledged as being faithful to his wife, their relationship was stormy, and in later years he travelled to continental Europe alone.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy then published his \"Elements of Chemical Philosophy, part 1, volume 1\", though other parts of this title were never completed. He made notes for a second edition, but it was never required. \nIn October 1813, he and his wife, accompanied by Michael Faraday as his scientific assistant (also treated as a valet), travelled to France to collect the second edition of the \"prix du Galvanisme,\" a medal that Napoleon Bonaparte had awarded Davy for his electro-chemical work. Faraday noted that 'Tis indeed a strange venture at this time, to trust ourselves in a foreign and hostile country, where so little regard is had to protestations of honour, that the slightest suspicion would be sufficient to separate us for ever from England, and perhaps from life'. Davy's party sailed from Plymouth to Morlaix by cartel, where they were searched.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Upon reaching Paris, Davy was a guest of honour at a meeting of the First Class of the Institut de France and met with Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re and other French chemists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While in Paris, Davy attended lectures at the Ecole Polytechnique, including those by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac on a mysterious substance isolated by Bernard Courtois. Davy wrote a paper for the Royal Society on the element, which is now called iodine. This led to a dispute between Davy and Gay-Lussac on who had the priority on the research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy's party did not meet Napoleon in person, but they did visit the Empress Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais at the Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison. The party left Paris in December 1813, travelling south to Italy. They sojourned in Florence, where using the burning glass of the Grand Duke of Tuscany in a series of experiments conducted with Faraday's assistance, Davy succeeded in using the sun's rays to ignite diamond, proving it is composed of pure carbon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy's party continued to Rome, where he undertook experiments on iodine and chlorine and on the colours used in ancient paintings. This was the first chemical research on the pigments used by artists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He also visited Naples and Mount Vesuvius, where he collected samples of crystals. By June 1814, they were in Milan, where they met Alessandro Volta, and then continued north to Geneva. They returned to Italy via Munich and Innsbruck, and when their plans to travel to Greece and Istanbul were abandoned after Napoleon's escape from Elba, they returned to England.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the Battle of Waterloo, Davy wrote to Lord Liverpool urging that the French be treated with severity:", "qas": []}, {"context": "After his return to England in 1815, Davy began experimenting with lamps that could be used safely in coal mines. The Revd Dr Robert Gray of Bishopwearmouth in Sunderland, founder of the Society for Preventing Accidents in Coalmines, had written to Davy suggesting that he might use his 'extensive stores of chemical knowledge' to address the issue of mining explosions caused by firedamp, or methane mixed with oxygen, which was often ignited by the open flames of the lamps then used by miners. Incidents such as the Felling mine disaster of 1812 near Newcastle, in which 92 men were killed, not only caused great loss of life among miners but also meant that their widows and children had to be supported by the public purse. The Revd Gray and a fellow clergyman also working in a north-east mining area, the Revd John Hodgson of Jarrow, were keen that action should be taken to improve underground lighting and especially the lamps used by miners.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy conceived of using an iron gauze to enclose a lamp's flame, and so prevent the methane burning inside the lamp from passing out to the general atmosphere. Although the idea of the safety lamp had already been demonstrated by William Reid Clanny and by the then unknown (but later very famous) engineer George Stephenson, Davy's use of wire gauze to prevent the spread of flame was used by many other inventors in their later designs. George Stephenson's lamp was very popular in the north-east coalfields, and used the same principle of preventing the flame reaching the general atmosphere, but by different means. Unfortunately, although the new design of gauze lamp initially did seem to offer protection, it gave much less light, and quickly deteriorated in the wet conditions of most pits. Rusting of the gauze quickly made the lamp unsafe, and the number of deaths from firedamp explosions rose yet further.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There was some discussion as to whether Davy had discovered the principles behind his lamp without the help of the work of Smithson Tennant, but it was generally agreed that the work of both men had been independent. Davy refused to patent the lamp, and its invention led to his being awarded the Rumford medal in 1816.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1815 Davy suggested that acids were substances that contained replaceable hydrogen\u00a0ions;\u2013 hydrogen that could be partly or totally replaced by reactive metals which are placed above hydrogen in the reactivity series. When acids reacted with metals they formed salts and hydrogen gas. Bases were substances that reacted with acids to form salts and water. These definitions worked well for most of the nineteenth century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Humphry Davy experimented on fragments of the Herculaneum papyri before his departure to Naples in 1818. His early experiments showed hope of success. In his report to the Royal Society Davy writes that: \n'When a fragment of a brown MS. in which the layers were strongly adhered, was placed in an atmosphere of chlorine, there was an immediate action, the papyrus smoked and became yellow, and the letters appeared much more distinct; and by the application of heat the layers separated from each other, giving fumes of muriatic acid.'", "qas": []}, {"context": "The success of the early trials prompted Davy to travel to Naples to conduct further research on the Herculaneum papyri. Accompanied by his wife, they set off on 26 May 1818 to stay in Flanders where Davy was invited to by the coal miners. They then traveled to Carniola (now Slovenia) which proved to become 'his favourite Alpine retreat' before finally arriving in Italy. In Italy, they befriended Lord Byron in Rome and then went on to travel to Naples.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Initial experiments were again promising and his work resulted in 'partially unrolling 23 MSS., from which fragments of writing were obtained' but after returning to Naples on 1 December 1819 from a summer in the Alps, Davy complained that 'the Italians at the museum [were] no longer helpful but obstructive'. Davy decided to renounce further work on the papyri because 'the labour, in itself difficult and unpleasant, been made more so, by the conduct of the persons at the head of this department in the Museum'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1761 onwards, copper plating had been fitted to the undersides of Royal Navy ships, to protect the wood from attack by shipworms. However, the copper bottoms were gradually corroded by exposure to the salt water. Between 1820 and 1825, Davy, assisted by Michael Faraday, attempted to protect the copper by electrochemical means. He attached sacrificial pieces of zinc or iron to the copper, which provided cathodic protection to the host metal. It was discovered, however, that protected copper became foul quickly, i.e. pieces of weed and/or marine creatures became attached to the hull, which had a detrimental effect on the handling of the ship. The Navy Board approached Davy in 1822, asking for help. Davy conducted a number of tests in Portsmouth Dockyard, which led to the Navy Board adopting the use of Davy's \"protectors\". By 1824, it had become apparent that fouling of the copper bottoms was still occurring on the majority of protected ships. By the end of 1825, the Admiralty ordered the Navy Board to cease fitting the protectors to sea-going ships, and to remove those that had already been fitted. Davy's scheme was seen as a public failure, despite the fact that, as Frank A. J. L. James comments, \"The somewhat ironical problem ... was not that they were unsuccessful. They did after all preserve the copper as Davy said they would. The problem was that the protectors, on most ships, had a chemical side effect which provided nutrients for weeds, barnacles etc. thus fouling the ships\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Elections took place on St Andrew's Day and Davy was elected on 30 November 1820. Although he was unopposed, other candidates had received initial backing. These candidates embodied the factional difficulties that beset Davy's presidency and which eventually defeated him.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Society was in transition from a club for gentlemen interested in natural philosophy, connected with the political and social elite, to an academy representing increasingly specialised sciences. The previous president, Joseph Banks, had held the post for over 40 years and had presided autocratically over what David Philip Miller calls the \"Banksian Learned Empire\", in which natural history was prominent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Banks had groomed the engineer, author and politician Davies Gilbert to succeed him and preserve the status quo, but Gilbert declined to stand. Fellows who thought royal patronage was important proposed Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg (later Leopold I of Belgium), who also withdrew, as did the Whig Edward St Maur, 11th Duke of Somerset. Davy was the outstanding scientist but some fellows did not approve of his popularising work at the Royal Institution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The strongest alternative had been William Hyde Wollaston, who was supported by the \"Cambridge Network\" of outstanding mathematicians such as Charles Babbage and John Herschel, who tried to block Davy. They were aware that Davy supported some modernisation, but thought that he would not sufficiently encourage aspiring young mathematicians, astronomers and geologists, who were beginning to form specialist societies. Davy was only 41, and reformers were fearful of another long presidency.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his early years Davy was optimistic about reconciling the reformers and the Banksians. In his first speech as president he declared, \"I trust that, with these new societies, we shall always preserve the most amicable relations ... I am sure there is no desire in [the Royal Society] to exert anything like patriarchal authority in relation to these institutions\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy spent much time juggling the factions but, as his reputation declined in the light of failures such as his research into copper-bottomed ships, he lost popularity and authority. This was compounded by a number of political errors. In 1825 his promotion of the new Zoological Society, of which he was a founding fellow, courted the landed gentry and alienated expert zoologists. He offended the mathematicians and reformers by failing to ensure that Babbage received one of the new Royal Medals (a project of his) or the vacant secretaryship of the Society in 1826. In November 1826 the mathematician Edward Ryan recorded that: \"The Society, every member almost ... are in the greatest rage at the President's proceedings and nothing is now talked of but removing him.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the event he was again re-elected unopposed, but he was now visibly unwell. In January 1827 he set off to Italy for reasons of his health. It did not improve and, as the 1827 election loomed, it was clear that he would not stand again. He was succeeded by Davies Gilbert.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In January 1819, Davy was awarded a baronetcy. Although Sir Francis Bacon (also later made a peer) and Sir Isaac Newton had already been knighted, this was, at the time, the first such honour ever conferred on a man of science in Britain. This was followed a year later with the Presidency of the Royal Society.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Davy's laboratory assistant, Michael Faraday, went on to enhance Davy's work and would become the more famous and influential scientist. Davy is supposed to have even claimed Faraday as his greatest discovery. Davy later accused Faraday of plagiarism, however, causing Faraday (the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry) to cease all research in electromagnetism until his mentor's death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Of a sanguine, somewhat irritable temperament, Davy displayed characteristic enthusiasm and energy in all his pursuits. As is shown by his verses and sometimes by his prose, his mind was highly imaginative; the poet Coleridge declared that if he \"had not been the first chemist, he would have been the first poet of his age\", and Southey said that \"he had all the elements of a poet; he only wanted the art.\" In spite of his ungainly exterior and peculiar manner, his happy gifts of exposition and illustration won him extraordinary popularity as a lecturer, his experiments were ingenious and rapidly performed, and Coleridge went to hear him \"to increase his stock of metaphors.\" The dominating ambition of his life was to achieve fame; occasional petty jealousy did not diminish his concern for the \"cause of humanity\", to use a phrase often employed by him in connection with his invention of the miners' lamp. Careless about etiquette, his frankness sometimes exposed him to annoyances he might have avoided by the exercise of tact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to one of Davy's biographers, June Z. Fullmer, he was a deist.\nHe spent the last months of his life writing \"Consolations in Travel\", an immensely popular, somewhat freeform compendium of poetry, thoughts on science and philosophy. Published posthumously, the work became a staple of both scientific and family libraries for several decades afterward. Davy spent the winter in Rome, hunting in the Campagna on his fiftieth birthday. But on 20 February 1829 he had another stroke. After spending many months attempting to recuperate, Davy died in a hotel room in Geneva, Switzerland, on 29 May 1829.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He had wished to be buried where he died, but had also wanted the burial delayed in case he was only comatose. He refused to allow a post-mortem for similar reasons. But the laws of Geneva did not allow any delay and he was given a public funeral on the following Monday, in the Plainpalais Cemetery, outside the city walls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nSee Fullmer's work for a full list of Davy's articles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Humphry Davy's books are as follows:\nDavy also contributed articles on chemistry to \"Rees's Cyclop\u00e6dia\", but the topics are not known.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His collected works were published in 1839\u20131840:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hecate", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hecate or Hekate (; , \"Hek\u00e1t\u0113\") is a goddess in ancient Greek religion and mythology, most often shown holding a pair of torches or a key and in later periods depicted in triple form. She was variously associated with crossroads, entrance-ways, light, magic, witchcraft, knowledge of herbs and poisonous plants, ghosts, necromancy, and sorcery. She appears in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter and in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", where she is promoted strongly as a great goddess. The place of origin of her following is uncertain, but it is thought that she had popular followings in Thrace.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another word for hekate ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hecate was one of the main deities worshiped in Athenian households as a protective goddess and one who bestowed prosperity and daily blessings on the family. In the post-Christian writings of the Chaldean Oracles (2nd\u20133rd century CE) she was regarded with (some) rulership over earth, sea, and sky, as well as a more universal role as Saviour (Soteira), Mother of Angels and the Cosmic World Soul.\nRegarding the nature of her cult, it has been remarked, \"she is more at home on the fringes than in the center of Greek polytheism. Intrinsically ambivalent and polymorphous, she straddles conventional boundaries and eludes definition.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The etymology of the name \"Hecate\" (\u1f19\u03ba\u03ac\u03c4\u03b7, \"Hek\u00e1t\u0113\") is not known. Some suggestions derive the name from a Greek root: from \u1f11\u03ba\u03ce\u03bd \"willing\" (thus, \"she who works her will\" or similar), or from \u1f19\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 \"Hekatos\", an obscure epithet of Apollo interpreted as \"the far reaching one\" or \"the far-darter\", whence for the feminine form \"she that operates from afar\" or \"she that removes or drives off\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is the origin of the name `` hecate '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "R. S. P. Beekes rejected a Greek etymology and suggested a Pre-Greek origin. A possibility for foreign origin of the name may be \"Heqet\", name of an Egyptian goddess of fertility and childbirth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of an egyptian goddess ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 3, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In Early Modern English, the name was also pronounced disyllabically (as ) and sometimes spelled \"Hecat\". It remained common practice in English to pronounce her name in two syllables, even when spelled with final \"e\", well into the 19th century.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the modern english name for -rrb- ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The spelling \"Hecat\" is due to Arthur Golding's 1567 translation of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", and this spelling without the final E later appears in plays of the Elizabethan-Jacobean period.\nWebster's Dictionary of 1866 particularly credits the influence of Shakespeare for the then-predominant disyllabic pronunciation of the name.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate possibly originated among the Carians of Anatolia, the region where most theophoric names invoking Hecate, such as Hecataeus or Hecatomnus, the father of Mausolus, are attested, and where Hecate remained a Great Goddess into historical times, at her unrivalled cult site in Lagina. While many researchers favor the idea that she has Anatolian origins, it has been argued that \"Hecate must have been a Greek goddess.\" The monuments to Hecate in Phrygia and Caria are numerous but of late date.", "qas": []}, {"context": "William Berg observes, \"Since children are not called after spooks, it is safe to assume that Carian theophoric names involving \"hekat-\" refer to a major deity free from the dark and unsavoury ties to the underworld and to witchcraft associated with the Hecate of classical Athens.\" In particular, there is some evidence that she might be derived from the local sun goddesses (see also Arinna), based on similar attributes.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the local sun deities ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 7, 1)"}]}, {"context": "If Hecate's cult spread from Anatolia into Greece, it is possible it presented a conflict, as her role was already filled by other more prominent deities in the Greek pantheon, above all by Artemis and Selene. This line of reasoning lies behind the widely accepted hypothesis that she was a foreign deity who was incorporated into the Greek pantheon. Other than in the \"Theogony\", the Greek sources do not offer a consistent story of her parentage, or of her relations in the Greek pantheon: sometimes Hecate is related as a Titaness, and a mighty helper and protector of humans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shrines to Hecate were placed at doorways to both homes and cities with the belief that it would protect from restless dead and other spirits. Likewise, shrines to Hecate at three way crossroads were created where food offerings were left at the new moon to protect those who did so from spirits and other evils.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dogs were sacred to Hecate and associated with roads, domestic spaces, purification, and spirits of the dead. Dogs were also sacrificed to the road.\nThis can be compared to Pausanias' report that in the Ionian city of Colophon in Asia Minor a sacrifice of a black female puppy was made to Hecate as \"the wayside goddess\", and Plutarch's observation that in Boeotia dogs were killed in purificatory rites. Dogs, with puppies often mentioned, were offered to Hecate at crossroads, which were sacred to the goddess.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was a popular divinity, and her cult was practiced with many local variations all over Greece and Western Anatolia. However, she did not have many known sanctuaries or temples dedicated to her aside from her most famous temple in Lagina. There was a Temple of Hecate in Argolis: \"Over against the sanctuary of Eilethyia is a temple of Hekate [the goddess probably here identified with the apotheosed Iphigeneia], and the image is a work of Skopas. This one is of stone, while the bronze images opposite, also of Hekate, were made respectively by Polykleitos and his brother Naukydes.\" \nThere were also a shrine to Hecate in Aigina, where she was very popular:\nAside from her own temples, Hecate was also worshipped in the sanctuaries of other gods, where she was apparently sometimes given her own space. There was an area sacred to Hecate in the precincts of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, where the priests, \"megabyzi\", officiated. This sanctuary was called \"Hekatesion\" (Shrine of Hekate). Hecate was also worshipped in the Temple of Athena in Titane: \"In Titane there is also a sanctuary of Athena, into which they bring up the image of Koronis [mother of Asklepios] . . . The sanctuary is built upon a hill, at the bottom of which is an Altar of the Winds, and on it the priest sacrifices to the winds one night in every year. He also performs other secret rites [of Hekate] at four pits, taming the fierceness of the blasts [of the winds], and he is said to chant as well the charms of Medea.\"\nShe was most commonly worshipped in nature, where she had many natural sanctuaries. An important sanctuary of Hecate was a holy cave on the island of Samothrake called Zerynthos:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate's most important sanctuary was Lagina, a theocratic city-state in which the goddess was served by eunuchs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The temple is mentioned by Strabo:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lagina, where the famous temple of Hecate drew great festal assemblies every year, lay close to the originally Macedonian colony of Stratonikeia, where she was the city's patron. In Thrace she played a role similar to that of lesser-Hermes, namely a ruler of liminal regions,particularly gates, and the wilderness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was greatly worshipped in Byzantium. She was said to have saved the city from Philip II, warning the citizens of a night time attack by a light in the sky, for which she was known as \"Hecate Lampadephoros\". The tale is preserved in the Suda.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As Hecate Phosphorus (Venus) she is said to have lit the sky during the Siege of Philip II in 340, revealing the attack to its inhabitants. The Byzantines dedicated a statue to her as the \"lamp carrier.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Athenian Greeks honored Hekate during the Deipnon. In Greek, deipnon means the evening meal, usually the largest meal of the day. Hekate's Deipnon is, at its most basic, a meal served to Hekate and the restless dead once a lunar month during the new moon. The Deipnon is always followed the next day by the Noumenia, when the first sliver of moon is visible, and then the Agathos Daimon the day after that.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main purpose of the Deipnon was to honor Hekate and to placate the souls in her wake who \"longed for vengeance.\" A secondary purpose was to purify the household and to atone for bad deeds a household member may have committed that offended Hekate, causing her to withhold her favor from them. The Deipnon consists of three main parts: 1) the meal that was set out at a crossroads, usually in a shrine outside the entryway to the home 2) an expiation sacrifice, and 3) purification of the household.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was known by a number of bynames:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nHecate was generally represented as three-formed. This has been speculated as being connected with the appearance of the full moon, half moon, and new moon.\nAs a virgin goddess, she remained unmarried and had no regular consort, though some traditions named her as the mother of Scylla.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest Greek depictions of Hecate were not three-formed. Farnell states: \"The evidence of the monuments as to the character and significance of Hecate is almost as full as that of to express her manifold and mystic nature.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest known monument is a small terracotta found in Athens, with a dedication to Hecate, in writing of the style of the 6th century. The goddess is seated on a throne with a chaplet bound round her head; she is altogether without attributes and character, and the main historical value of this work, which is evidently of quite a general type and gets a special reference and name merely from the inscription, is that it proves the single shape to be her earlier form, and her recognition at Athens to be earlier than the Persian invasion.\nThe 2nd-century travel writer Pausanias stated that Hecate was first depicted in triplicate by the sculptor Alkamenes in the Greek Classical period of the late 5th century BCE which was placed before the temple of the Wingless Nike in Athens. Greek anthropomorphic conventions of art resisted representing her with three faces: a votive sculpture from Attica of the 3rd century BCE (\"illustration, left\"), shows three single images against a column; round the column of Hecate dance the Charites. Some classical portrayals show her as a triplicate goddess holding a torch, a key, serpents, daggers and numerous other items. Depictions of both a single form Hekate and triple formed, as well as occasional four headed descriptions continued throughout her history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Egyptian-inspired Greek esoteric writings connected with Hermes Trismegistus, and in magical papyri of Late Antiquity she is described as having three heads: one dog, one serpent, and one horse. In other representations her animal heads include those of a cow and a boar. Hecate's triplicity is elsewhere expressed in a more Hellenic fashion in the vast frieze of the great Pergamon Altar, now in Berlin, wherein she is shown with three bodies, taking part in the battle with the Titans. In the Argolid, near the shrine of the Dioscuri, Pausanias saw the temple of Hecate opposite the sanctuary of Eileithyia; He reported the image to be the work of Scopas, stating further, \"This one is of stone, while the bronze images opposite, also of Hecate, were made respectively by Polycleitus and his brother Naucydes, son of Mothon.\" (\"Description of Greece\" 2.22.7)", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the \"Argonautica\", a 3rd-century BCE Alexandrian epic based on early material, Jason placates Hecate in a ritual prescribed by Medea, her priestess: bathed at midnight in a stream of flowing water, and dressed in dark robes, Jason is to dig a round pit and over it cut the throat of an ewe, sacrificing it and then burning it whole on a pyre next to the pit as a holocaust. He is told to sweeten the offering with a libation of honey, then to retreat from the site without looking back, even if he hears the sound of footsteps or barking dogs. All these elements betoken the rites owed to a chthonic deity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 4th-century BCE marble relief from Crannon in Thessaly was dedicated by a race-horse owner.\nIt shows Hecate, with a hound beside her, placing a wreath on the head of a mare. She is commonly attended by a dog or dogs, and the most common form of offering was to leave meat at a crossroads. Images of her attended by a dog are also found at times when she is shown as in her role as mother goddess with child, and when she is depicted alongside the god Hermes and the goddess Kybele in reliefs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dogs were closely associated with Hecate in the Classical world. \"In art and in literature Hecate is constantly represented as dog-shaped or as accompanied by a dog. Her approach was heralded by the howling of a dog. The dog was Hecate's regular sacrificial animal, and was often eaten in solemn sacrament.\" The sacrifice of dogs to Hecate is attested for Thrace, Samothrace, Colophon, and Athens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It has been claimed that her association with dogs is \"suggestive of her connection with birth, for the dog was sacred to Eileithyia, Genetyllis, and other birth goddesses. Although in later times Hecate's dog came to be thought of as a manifestation of restless souls or demons who accompanied her, its docile appearance and its accompaniment of a Hecate who looks completely friendly in many pieces of ancient art suggests that its original signification was positive and thus likelier to have arisen from the dog's connection with birth than the dog's underworld associations.\" The association with dogs, particularly female dogs, could be explained by a metamorphosis myth in Lycophron: the friendly looking female dog accompanying Hecate was originally the Trojan Queen Hekabe, who leapt into the sea after the fall of Troy and was transformed by Hecate into her familiar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another metamorphosis myth explains why the polecat is also associated with Hecate. From Antoninus Liberalis:\n\"At Thebes Proitos had a daughter Galinthias. This maiden was playmate and companion of Alkmene, daughter of Elektryon. As the birth throes for Herakles were pressing on Alkmene, the Moirai (Fates) and Eileithyia (Birth-Goddess), as a favour to Hera, kept Alkmene in continuous birth pangs. They remained seated, each keeping their arms crossed. Galinthias, fearing that the pains of her labour would drive Alkmene mad, ran to the Moirai and Eleithyia and announced that by desire of Zeus a boy had been born to Alkmene and that their prerogatives had been abolished.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At all this, consternation of course overcame the Moirai and they immediately let go their arms. Alkmene\u2019s pangs ceased at once and Herakles was born. The Moirai were aggrieved at this and took away the womanly parts of Galinthias since, being but a mortal, she had deceived the gods. They turned her into a deceitful weasel (or polecat), making her live in crannies and gave her a grotesque way of mating. She is mounted through the ears and gives birth by bringing forth her young through the throat. Hekate felt sorry for this transformation of her appearance and appointed her a sacred servant of herself.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aelian told a different story of a woman transformed into a polecat: \"\"I have heard that the polecat was once a human being. It has also reached my hearing that Gale was her name then; that she was a dealer in spells and a sorceress (Pharmakis); that she was extremely incontinent, and that she was afflicted with abnormal sexual desires. Nor has it escaped my notice that the anger of the goddess Hekate transformed it into this evil creature. May the goddess be gracious to me: fables and their telling I leave to others.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athenaeus of Naucratis, drawing on the etymological speculation of Apollodorus of Athens, notes that the red mullet is sacred to Hecate, \"on account of the resemblance of their names; for that the goddess is \"trimorphos\", of a triple form\". The Greek word for mullet was \"trigle\" and later \"trigla\". He goes on to quote a fragment of verse \"O mistress Hecate, Trioditis / With three forms and three faces / Propitiated with mullets\". In relation to Greek concepts of pollution, Parker observes, \"The fish that was most commonly banned was the red mullet (\"trigle\"), which fits neatly into the pattern. It 'delighted in polluted things,' and 'would eat the corpse of a fish or a man'. Blood-coloured itself, it was sacred to the blood-eating goddess Hecate. It seems a symbolic summation of all the negative characteristics of the creatures of the deep.\" At Athens, it is said there stood a statue of Hecate \"Triglathena\", to whom the red mullet was offered in sacrifice. After mentioning that this fish was sacred to Hecate, Alan Davidson writes, \"Cicero, Horace, Juvenal, Martial, Pliny, Seneca and Suetonius have left abundant and interesting testimony to the red mullet fever which began to affect wealthy Romans during the last years of the Republic and really gripped them in the early Empire. The main symptoms were a preoccupation with size, the consequent rise to absurd heights of the prices of large specimens, a habit of keeping red mullet in captivity, and the enjoyment of the highly specialized aesthetic experience induced by watching the color of the dying fish change.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The frog, which was also the symbol of the similarly-named Egyptian goddess Heqet, has also become sacred to Hecate in modern Pagan literature, possibly due in part to its ability to cross between two elements.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In her three-headed representations, discussed above, Hecate often has one or more animal heads, including cow, dog, boar, serpent and horse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was closely associated with plant lore and the concoction of medicines and poisons. In particular she was thought to give instruction in these closely related arts. Apollonius of Rhodes, in the \"Argonautica\" mentions that Medea was taught by Hecate, \"I have mentioned to you before a certain young girl whom Hecate, daughter of Perses, has taught to work in drugs.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The goddess is described as wearing oak in fragments of Sophocles' lost play \"The Root Diggers\" (or \"The Root Cutters\"), and an ancient commentary on Apollonius of Rhodes' Argonautica (3.1214) describes her as having a head surrounded by serpents, twining through branches of oak.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The yew in particular was sacred to Hecate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was said to favor offerings of garlic, which was closely associated with her cult. She is also sometimes associated with cypress, a tree symbolic of death and the underworld, and hence sacred to a number of chthonic deities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A number of other plants (often poisonous, medicinal and/or psychoactive) are associated with Hecate. These include aconite (also called \"hecateis\"), belladonna, dittany, and mandrake. It has been suggested that the use of dogs for digging up mandrake is further corroboration of the association of this plant with Hecate; indeed, since at least as early as the 1st century CE, there are a number of attestations to the apparently widespread practice of using dogs to dig up plants associated with magic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate was associated with borders, city walls, doorways, crossroads and, by extension, with realms outside or beyond the world of the living. She appears to have been particularly associated with being 'between' and hence is frequently characterized as a \"liminal\" goddess. \"Hecate mediated between regimes\u2014Olympian and Titan\u2014but also between mortal and divine spheres.\" This liminal role is reflected in a number of her cult titles: \"Apotropaia\" (that turns away/protects); \"Enodia\" (on the way); \"Propulaia\"/\"Propylaia\" (before the gate); \"Triodia\"/\"Trioditis\" (who frequents crossroads); \"Kl\u00eaidouchos\" (holding the keys), etc.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This function would appear to have some relationship with the iconographic association of Hecate with keys, and might also relate to her appearance with two torches, which when positioned on either side of a gate or door illuminated the immediate area and allowed visitors to be identified. \"In Byzantium small temples in her honor were placed close to the gates of the city. Hecate's importance to Byzantium was above all as a deity of protection. When Philip of Macedon was about to attack the city, according to the legend she alerted the townspeople with her ever present torches, and with her pack of dogs, which served as her constant companions.\" This suggests that Hecate's close association with dogs derived in part from the use of watchdogs, who, particularly at night, raised an alarm when intruders approached. Watchdogs were used extensively by Greeks and Romans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cult images and altars of Hecate in her triplicate or trimorphic form were placed at three-way crossroads (though they also appeared before private homes and in front of city gates). In this form she came to be identified with the Roman goddess Diana Trivia (\"of the three ways\"). In what appears to be a 7th-century indication of the survival of cult practices of this general sort, Saint Eligius, in his \"Sermo\" warns the sick among his recently converted flock in Flanders against putting \"devilish charms at springs or trees or crossroads\", and, according to Saint Ouen would urge them \"No Christian should make or render any devotion to the deities of the trivium, where three roads meet...\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like Hecate, \"[t]he dog is a creature of the threshold, the guardian of doors and portals, and so it is appropriately associated with the frontier between life and death, and with demons and ghosts which move across the frontier. The yawning gates of Hades were guarded by the monstrous watchdog Cerberus, whose function was to prevent the living from entering the underworld, and the dead from leaving it.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate has been characterized as a pre-Olympian chthonic goddess. The first literature mentioning Hecate is the \"Theogony\" (c. 700 BCE) by Hesiod:\nAccording to Hesiod, she held sway over many things:\nHesiod's inclusion and praise of Hekate in the \"Theogony\" has been troublesome for scholars, in that he seems to hold her in high regard, while the testimony of other writers, and surviving evidence, suggests that this may have been the exception. One theory is that Hesiod's original village had a substantial Hekate following and that his inclusion of her in the \"Theogony\" was a way of adding to her prestige by spreading word of her among his readers. Another theory is that Hekate was mainly a household god and humble household worship could have been more pervasive and yet not mentioned as much as temple worship. In Athens Hekate, along with Zeus, Hermes, Hestia, and Apollo, were very important in daily life as they were the main gods of the household. However, it is clear that the special position given to Hekate by Zeus is upheld throughout her history by depictions found on coins depicting Hekate on the hand of Zeus as highlighted in more recent research presented by d'Este and Rankine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter (composed c. 600 BCE), Hekate is called the \"tender-hearted\", a euphemism perhaps intended to emphasize her concern with the disappearance of Persephone, when she assisted Demeter with her search for Persephone following her abduction by Hades, suggesting that Demeter should speak to the god of the sun, Helios. Subsequently, Hekate became Persephone's companion on her yearly journey to and from the realms of Hades; serving as a psychopomp. Because of this association, Hekate was one of the chief goddesses of the Eleusinian Mysteries, alongside Demeter and Persephone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Variations in interpretations of Hekate's role or roles can be traced in classical Athens. In two fragments of Aeschylus she appears as a great goddess. In Sophocles and Euripides she is characterized as the mistress of witchcraft and the Keres.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One surviving group of stories suggests how Hekate might have come to be incorporated into the Greek pantheon without affecting the privileged position of Artemis. Here, Hekate is a mortal priestess often associated with Iphigeneia. She scorns and insults Artemis, who in retribution eventually brings about the mortal's suicide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the earliest written source mentioning Hekate, Hesiod emphasized that she was an only child, the daughter of Perses and Asteria, the sister of Leto (the mother of Artemis and Apollo). Grandmother of the three cousins was Phoebe the ancient Titaness who personified the moon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In various later accounts, Hekate was described either as the daughter of (1) Deo (Demeter) and thus half-sister of Persephone, (2) daughter of Night, (3) Zeus and Asteria, or lastly of Aristaeus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate is the primary feminine figure in the \"Chaldean Oracles\" (2nd-3rd century CE), where she is associated in fragment 194 with a \"strophalos\" (usually translated as a spinning top, or wheel, used in magic) \"Labour thou around the Strophalos of Hecate.\" This appears to refer to a variant of the device mentioned by Psellus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Hellenistic syncretism, Hecate also became closely associated with Isis. Lucius Apuleius in \"The Golden Ass\" (2nd century) equates Juno, Bellona, Hecate and Isis:\nIn the syncretism during Late Antiquity of Hellenistic and late Babylonian (\"Chaldean\") elements, Hecate was identified with Ereshkigal, the underworld counterpart of Inanna in the Babylonian cosmography. In the Michigan magical papyrus (inv. 7), dated to the late 3rd or early 4th century CE, \"Hecate Ereschigal\" is invoked against fear of punishment in the afterlife.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Strmiska (2005) claimed that Hecate, conflated with the figure of Diana, appears in late antiquity and in the early medieval period as part of an \"emerging legend complex\" known as \"The Society of Diana\" associated with gatherings of women, the moon, and witchcraft that eventually became established \"in the area of Northern Italy, southern Germany, and the western Balkans.\" This theory of the Roman origins of many European folk traditions related to Diana or Hecate was explicitly advanced at least as early as 1807 and is reflected in etymological claims by early modern lexicographers from the 17th to the 19th century, connecting \"hag, hexe\" \"witch\" to the name of Hecate. Such derivations are today proposed only by a minority", "qas": []}, {"context": "A medieval commentator has suggested a link connecting the word \"jinx\" with Hecate: \"The Byzantine polymath Michael Psellus [...] speaks of a bullroarer, consisting of a golden sphere, decorated throughout with symbols and whirled on an oxhide thong. He adds that such an instrument is called a \"iunx\" (hence \"jinx\"), but as for the significance says only that it is ineffable and that the ritual is sacred to Hecate.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shakespeare mentions Hecate both before the end of the 16th century (A Midsummer Night's Dream, 1594-96), and just after, in Macbeth (1605): specifically, in the title character's \"dagger\" soliloquy: \"Witchcraft celebrates pale Hecate's offerings...\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1929, Lewis Brown, an expert on religious cults, connected the 1920s Blackburn Cult (also known as, \"The Cult of the Great Eleven,\") with Hecate worship rituals. He noted that the cult regularly practiced dog sacrifice and had secretly buried the body of one of its \"queens\" with seven dogs. Researcher Samuel Fort noted additional parallels, to include the cult's focus on mystic and typically nocturnal rites, its female dominated membership, the sacrifice of other animals (to include horses and mules), a focus on the mystical properties of roads and portals, and an emphasis on death, healing, and resurrection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a \"goddess of witchcraft\", Hecate has been incorporated in various systems of modern witchcraft, Wicca and Neopaganism, in some cases associated with the Wild Hunt of Germanic tradition, in others as part of a reconstruction of specifically Greek polytheism, in English also known as \"Hellenismos\". In Wicca, Hecate has in some cases become identified with the \"Crone\" aspect of the \"Triple Goddess\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hecate is also the namesake of the hundredth numbered asteroid, which was discovered by American astronomer James Craig Watson on July 11, 1868. Its adopted name alludes to it as being the hundredth named asteroid ('hekaton' being the Greek for 'hundred').", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Haematopoiesis", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Haematopoiesis (from Greek \u03b1\u1f37\u03bc\u03b1, \"blood\" and \u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd \"to make\"; also hematopoiesis in American English; sometimes also haemopoiesis or hemopoiesis) is the formation of blood cellular components. All cellular blood components are derived from haematopoietic stem cells.<ref name=\"Birbrair n/a\u2013n/a\"></ref> In a healthy adult person, approximately 10\u201310 new blood cells are produced daily in order to maintain steady state levels in the peripheral circulation.", "qas": [{"question": "what does greek mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside in the medulla of the bone (bone marrow) and have the unique ability to give rise to all of the different mature blood cell types and tissues. HSCs are self-renewing cells: when they differentiate, at least some of their daughter cells remain as HSCs, so the pool of stem cells is not depleted.This phenomenon is called asymmetric division. The other daughters of HSCs (myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells) can follow any of the other differentiation pathways that lead to the production of one or more specific types of blood cell, but cannot renew themselves. The pool of progenitors is heterogeneous and can be divided into two groups; long-term self-renewing HSC and only transiently self-renewing HSC, also called short-terms. This is one of the main vital processes in the body.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All blood cells are divided into three lineages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Granulopoiesis (or granulocytopoiesis) is haematopoiesis of granulocytes, except of mast cells which are granulocytes but with an extramedullar maturation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Megakaryocytopoiesis is haematopoiesis of megakaryocytes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In developing embryos, blood formation occurs in aggregates of blood cells in the yolk sac, called blood islands. As development progresses, blood formation occurs in the spleen, liver and lymph nodes. When bone marrow develops, it eventually assumes the task of forming most of the blood cells for the entire organism. However, maturation, activation, and some proliferation of lymphoid cells occurs in the spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes. In children, haematopoiesis occurs in the marrow of the long bones such as the femur and tibia. In adults, it occurs mainly in the pelvis, cranium, vertebrae, and sternum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In some cases, the liver, thymus, and spleen may resume their haematopoietic function, if necessary. This is called \"extramedullary haematopoiesis\". It may cause these organs to increase in size substantially. \nDuring fetal development, since bones and thus the bone marrow develop later, the liver functions as the main haematopoetic organ. Therefore, the liver is enlarged during development.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In some vertebrates, haematopoiesis can occur wherever there is a loose stroma of connective tissue and slow blood supply, such as the gut, spleen or kidney.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a stem cell matures it undergoes changes in gene expression that limit the cell types that it can become and moves it closer to a specific cell type (cellular differentiation). These changes can often be tracked by monitoring the presence of proteins on the surface of the cell. Each successive change moves the cell closer to the final cell type and further limits its potential to become a different cell type.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Two models for hematopoiesis have been proposed: determinism and stochastic theory. For the stem cells and other undifferentiated blood cells in the bone marrow, the determination is generally explained by the \"determinism\" theory of haematopoiesis, saying that colony stimulating factors and other factors of the haematopoietic microenvironment determine the cells to follow a certain path of cell differentiation. This is the classical way of describing haematopoiesis. In \"stochastic\" \"theory,\" undifferentiated blood cells differentiate to specific cell types by randomness. This theory has been supported by experiments showing that within a population of mouse haematopoietic progenitor cells, underlying stochastic variability in the distribution of Sca-1, a stem cell factor, subdivides the population into groups exhibiting variable rates of cellular differentiation. For example, under the influence of erythropoietin (an erythrocyte-differentiation factor), a subpopulation of cells (as defined by the levels of Sca-1) differentiated into erythrocytes at a sevenfold higher rate than the rest of the population. Furthermore, it was shown that if allowed to grow, this subpopulation re-established the original subpopulation of cells, supporting the theory that this is a stochastic, reversible process. Another level at which stochasticity may be important is in the process of apoptosis and self-renewal. In this case, the haematopoietic microenvironment prevails upon some of the cells to survive and some, on the other hand, to perform apoptosis and die. By regulating this balance between different cell types, the bone marrow can alter the quantity of different cells to ultimately be produced.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Red and white blood cell production is regulated with great precision in healthy humans, and the production of leukocytes is rapidly increased during infection. The proliferation and self-renewal of these cells depend on growth factors. One of the key players in self-renewal and development of haematopoietic cells is stem cell factor (SCF), which binds to the c-kit receptor on the HSC. Absence of SCF is lethal. There are other important glycoprotein growth factors which regulate the proliferation and maturation, such as interleukins IL-2, IL-3, IL-6, IL-7. Other factors, termed colony-stimulating factors (CSFs), specifically stimulate the production of committed cells. Three CSFs are granulocyte-macrophage CSF (GM-CSF), granulocyte CSF (G-CSF) and macrophage CSF (M-CSF). \nThese stimulate granulocyte formation and are active on either progenitor cells or end product cells.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Erythropoietin is required for a myeloid progenitor cell to become an erythrocyte. On the other hand, thrombopoietin makes myeloid progenitor cells differentiate to megakaryocytes (thrombocyte-forming cells).\nThe diagram to the right provides examples of cytokines and the differentiated blood cells they give rise to.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Growth factors initiate signal transduction pathways, which lead to activation of transcription factors. Growth factors elicit different outcomes depending on the combination of factors and the cell's stage of differentiation. For example, long-term expression of PU.1 results in myeloid commitment, and short-term induction of PU.1 activity leads to the formation of immature eosinophils. Recently, it was reported that transcription factors such as NF-\u03baB can be regulated by microRNAs (e.g., miR-125b) in haematopoiesis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first key player of differentiation from HSC to a multipotent progenitor (MPP) is transcription factor CCAAT-enhancer binding protein \u03b1 (C/EBP\u03b1). Mutations in C/EBP\u03b1 are associated with acute myeloid leukaemia. From this point, cells can either differentiate along the Erythroid-megakaryocyte lineage or lymphoid and myeloid lineage, which have common progenitor, called lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor. There are two main transcription factors. PU.1 for Erythroid-megakaryocyte lineage and GATA-1, which leads to a lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other transcription factors include Ikaros (B cell development), and Gfi1 (promotes Th2 development and inhibits Th1) or IRF8 (basophils and mast cells). Significantly, certain factors elicit different responses at different stages in the haematopoiesis. For example, CEBP\u03b1 in neutrophil development or PU.1 in monocytes and dendritic cell development. It is important to note that processes are not unidirectional: differentiated cells may regain attributes of progenitor cells.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An example is PAX5 factor, which is important in B cell development and associated with lymphomas. Surprisingly, pax5 conditional knock out mice allowed peripheral mature B cells to de-differentiate to early bone marrow progenitors. These findings show that transcription factors act as caretakers of differentiation level and not only as initiators.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mutations in transcription factors are tightly connected to blood cancers, as acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). For example, Ikaros is known to be regulator of numerous biological events. Mice with no Ikaros lack B cells, Natural killer and T cells. Ikaros has six zinc fingers domains, four are conserved DNA-binding domain and two are for dimerization. Very important finding is, that different zinc fingers are involved in binding to different place in DNA and this is the reason for pleiotropic effect of Ikaros and different involvement in cancer, but mainly are mutations associated with BCR-Abl patients and it is bad prognostic marker.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a decade now, the evidence is growing that HSC maturation follows a myeloid-based model instead of the 'classical' schoolbook dichotomy model. In the latter model, the HSC first generates a common myeloid-erythroid progenitor (CMEP) and a common lymphoid progenitor (CLP). The CLP produces only T or B cells. The myeloid-based model postulates that HSCs first diverge into the CMEP and a common myelo-lymphoid progenitor (CMLP), which generates T and B cell progenitors through a bipotential myeloid-T progenitor and a myeloid-B progenitor stage. The main difference is that in this new model, all erythroid, T and B lineage branches retain the potential to generate myeloid cells (even after the segregation of T and B cell lineages). The model proposes the idea of erythroid, T and B cells as specialized types of a prototypic myeloid HSC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hogmanay", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hogmanay (; ) is the Scots word for the last day of the year and is synonymous with the celebration of the New Year (Gregorian calendar) in the Scottish manner. It is normally followed by further celebration on the morning of New Year's Day (1 January) or, in some cases, 2 January\u2014a Scottish bank holiday.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the scots calendar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what day is the day of new year's day ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The origins of Hogmanay are unclear, but it may be derived from Norse and Gaelic observances. Customs vary throughout Scotland, and usually include gift-giving and visiting the homes of friends and neighbours, with special attention given to the first-foot, the first guest of the new year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The etymology of the word is obscure. The earliest proposed etymology comes from the 1693 \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\", which held that the term was a corruption of the Greek \"\" (), or \"holy month\". The three main modern theories derive it from a French, Norse or Gaelic root.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word is first recorded in a Latin entry in 1443 in the West Riding of Yorkshire as \"hagnonayse\". The first appearance in English came in 1604 in the records of Elgin, as \"hagmonay\". Subsequent 17th-century spellings include \"Hagmena\" (1677), \"Hogmynae night\" (1681), and \"Hagmane\" (1693) in an entry of the \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although \"Hogmanay\" is currently the predominant spelling and pronunciation, a number of variant spellings and pronunciations have been recorded, including:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nwith the first syllable variously being , , , or .", "qas": []}, {"context": "It may have been introduced to Middle Scots via French. The most commonly cited explanation is a derivation from the northern French dialectal word \"hoguinan\u00e9\", or variants such as \"hoginane\", \"hoginono\" and \"hoguinettes\", those being derived from 16th century Middle French \"aguillanneuf\" meaning either a gift given at New Year, a children's cry for such a gift, or New Year's Eve itself. Compare also the apparent Spanish cognate \"aguinaldo/aguilando\", with a suggested Latin derivation of \" \"in this year.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "This explanation is supported by a children's tradition, observed up to the 1960s in some parts of Scotland at least, of visiting houses in their locality on New Year's Eve and requesting and receiving small treats such as sweets or fruit. The second element would appear to be \" (the New Year), with some sources suggesting a druidical origin of the practice overall. Compare those to Norman \"hoguinan\u00e9\" and the obsolete customs in Jersey of crying \"ma hodg\u00eengnole\", and in Guernsey of asking for an \"oguinane\", for a New Year gift (see also La Guiannee). In Qu\u00e9bec, \"la guignol\u00e9e\" was a door-to-door collection for the poor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other suggestions include \"au gui mener\" (\"lead to the mistletoe\"), \"\u00e0 mener\" ('bring to the beggars'), \"au gui l'an neuf\" ('at the mistletoe the new year', or \"(l')homme est n\u00e9\" ('(the) man is born').", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word may have come from the Goidelic languages. Frazer and Kelley report a Manx new-year song that begins with the line \"To-night is New Year's Night, Hogunnaa\" but did not record the full text in Manx. Kelley himself uses the spelling \"Og-u-naa... Tro-la-la\" whereas other sources parse this as \"hog-un-naa\" and give the modern Manx form as \"Hob dy naa\". Manx dictionaries though give \"Hop-tu-Naa\" (), generally glossing it as \"Hallowe'en\", same as many of the more Manx-specific folklore collections.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this context it is also recorded that in the south of Scotland (for example Roxburghshire), there is no , the word thus being \"Hunganay\", which could suggest the is intrusive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another theory occasionally encountered is a derivation from the phrase \"thog mi an \u00e8igh/eugh\" (, \"I raised the cry\"), which resembles \"Hogmanay\" in pronunciation and was part of the rhymes traditionally recited at New Year but it is unclear if this is simply a case of folk etymology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Overall, Gaelic consistently refers to the New Year's Eve as \"Oidhche na Bliadhn(a) \u00d9ir(e)\" (\"the Night of the New Year\") and \"Oidhche Challainn\" (\"the Night of the Calends\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some authors reject both the French and Goidelic theories, and instead suggest that the ultimate source both for the Norman French, Scots, and Goidelic variants of this word have a common Norse root. It is suggested that the full forms\ninvoke the hill-men (Icelandic \"haugmenn\", cf Anglo-Saxon \"hoghmen\") or \"elves\" and banishes the trolls into the sea (Norse \"\u00e1 l\u00e6\" \"into the sea\"). Repp furthermore makes a link between \"Trollalay/Trolla-laa\" and the rhyme recorded in \"Percy's Relics\": \"Trolle on away, trolle on awaye. Synge heave and howe rombelowe trolle on away\", which he reads as a straightforward invocation of troll-banning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The roots of Hogmanay perhaps reach back to the celebration of the winter solstice among the Norse, as well as incorporating customs from the Gaelic celebration of Samhain. The Vikings celebrated Yule, which later contributed to the Twelve Days of Christmas, or the \"Daft Days\" as they were sometimes called in Scotland. Christmas was not celebrated as a festival and Hogmanay was the more traditional celebration in Scotland. This may have been a result of the Protestant Reformation after which Christmas was seen as \"too Papist\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many customs, both national and local, associated with Hogmanay. The most widespread national custom is the practice of first-footing, which starts immediately after midnight. This involves being the first person to cross the threshold of a friend or neighbour and often involves the giving of symbolic gifts such as salt (less common today), coal, shortbread, whisky, and black bun (a rich fruit cake), intended to bring different kinds of luck to the householder. Food and drink (as the gifts) are then given to the guests. This may go on throughout the early hours of the morning and well into the next day (although modern days see people visiting houses well into the middle of January). The first-foot is supposed to set the luck for the rest of the year. Traditionally, tall, dark-haired men are preferred as the first-foot.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An example of a local Hogmanay custom is the fireball swinging that takes place in Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire, in northeast Scotland. This involves local people making up \"balls\" of chicken wire filled with old newspaper, sticks, rags, and other dry flammable material up to a diameter of , each attached to about of wire, chain or nonflammable rope. As the Old Town House bell sounds to mark the new year, the balls are set alight and the swingers set off up the High Street from the Mercat Cross to the Cannon and back, swinging the burning balls around their heads as they go.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the end of the ceremony, any fireballs that are still burning are cast into the harbour. Many people enjoy this display, and large crowds flock to see it, with 12,000 attending the 2007/2008 event. In recent years, additional attractions have been added to entertain the crowds as they wait for midnight, such as fire poi, a pipe band, street drumming and a firework display after the last fireball is cast into the sea. The festivities are now streamed live over the Internet. \nAnother example of a pagan fire festival is the burning the clavie in the town of Burghead in Moray.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the east coast fishing communities and Dundee, first-footers once carried a decorated herring. And in Falkland in Fife, local men marched in torchlight procession to the top of the Lomond Hills as midnight approached. Bakers in St Andrews baked special cakes for their Hogmanay celebration (known as \"Cake Day\") and distributed them to local children.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Institutions also had their own traditions. For example, amongst the Scottish regiments, officers waited on the men at special dinners while at the bells, the Old Year is piped out of barrack gates. The sentry then challenges the new escort outside the gates: \"Who goes there?\" The answer is \"The New Year, all's well.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "An old custom in the Highlands \u2013 which has survived to a small extent and seen some degree of revival \u2013 is to celebrate Hogmanay with the \"saining\" (Scots for 'protecting, blessing') of the household and livestock. Early on New Year's morning, householders drink and then sprinkle 'magic water' from 'a dead and living ford' around the house (a 'dead and living ford' refers to a river ford that is routinely crossed by both the living and the dead). After the sprinkling of the water in every room, on the beds and all the inhabitants, the house is sealed up tight and branches of juniper are set on fire and carried throughout the house and byre. The juniper smoke is allowed to thoroughly fumigate the buildings until it causes sneezing and coughing among the inhabitants. Then all the doors and windows are flung open to let in the cold, fresh air of the new year. The woman of the house then administers 'a restorative' from the whisky bottle, and the household sits down to its New Year breakfast.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hogmanay custom of singing \"Auld Lang Syne\" has become common in many countries. \"Auld Lang Syne\" is a Scots poem by Robert Burns, based on traditional and other earlier sources. It is now common to sing this in a circle of linked arms that are crossed over one another as the clock strikes midnight for New Year's Day, though it is only intended that participants link arms at the beginning of the final verse, before rushing in to the centre as a group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Between 1957 and 1968, a New Year's Eve television programme, \"The White Heather Club\", was presented to herald in the Hogmanay celebrations.\nThe show was presented by Andy Stewart who always began by singing \"Come in, come in, it's nice to see you...\" The show always ended with Andy Stewart and the cast singing, \"Haste ye Back\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "The performers were Jimmy Shand and band, Ian Powrie and his band, Scottish country dancers: Dixie Ingram and the Dixie Ingram Dancers, Joe Gordon Folk Four, James Urquhart, Ann & Laura Brand, Moira Anderson & Kenneth McKellar. All the male dancers and Andy Stewart wore kilts, and the female dancers wore long white dresses with tartan sashes.\nFollowing the demise of the \"White Heather Club\", Andy Stewart continued to feature regularly in TV Hogmanay shows until his retirement. His last appearance was in 1992.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1980s comedian Andy Cameron presented the \"Hogmanay Show\" (on STV in 1983 and 1984 and from 1985 to 1990 on BBC Scotland) while Peter Morrison presented the show \"A Highland Hogmanay\" on STV/Grampian, axed in 1993.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For many years, a staple of New Year's Eve television programming in Scotland was the comedy sketch show \"Scotch and Wry\", featuring the comedian Rikki Fulton, which invariably included a hilarious monologue from him as the gloomy Reverend I.M. Jolly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1993, the programmes that have been mainstays on BBC Scotland on Hogmanay have been \"Hogmanay Live\" and Jonathan Watson's football-themed sketch comedy show, \"Only an Excuse?\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 1693 \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\" contained one of the first mentions of the holiday in official church records. Hogmanay was treated with general disapproval. Still, in Scotland Hogmanay and New Year's Day are as important as Christmas Eve and Christmas Day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although Christmas Day held its normal religious nature in Scotland amongst its Catholic and Episcopalian communities, the Presbyterian national church, the Church of Scotland, discouraged the celebration of Christmas for nearly 400 years; it only became a public holiday in Scotland in 1958. Conversely, 1 and 2 January are public holidays and Hogmanay still is associated with as much celebration as Christmas in Scotland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As in much of the world, the largest Scottish cities \u2013 Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen \u2013 hold all-night celebrations, as do Stirling and Inverness. The Edinburgh Hogmanay celebrations are among the largest in the world. Celebrations in Edinburgh in 1996\u201397 were recognised by the \"Guinness Book of Records\" as the world's largest New Years party, with approximately 400,000 people in attendance. Numbers were then restricted due to safety concerns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2003-4 most of the organised events were cancelled at short notice due to very high winds. The Stonehaven Fireballs went ahead as planned, however, with some 6,000 people braving the stormy weather to watch 42 fireball swingers process along the High Street. Similarly, the 2006\u201307 celebrations in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Stirling were all cancelled on the day, again due to high winds and heavy rain. The Aberdeen celebration, however, went ahead, and was opened by the pop music group, Wet Wet Wet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most Scots still celebrate New Year's Day with a special dinner, usually steak pie.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historically, presents were given in Scotland on the first Monday of the New Year. A roast dinner would be eaten to celebrate the festival. \"Handsel\" was a word for gift and hence \"Handsel Day\". In modern Scotland this practice has died out.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hamster", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hamsters are rodents (order Rodentia) belonging to the subfamily Cricetinae, which contains 18 species classified in seven genera. They have become established as popular small house pets. The best-known species of hamster is the golden or Syrian hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\"), which is the type most commonly kept as pets. Other hamster species commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster, Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus campbelli\"), the winter white dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus sungorus\") and the Roborovski hamster (\"Phodopus roborovskii\").", "qas": [{"question": "what are the three species of dwarf species ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 0, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Hamsters are more crepuscular than nocturnal and, in the wild, remain underground during the day to avoid being caught by predators. They feed primarily on seeds, fruits, and vegetation, and will occasionally eat burrowing insects. Physically, they are stout-bodied with distinguishing features that include elongated cheek pouches extending to their shoulders, which they use to carry food back to their burrows, as well as a short tail and fur-covered feet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the Syrian hamster or golden hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\") was first described scientifically by George Robert Waterhouse in 1839, researchers were not able to successfully breed and domesticate hamsters until 1939. The entire laboratory and pet populations of Syrian hamsters appear to be descendants of a single brother\u2013sister pairing. These littermates were captured and imported in 1930 from Aleppo in Syria by Israel Aharoni, a zoologist of the University of Jerusalem. In Jerusalem, the hamsters bred very successfully. Years later, animals of this original breeding colony were exported to the USA, where Syrian hamsters became a common pet and laboratory animal. Comparative studies of domestic and wild Syrian hamsters have shown reduced genetic variability in the domestic strain. However, the differences in behavioral, chronobiological, morphometrical, hematological, and biochemical parameters are relatively small and fall into the expected range of interstrain variations in other laboratory animals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The name \"hamster\" is a loanword from the German, which itself derives from earlier Middle High German \"hamastra\". It is possibly related to Old Church Slavonic \"khomestoru\", which is either a blend of the root of Russian \u0445\u043e\u043c\u044f\u043a (\"khomyak\") \"hamster\" and a Baltic word (cf. Lithuanian \"staras\" \"hamster\"); or of Persian origin (cf. Av \"hama\u0113star\" \"oppressor\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamsters are typically stout-bodied, with tails shorter than body length, and have small, furry ears, short, stocky legs, and wide feet. They have thick, silky fur, which can be long or short, colored black, grey, honey, white, brown, yellow, red, or a mix, depending on the species. Two species of hamster belonging to the genus \"Phodopus\", Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"P. campbelli\") and the Djungarian hamster (\"P. sungorus\"), and two of the genus \"Cricetulus\", the Chinese striped hamster (\"C. barabensis\") and the Chinese hamster (\"C. griseus\") have a dark stripe down their heads to their tails. The species of genus \"Phodopus\" are the smallest, with bodies long; the largest is the European hamster (\"Cricetus cricetus\"), measuring up to long, not including a short tail of up to .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The hamster tail can be difficult to see, as it is usually not very long (about 1/6 the length of the body), with the exception of the Chinese hamster, which has a tail the same length as the body. One rodent characteristic that can be highly visible in hamsters is their sharp incisors; they have an upper pair and lower pair which grow continuously throughout life, so must be regularly worn down. Hamsters are very flexible, but their bones are somewhat fragile. They are extremely susceptible to rapid temperature changes and drafts, as well as extreme heat or cold.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamsters have poor eyesight; they are nearsighted and colorblind. Hamsters have scent glands on their flanks (and abdomens in Chinese and dwarf hamsters) which they rub against the substrate, leaving a scent trail. Hamsters also use their sense of smell to distinguish between the sexes, and to locate food. They are also particularly sensitive to high-pitched noises and can hear and communicate in the ultrasonic range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamsters are omnivores. Although pet hamsters can survive on a diet of exclusively commercial hamster food, other items, such as vegetables, fruits, seeds, and nuts, can be given. Hamsters in the Middle East have been known to hunt in packs to find insects for food. Hamsters are hindgut fermenters and eat their own feces (coprophagy) to recover nutrients digested in the hindgut, but not absorbed.", "qas": [{"question": "what are hamsters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A behavioral characteristic of hamsters is food hoarding. They carry food in their spacious cheek pouches to their underground storage chambers. When full, the cheeks can make their heads double, or even triple in size.. Hamsters lose weight during the autumn months in anticipation of winter. This occurs even when hamsters are kept as pets and is related to an increase in exercise.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a physiological characteristic of hamsters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most hamsters are strictly solitary. If housed together, acute and chronic stress may occur, and they may fight fiercely, sometimes fatally. Dwarf hamster species may tolerate siblings or same-gender unrelated hamsters if introduced at an early enough age, but this cannot be guaranteed.", "qas": [{"question": "most hamsters are what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hamsters can be described as nocturnal or Crepuscular (active mostly at dawn and dusk). Khunen writes, \"Hamsters are nocturnal rodents who are active during the night...\", but others have written that because hamsters live underground during most of the day, only leaving their burrows for about an hour before sundown and then returning when it gets dark, their behavior is primarily crepuscular. Fritzsche indicated although some species have been observed to show more nocturnal activity than others, they are all primarily crepuscular.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the wild Syrian hamsters can hibernate and allow their body temperature to fall close to ambient temperature. This kind of thermoregulation diminishes the metabolic rate to about 5% and helps the animal to considerably reduce the need for food during the winter. Hibernation can last up to one week but more commonly last 2-3 days. When kept as house pets the Syrian hamster does not hibernate.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of hamster does not hibernate ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 11, 3)"}]}, {"context": "All hamsters are excellent diggers, constructing burrows with one or more entrances, with galleries connected to chambers for nesting, food storage, and other activities. They use their fore- and hindlegs, as well as their snouts and teeth, for digging. In the wild, the burrow buffers extreme ambient temperatures, offers relatively stable climatic conditions, and protects against predators. Syrian hamsters dig their burrows generally at a depth of 0.7 m. A burrow includes a steep entrance pipe (4\u20135\u00a0cm in diameter), a nesting and a hoarding chamber and a blind-ending branch for urination. Laboratory hamsters have not lost their ability to dig burrows; in fact, they will do this with great vigor and skill if they are provided with the appropriate substrate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wild hamsters will also appropriate tunnels made by other mammals; the Djungarian hamster, for instance, uses paths and burrows of the pika.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamsters become fertile at different ages depending on their species. Both Syrian and Russian hamsters mature quickly and can begin reproducing at a young age (4\u20135 weeks), whereas Chinese hamsters will usually begin reproducing at two to three months of age, and Roborovskis at three to four months of age. The female's reproductive life lasts about 18 months, but male hamsters remain fertile much longer. Females are in estrus about every four days, which is indicated by a reddening of genital areas, a musky smell, and a hissing, squeaking vocalisation she will emit if she believes a male is nearby.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When seen from above, a sexually mature female hamster has a trim tail line; a male's tail line bulges on both sides. This might not be very visible in all species. Male hamsters typically have very large testes in relation to their body size. Before sexual maturity occurs, it is more difficult to determine a young hamster's sex. When examined, female hamsters have their anal and genital openings close together, whereas males have these two holes farther apart (the penis is usually withdrawn into the coat and thus appears as a hole or pink pimple).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Syrian hamsters are seasonal breeders and will produce several litters a year with several pups in each litter. The breeding season is from April to October in the Northern Hemisphere, with two to five litters of one to 13 young being born after a gestation period of 16 to 23 days. Dwarf hamsters breed all through the year. Gestation lasts 16 to 18 days for Syrian hamsters, 18 to 21 days for Russian hamsters, 21 to 23 days for Chinese hamsters and 23 to 30 for Roborovski hamsters. The average litter size for Syrian hamsters is about seven pups, but can be as great as 24, which is the maximum number of pups that can be contained in the uterus. Campbell's dwarf hamsters tend to have four to eight pups in a litter, but can have up to 13. Winter white hamsters tend to have slightly smaller litters, as do Chinese and Roborovski hamsters.", "qas": [{"question": "what do winter white hamsters tend to have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 16, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Female Chinese and Syrian hamsters are known for being aggressive toward the male if kept together for too long after mating. In some cases, male hamsters can die after being attacked by the female. If breeding hamsters, separation of the pair after mating is recommended, or they will attack each other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Female hamsters are also particularly sensitive to disturbances while giving birth, and may even eat their own young if they think they are in danger, although sometimes they are just carrying the pups in their cheek pouches. If captive female hamsters are left for extended periods (three weeks or more) with their litter, they may cannibalize the litter, so the litter must be removed by the time the young can feed and drink independently.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamsters are born hairless and blind in a nest the mother will have prepared in advance. After one week, they begin to explore outside the nest. They are completely weaned after three weeks, or four for Roborovski hamsters.", "qas": [{"question": "how long does it take for 6 minutes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 19, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Syrian hamsters typically live no more than two to three years in captivity, and less in the wild. Russian hamsters (Campbell's and Djungarian) live about two to four years in captivity, and Chinese hamsters \u20133 years. The smaller Roborovski hamster often lives to three years in captivity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The best-known species of hamster is the golden or Syrian hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\"), which is the type most commonly kept as pets. There are numerous Syrian hamster variations including long-haired varieties and different colors. British zoologist Leonard Goodwin claimed most hamsters kept in the United Kingdom were descended from the colony he introduced for medical research purposes during the Second World War.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most commonly seen species of hamster ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Other hamsters commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster. Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus campbelli\") is the most common\u2014they are also sometimes called \"Russian dwarfs\"; however, many hamsters are from Russia, so this ambiguous name does not distinguish them from other species appropriately. The coat of the winter white dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus sungorus\") turns almost white during winter (when the hours of daylight decrease). The Roborovski hamster (\"Phodopus roborovskii\") is extremely small and fast, making it difficult to keep as a pet.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the three species of dwarf ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A hamster show is an event in which people gather hamsters to judge them against each other. Hamster shows are also places where people share their enthusiasm for hamsters among attendees. Hamster shows feature an exhibition of the hamsters participating in the judging.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an event in which people gather hamsters to do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 23, 0)"}, {"question": "what does hamster show ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 23, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The judging of hamsters usually includes a goal of promoting hamsters which conform to natural or established varieties of hamsters. By awarding hamsters which match standard hamster types, hamster shows encourage planned and careful hamster breeding.", "qas": [{"question": "what do hamster do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 24, 1)"}, {"question": "what is the goal of hamsters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Taxonomists generally disagree about the most appropriate placement of the subfamily Cricetinae within the superfamily Muroidea. Some place it in a family Cricetidae that also includes voles, lemmings, and New World rats and mice; others group all these into a large family called Muridae. Their evolutionary history is recorded by 15 extinct fossil genera and extends back 11.2 million to 16.4 million years to the Middle Miocene Epoch in Europe and North Africa; in Asia it extends 6 million to 11 million years. Four of the seven living genera include extinct species. One extinct hamster of \"Cricetus\", for example, lived in North Africa during the Middle Miocene, but the only extant member of that genus is the European or common hamster of Eurasia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nNeumann \"et al.\" (2006) conducted a molecular phylogenetic analysis of 12 of the above 17 species using DNA sequence from three genes: 12S rRNA, cytochrome b, and von Willebrand factor. They uncovered the following relationships:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The genus \"Phodopus\" was found to represent the earliest split among hamsters. Their analysis included both species. The results of another study suggest \"Cricetulus kamensis\" (and presumably the related \"C. alticola\") might belong to either this \"Phodopus\" group or hold a similar basal position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The genus \"Mesocricetus\" also forms a clade. Their analysis included all four species, with \"M. auratus\" and \"M. raddei\" forming one subclade and \"M. brandti\" and \"M. newtoni\" another.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The remaining genera of hamsters formed a third major clade. Two of the three sampled species within \"Cricetulus\" represent the earliest split. This clade contains \"C. barabensis\" (and presumably the related \"C. sokolovi\") and \"C. longicaudatus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The remaining clade contains members of \"Allocricetulus\", \"Tscherskia\", \"Cricetus\", and \"C. migratorius\". \"Allocricetulus\" and \"Cricetus\" were sister taxa. \"Cricetulus migratorius\" was their next closest relative, and \"Tscherskia\" was basal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some similar rodents sometimes called \"hamsters\" are not currently classified in the hamster subfamily Cricetinae. These include the maned hamster, or crested hamster, which is really the maned rat (\"Lophiomys imhausi\"). Others are the mouse-like hamsters (\"Calomyscus\" spp.), and the white-tailed rat (\"Mystromys albicaudatus\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "History of Finland", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The history of Finland begins around 9,000 BC during the end of the last glacial period. Stone Age cultures were Kunda, Comb Ceramic, Corded Ware, Kiukainen, and P\u00f6lj\u00e4 cultures. The Finnish Bronze Age started in approximately 1,500 BC and the Iron Age started in 500 BC and lasted until 1,300 AD. Finnish Iron Age cultures can be separated into Finnish proper, Tavastian, and Karelian cultures. The earliest written sources mentioning Finland start to appear from the 12th century onwards when the Catholic Church started to gain a foothold in Southwest Finland.", "qas": [{"question": "when does the history of finland begin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "when did the earliest written mention switzerland start to gain a foothold ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 0, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Due to the Northern Crusades and Swedish colonisation of some Finnish coastal areas, most of the region became a part of the Kingdom of Sweden and the realm of the Catholic Church from the 13th century onwards. After the Finnish War in 1809, the vast majority of the Finnish-speaking areas of Sweden were ceded to the Russian Empire (excluding the areas of modern-day Northern Sweden where Me\u00e4nkieli dialects of Finnish are spoken), making this area the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland. The Lutheran religion dominated. Finnish nationalism emerged in the 19th century. It focused on Finnish cultural traditions, folklore, and mythology, including music and\u2014especially\u2014the highly distinctive language and lyrics associated with it. One product of this era was the Kalevala, one of the most significant works of Finnish literature. The catastrophic Finnish famine of 1866\u20131868 was followed by eased economic regulations and extensive emigration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1917, Finland declared independence. A civil war between the Finnish Red Guards and the White Guard ensued a few months later, with the Whites gaining the upper hand during the springtime of 1918. After the internal affairs stabilized, the still mainly agrarian economy grew relatively quickly. Relations with the West, especially Sweden and Britain, were strong but tensions remained with the Soviet Union. During the Second World War, Finland fought twice against the Soviet Union, first defending its independence in the Winter War and then invading the Soviet Union in the Continuation War. In the peace settlement Finland ended up ceding a large part of Karelia and some other areas to the Soviet Union. However, Finland remained an independent democracy in Northern Europe.", "qas": [{"question": "in what country did estonia declare independence ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 2, 0)"}, {"question": "what country remained an independent democracy in northern europe ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 2, 6)"}]}, {"context": "In the latter half of its independent history, Finland has maintained a mixed economy. Since its post-World War II economic boom in the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita has been among the world's highest. The expanded welfare state of Finland from 1970 and 1990 increased the public sector employees and spending and the tax burden imposed on the citizens. In 1992, Finland simultaneously faced economic overheating and depressed Western, Russian, and local markets. Finland joined the European Union in 1995, and replaced the Finnish markka with the euro in 2002. According to a 2016 poll, 61% of Finns preferred not to join NATO.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If confirmed, the oldest archeological site in Finland would be the Wolf Cave in Kristinestad, in Ostrobothnia. The site would be the only pre-glacial (Neanderthal) site so far discovered in the Nordic Countries, and it is approximately 125,000 years old.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The last ice age in the area of the modern-day Finland ended c. 9000 BC. Starting about that time, people migrated to the area of Finland from the South and South-East. Their culture represented mixture of Kunda, Butovo, and Veretje cultures. At the same time, northern Finland was inhabited via the coast of Norway. The oldest confirmed evidence of the post-glacial human settlements in Finland are from the area of Ristola in Lahti and from Orimattila, from c. 8900 BC. Finland has been continuously inhabited at least since the end of the last ice age, up to the present. The earliest post-glacial inhabitants of the present-day area of Finland were probably mainly seasonal hunter-gatherers. Among finds is the net of Antrea, the oldest fishing net known ever to have been excavated (calibrated carbon dating: ca. 8300 BC).", "qas": [{"question": "when did the last ice age occur ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By 5300 BC, pottery was present in Finland. The earliest samples belong to the Comb Ceramic Cultures, known for their distinctive decorating patterns. This marks the beginning of the neolithic period for Finland, although subsistence was still based on hunting and fishing. Extensive networks of exchange existed across Finland and northeastern Europe during the 5th millennium BC. For example, flint from Scandinavia and the Valdai Hills, amber from Scandinavia and the Baltic region, and slate from Scandinavia and Lake Onega found their way into Finnish archaeological sites, while asbestos and soap stone from Finland (e.g. the area of Saimaa) were found in other regions. Rock paintings \u2014 apparently related to shamanistic and totemistic belief systems \u2014 have been found, especially in Eastern Finland, e.g. Astuvansalmi.\nBetween 3500 and 2000 BC, monumental stone enclosures colloquially known as Giant's Churches () were constructed in the Ostrobothnia region. The purpose of the enclosures is unknown.", "qas": [{"question": "in what country was pottery first found in the country ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In recent years, a dig in Kierikki site north of Oulu on River Ii has changed the image of Finnish neolithic stone age culture. The site has been inhabited around the year and has traded extensively. Kierikki culture is also seen as a subtype of Comb Ceramic culture. More of the site is excavated annually.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 3200 BC onwards, either immigrants or a strong cultural influence from south of the Gulf of Finland settled in southwestern Finland. This culture was a part of the European Battle Axe cultures, which have often been associated with the movement of the Indo-European speakers. The Battle Axe, or Cord Ceramic, culture seems to have practiced agriculture and animal husbandry outside of Finland, but the earliest confirmed traces of agriculture in Finland date later, approximately to the 2nd millennium BC. Further inland, the societies retained their hunting-gathering lifestyles for the time being.", "qas": [{"question": "where did the immigrants of estonia settle from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Battle Axe and Comb Ceramic cultures eventually merged, giving rise to the Kiukainen culture that existed between 2300 BC, and 1500 BC, and was fundamentally a comb ceramic tradition with cord ceramic characteristics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronze Age began some time after 1500 BC. The coastal regions of Finland were a part of the Nordic Bronze Culture, whereas in the inland regions the influences came from the bronze-using cultures of northern and eastern Russia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Iron Age in Finland is considered to last from c. 500 BC until c. 1300 AD when known official and written records of Finland become more common due to the Swedish invasions as part of the Northern Crusades in the 13th century. As the Finnish Iron Age lasted almost two millennia, it is further divided into six sub-periods:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Very few written records of Finland or its people remain in any language of the era. Primary written sources are thus mostly of foreign origin, most informative of which include Tacitus' description of \"Fenni\" in his \"Germania\", the sagas written down by Snorri Sturluson, as well as the 12th- and 13th-century ecclesiastical letters written for Finns. Numerous other sources from the Roman period onwards contain brief mentions of ancient Finnish kings and place names, as such defining Finland as a kingdom and noting the culture of its people.", "qas": [{"question": "where do most records of sweden remain in any language ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Currently the oldest known Scandinavian documents mentioning a \"land of the Finns\" are two runestones: S\u00f6derby, Sweden, with the inscription \"finlont\" (U 582), and Gotland with the inscription \"finlandi\" (G 319) dating from the 11th century. However, as the long continuum of the Finnish Iron Age into the historical Medieval period of Europe suggests, the primary source of information of the era in Finland is based on archaeological findings and modern applications of natural scientific methods like those of DNA analysis or computer linguistics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Production of iron during the Finnish Iron Age was adopted from the neighboring cultures in the east, west and south about the same time as the first imported iron artifacts appear. This happened almost simultaneously in various parts of the country.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Pre-Roman period of the Finnish Iron Age is scarcest in findings, but the known ones suggest that cultural connections to other Baltic cultures were already established. for which the findings of Pernaja and Savukoski provide solid argument. Many of the era's dwelling sites are the same as those of the Neolithic. Most of the iron of the era was produced on site.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Roman period brought along an influx of imported iron (and other) artifacts like Roman wine glasses and dippers as well as various coins of the Empire. During this period the (proto) Finnish culture stabilized on the coastal regions and larger graveyards become commonplace. The prosperity of the Finns rose to the level that the vast majority of gold treasures found within Finland date back to this period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Migration period saw the expansion of land cultivation inland, especially in Southern Bothnia, and the growing influence of Germanic cultures, both in artifacts like swords and other weapons and in burial customs. However most iron as well as its forging was of domestic origin, probably from bog iron.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Merovingian period in Finland gave rise to distinctive fine crafts culture of its own, visible in the original decorations of domestically produced weapons and jewelry. Finest luxury weapons were, however, imported from Western Europe. The very first Christian burials are from the latter part of this era as well. In the Lev\u00e4luhta burial findings the average height of a man was originally thought to be just 158\u00a0cm and that of a woman 147\u00a0cm. but the recent research has corrected these numbers upwards and has confirmed that the people buried in Lev\u00e4luhta were of average height for the era in Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Recent findings suggest that Finnish trade connections already became more active during the 8th century bringing an influx of silver onto Finnish markets. The opening of the eastern route to Constantinople via Finland's southern coastline archipelago brought Arabic and Byzantine artifacts into the excavation findings of the era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest findings of imported iron blades and local iron working appear in 500 BC. From about 50 AD, there are indications of a more intense long-distance exchange of goods in coastal Finland. Inhabitants exchanged their products, presumably mostly furs, for weapons and ornaments with the Balts and the Scandinavians as well as with the peoples along the traditional eastern trade routes. The existence of richly furnished burials, usually with weapons, suggests that there was a chiefly elite in the southern and western parts of the country. Hillforts spread over most of southern Finland at the end of the Iron and early Medieval Age. There is no commonly accepted evidence of early state formations in Finland, and the presumably Iron Age origins of urbanization are contested.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The question of the timelines for the evolution and the spreading of the current Finnish languages is controversial, and new theories challenging older ones have been introduced continuously.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is widely believed that Finno-Ugric (or Uralic) languages were first spoken in Finland and the adjacent areas during the Comb Ceramic period, around 4000 BC at the latest. During the 2nd millennium BC these evolved \u2014 possibly under an Indo-European (most likely Baltic) influence \u2014 into proto-Sami (inland) and Proto-Finnic (coastland). However, this theory has been increasingly contested among comparative linguists. It has been suggested instead that the Finno-Ugric languages arrived in the Gulf of Finland area much later, perhaps around 2000 BC or later in the Bronze Age, as result of an early Bronze Age Uralic language expansion possibly connected to the Seima-Turbino phenomenon. This would also imply that Finno-Ugric languages in Finland were preceded by a North-Western Indo-European language, at least to the extent the latter can be associated with the Cord Ceramic culture, as well as by hitherto unknown Paleo-European languages. The center of expansion for the Proto-Finnic language is posited to have been located on the southern coast of the Gulf of Finland. The Finnish language is thought to have started to differentiate during the Iron Age starting from the earliest centuries of the Common Era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cultural influences from a variety of places are visible in the Finnish archaeological finds from the very first settlements onwards. For example, archaeological finds from Finnish Lapland suggest the presence of the Komsa culture from Norway. The Sujala finds, which are equal in age with the earliest Komsa artifacts, may also suggest a connection to the Swiderian culture. Southwestern Finland belonged to the Nordic Bronze Age, which may be associated with Indo-European languages, and according to Finnish Germanist Jorma Koivulehto speakers of Proto-Germanic language in particular. Artifacts found in Kalanti and the province of Satakunta, which have long been monolingually Finnish, and their place names have made several scholars argue for an existence of a proto-Germanic speaking population component a little later, during the Early and Middle Iron Age.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Swedish colonisation of \u00c5land Islands, Turku archipelago and Uusimaa could possibly have started in 12th century but it was in its height in 13th and 14th century, when it also affected Eastern-Uusimaa and Pohjanmaa regions. The oldest Swedish place names in Finland are from this period as well as the Swedish-speaking population of Finland.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the oldest native place in estonia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 24, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Contact between Sweden and what is now Finland was considerable even during pre-Christian times; the Vikings were known to the Finns due to their participation in both commerce and plundering. There is possible evidence of Viking settlement in the Finnish mainland. The \u00c5land Islands probably had Swedish settlement during the Viking Period. However, some scholars claim that the archipelago was deserted during the 11th century.\nAccording to the archaeological finds, Christianity gained a foothold in Finland during the 11th century. According to the very few written documents that have survived, the church in Finland was still in its early development in the 12th century. Later medieval legends from late 13th century describe Swedish attempts to conquer and Christianize Finland sometime in the mid-1150s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early 13th century, Bishop Thomas became the first known bishop of Finland. There were several secular powers who aimed to bring the Finnish tribes under their rule. These were Sweden, Denmark, the Republic of Novgorod in northwestern Russia, and probably the German crusading orders as well. Finns had their own chiefs, but most probably no central authority. At the time there can be seen three cultural areas or tribes in Finland: Finns, Tavastians and Karelians. Russian chronicles indicate there were several conflicts between Novgorod and the Finnic tribes from the 11th or 12th century to the early 13th century.", "qas": [{"question": "who became the first bishop of sweden ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It was the Swedish regent, Birger Jarl, who allegedly established Swedish rule in Finland through the Second Swedish Crusade, most often dated to 1249. The Eric Chronicle, the only source narrating the \"crusade\", describes that it was aimed at Tavastians. Due to papal letter from 1237 Tavastians are known to stopped being Christian and returned to their old ethnic faith earlier. Novgorod gained control in Karelia in 1278, the region inhabited by speakers of Eastern Finnish dialects. Sweden however gained the control of Western Karelia with the Third Swedish Crusade in 1293. Western Karelians were from then on viewed as part of the western cultural sphere, while eastern Karelians turned culturally to Russia and Orthodoxy. While eastern Karelians remain linguistically and ethnically closely related to the Finns, they are considered a people of their own by most. Thus, the northern border between Catholic and Orthodox Christendom came to lie at the eastern border of what would become Finland with the Treaty of N\u00f6teborg in 1323.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 13th century, Finland was integrated into medieval European civilization. The Dominican order arrived in Finland around 1249 and came to exercise huge influence there. In the early 14th century, the first documents of Finnish students at Sorbonne appear. In the southwestern part of the country, an urban settlement evolved in Turku. Turku was one of the biggest towns in the Kingdom of Sweden, and its population included German merchants and craftsmen. Otherwise the degree of urbanization was very low in medieval Finland. Southern Finland and the long coastal zone of the Bothnian Gulf had a sparse farming settlements, organized as parishes and castellanies. In the other parts of the country a small population of Sami hunters, fishermen and small-scale farmers lived. These were exploited by the Finnish and Karelian tax collectors. During the 12th and 13th centuries, great numbers of Swedish settlers moved to the southern and northwestern coasts of Finland, to the \u00c5land Islands, and to the archipelago between Turku and the \u00c5land Islands. In these regions, the Swedish language is widely spoken even today. Swedish came to be the language of the upper class in many other parts of Finland as well.", "qas": [{"question": "when was sweden integrated into europe ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 28, 0)"}, {"question": "what language did estonia come to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 28, 11)"}]}, {"context": "The name \"Finland\" originally signified only the southwestern province that has been known as \"Finland Proper\" since the 18th century. First known mention of Finland is in runestone Gs 13 from 11th century. The original Swedish name for the realm's eastern part was \u00d6sterlands in plural, meaning the area of Finland proper, Tavastia and Karelia, but it was later transferred into singular form \u00d6sterland (lit. Eastern Land) which was in use between 1350\u20131470. In the 15th century Finland began to be used synonymously with \u00d6sterland. The concept of a Finnish \"country\" in the modern sense developed slowly from the 15th to 18th centuries.\nDuring the 13th century, the bishopric of Turku was established. The cathedral of Turku was the center of the cult of Saint Henry, and naturally the cultural center of the bishopric. The bishop had the ecclesiastical authority over much of today's Finland and was usually the most powerful man there. Bishops were often Finns, whereas the commanders in the castles were more often Scandinavian or German noblemen. In 1362, representatives from Finland were called to participate in the elections for the king of Sweden. As such, that year is often considered when Finland was incorporated into the Kingdom of Sweden. As in the Scandinavian part of the kingdom, the gentry or (lower) nobility consisted of magnates and yeomen who could afford armament for a man and a horse; these were concentrated in the southern part of Finland.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the name `` sweden '' become `` sweden proper '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The strong fortress of Viborg (Finnish: \"Viipuri\", Russian: \"Vyborg\") guarded the eastern border of Finland. Sweden and Novgorod signed the Treaty of N\u00f6teborg (\"P\u00e4hkin\u00e4saari\" in Finnish) in 1323, but that would not last long. In 1348 the Swedish king Magnus Eriksson staged a failed crusade against the Orthodox \"heretics\", managing only to alienate his supporters and ultimately lose his crown. The bones of contention between Sweden and Novgorod were the northern coastline of the Bothnian Gulf and the wilderness regions of Savo in Eastern Finland. Novgorod considered these as hunting and fishing grounds of its Karelian subjects, and protested against the slow infiltration of Catholic settlers from the West. Occasional raids and clashes between Swedes and Novgorodians occurred during the late 14th and 15th centuries, but for most of the time an uneasy peace prevailed.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the strong fortress of viborg ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the 1380s, a civil war in the Scandinavian part of Sweden brought unrest to Finland as well. The victor of this struggle was Queen Margaret I of Denmark, who brought the three Scandinavian kingdoms of Sweden, Denmark and Norway under her rule (the \"Kalmar Union\") in 1389. The next 130 years or so were characterized by attempts of different Swedish factions to break out of the Union. Finland was sometimes involved in these struggles, but in general the 15th century seems to have been a relatively prosperous time, characterized by population growth and economic development. Towards the end of the 15th century, however, the situation on the eastern border became more tense. The Principality of Moscow conquered Novgorod, preparing the way for a unified Russia, and from 1495\u20131497 a war was fought between Sweden and Russia. The fortress-town of Viborg stood against a Russian siege; according to a contemporary legend, it was saved by a miracle.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the civil war in estonia known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1521 the Kalmar Union collapsed and Gustav Vasa became the King of Sweden. During his rule, the Swedish church was reformed. The state administration underwent extensive reforms and development too, giving it a much stronger grip on the life of local communities\u2014and ability to collect higher taxes. Following the policies of the Reformation, in 1551 Mikael Agricola, bishop of Turku, published his translation of the New Testament into the Finnish language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1550 Helsinki was founded by Gustav Vasa under the name of Helsingfors, but remained little more than a fishing village for more than two centuries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "King Gustav Vasa died in 1560 and his crown was passed to his three sons in separate turns. King Erik XIV started an era of expansion when the Swedish crown took the city of Tallinn in Estonia under its protection in 1561. This action contributed to the early stages of the Livonian War which was a warlike era which lasted for 160 years. In the first phase, Sweden fought for the lordship of Estonia and Latvia against Denmark, Poland and Russia. The common people of Finland suffered because of drafts, high taxes, and abuse by military personnel. This resulted in the Cudgel War of 1596\u20131597, a desperate peasant rebellion, which was suppressed brutally and bloodily. A peace treaty (the Treaty of Teusina) with Russia in 1595 moved the border of Finland further to the east and north, very roughly where the modern border lies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An important part of the 16th-century history of Finland was growth of the area settled by the farming population. The crown encouraged farmers from the province of Savonia to settle the vast wilderness regions in Middle Finland. This was done, and the original Sami population often had to leave. Some of the wilderness settled was traditional hunting and fishing territory of Karelian hunters. During the 1580s, this resulted in a bloody guerrilla warfare between the Finnish settlers and Karelians in some regions, especially in Ostrobothnia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1611\u20131632 Sweden was ruled by King Gustavus Adolphus, whose military reforms transformed the Swedish army from a peasant militia into an efficient fighting machine, possibly the best in Europe. The conquest of Livonia was now completed, and some territories were taken from internally divided Russia in the Treaty of Stolbova. In 1630, the Swedish (and Finnish) armies marched into Central Europe, as Sweden had decided to take part in the great struggle between Protestant and Catholic forces in Germany, known as the Thirty Years' War. The Finnish light cavalry was known as the Hakkapeliitat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, the Swedish Empire was one of the most powerful countries in Europe. During the war, several important reforms had been made in Finland:\nHowever, the high taxation, continuing wars and the cold climate (the Little Ice Age) made the Imperial era of Sweden rather gloomy times for Finnish peasants. In 1655\u20131660, the Northern Wars were fought, taking Finnish soldiers to the battle-fields of Livonia, Poland and Denmark. In 1676, the political system of Sweden was transformed into an absolute monarchy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Middle and Eastern Finland, great amounts of tar were produced for export. European nations needed this material for the maintenance of their fleets. According to some theories, the spirit of early capitalism in the tar-producing province of Ostrobothnia may have been the reason for the witch-hunt wave that happened in this region during the late 17th century. The people were developing more expectations and plans for the future, and when these were not realized, they were quick to blame witches\u2014according to a belief system the Lutheran church had imported from Germany.", "qas": [{"question": "what country has great quantities of asphalt ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Empire had a colony in the New World in the modern-day Delaware-Pennsylvania area between 1638\u20131655. At least half of the immigrants were of Finnish origin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 17th century was an era of very strict Lutheran orthodoxy. In 1608, the law of Moses was declared the law of the land, in addition to secular legislation. Every subject of the realm was required to confess the Lutheran faith and church attendance was mandatory. Ecclesiastical penalties were widely used. The rigorous requirements of orthodoxy were revealed in the dismissal of the Bishop of Turku, Johan Terserus, who wrote a catechism which was decreed heretical in 1664 by the theologians of the Academy of \u00c5bo. On the other hand, the Lutheran requirement of the individual study of Bible prompted the first attempts at wide-scale education. The church required from each person a degree of literacy sufficient to read the basic texts of the Lutheran faith. Although the requirements could be fulfilled by learning the texts by heart, also the skill of reading became known among the population.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1696\u20131699, a famine caused by climate decimated Finland. A combination of an early frost, the freezing temperatures preventing grain from reaching Finnish ports, and a lackluster response from the Swedish government saw about one-third of the population die. Soon afterwards, another war determining Finland's fate began (the Great Northern War of 1700\u201321).", "qas": [{"question": "what caused a drought in 1696\u20131699, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 41, 0)"}, {"question": "when did the great northern war take place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 41, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The Great Northern War (1700\u20131721) was devastating, as Sweden and Russia fought for control of the Baltic. Harsh conditions\u2014worsening poverty and repeated crop failures\u2014among peasants undermined support for the war, leading to Sweden's defeat. Finland was a battleground as both armies ravaged the countryside, leading to famine, epidemics, social disruption and the loss of nearly half the population. By 1721 only 250,000 remained. Landowners had to pay higher wages to keep their peasants. Russia was the winner, annexing the south-eastern part, including the town of Viborg, after the Treaty of Nystad. The border with Russia came to lie roughly where it returned to after World War II. Sweden's status as a European great power was forfeit, and Russia was now the leading power in the North. The absolute monarchy was ended in Sweden. During this Age of Liberty, the Parliament ruled the country, and the two parties of the Hats and Caps struggled for control leaving the lesser Court party, i.e. parliamentarians with close connections to the royal court, with little to no influence. The Caps wanted to have a peaceful relationship with Russia and were supported by many Finns, while other Finns longed for revenge and supported the Hats.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Finland by this time was depopulated, with a population in 1749 of 427,000. However, with peace the population grew rapidly, and doubled before 1800. 90% of the population were typically classified as \"peasants\", most being free taxed yeomen. Society was divided into four Estates: peasants (free taxed yeomen), the clergy, nobility and burghers. A minority, mostly cottagers, were estateless, and had no political representation. Forty-five percent of the male population were enfranchised with full political representation in the legislature\u2014although clerics, nobles and townsfolk had their own chambers in the parliament, boosting their political influence and excluding the peasantry on matters of foreign policy.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the population of denmark in 1788 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 43, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The mid-18th century was a relatively good time, partly because life was now more peaceful. However, during the Lesser Wrath (1741\u20131742), Finland was again occupied by the Russians after the government, during a period of Hat party dominance, had made a botched attempt to reconquer the lost provinces. Instead the result of the Treaty of \u00c5bo was that the Russian border was moved further to the west. During this time, Russian propaganda hinted at the possibility of creating a separate Finnish kingdom.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both the ascending Russian Empire and pre-revolutionary France aspired to have Sweden as a client state. Parliamentarians and others with influence were susceptible to taking bribes which they did their best to increase. The integrity and the credibility of the political system waned, and in 1771 the young and charismatic king Gustav III staged a coup d'\u00e9tat, abolished parliamentarism and reinstated royal power in Sweden\u2014more or less with the support of the parliament. In 1788, he started a new war against Russia. Despite a couple of victorious battles, the war was fruitless, managing only to bring disturbance to the economic life of Finland. The popularity of King Gustav III waned considerably. During the war, a group of officers made the famous Anjala declaration demanding peace negotiations and calling of \"Riksdag\" (Parliament). An interesting sideline to this process was the conspiracy of some Finnish officers, who attempted to create an independent Finnish state with Russian support. After an initial shock, Gustav III crushed this opposition. In 1789, the new constitution of Sweden strengthened the royal power further, as well as improving the status of the peasantry. However, the continuing war had to be finished without conquests\u2014and many Swedes now considered the king as a tyrant.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the interruption of the Gustav III's war (1788\u20131790), the last decades of the 18th century had been an era of development in Finland. New things were changing even everyday life, such as starting of potato farming after the 1750s. New scientific and technical inventions were seen. The first hot air balloon in Finland (and in the whole Swedish kingdom) was made in Oulu (Ule\u00e5borg) in 1784, only a year after it was invented in France. Trade increased and the peasantry was growing more affluent and self-conscious. The Age of Enlightenment's climate of broadened debate in the society on issues of politics, religion and morals would in due time highlight the problem that the overwhelming majority of Finns spoke only Finnish, but the cascade of newspapers, belles-lettres and political leaflets was almost exclusively in Swedish\u2014when not in French.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the gustav war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 46, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The two Russian occupations had been harsh and were not easily forgotten. These occupations were a seed of a feeling of separateness and otherness, that in a narrow circle of scholars and intellectuals at the university in Turku was forming a sense of a separate Finnish identity representing the eastern part of the realm. The shining influence of the Russian imperial capital Saint Petersburg was also much stronger in southern Finland than in other parts of Sweden, and contacts across the new border dispersed the worst fears for the fate of the educated and trading classes under a Russian r\u00e9gime. At the turn of the 19th century, the Swedish-speaking educated classes of officers, clerics and civil servants were mentally well prepared for a shift of allegiance to the strong Russian Empire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "King Gustav III was assassinated in 1792, and his son Gustav IV Adolf assumed the crown after a period of regency. The new king was not a particularly talented ruler; at least not talented enough to steer his kingdom through the dangerous era of the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Meanwhile, the Finnish areas belonging to Russia after the peace treaties in 1721 and 1743 (not including Ingria), called \"Old Finland\" were initially governed with the old Swedish laws (a not uncommon practice in the expanding Russian Empire in the 18th century). However, gradually the rulers of Russia granted large estates of land to their non-Finnish favorites, ignoring the traditional landownership and peasant freedom laws of Old Finland. There were even cases where the noblemen punished peasants corporally, for example by flogging. The overall situation caused decline in the economy and morale in Old Finland, worsened since 1797 when the area was forced to send men to the Imperial Army. The construction of military installations in the area brought thousands of non-Finnish people to the region. In 1812, after the Russian conquest of Finland, \"Old Finland\" was rejoined to the rest of the country but the landownership question remained a serious problem until the 1870s.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the russian conquest take place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 49, 5)"}]}, {"context": "While the king of Sweden sent in his governor to rule Finland, in day to day reality the villagers ran their own affairs using traditional local assemblies (called the ting) which selected a local \"lagman\", or lawman, to enforce the norms. The Swedes used the parish system to collect taxes. The socken (local parish) was at once a community religious organization and a judicial district that administered the king's law. The ting participated in the taxation process; taxes were collected by the bailiff, a royal appointee.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In contrast to serfdom in Germany and Russia, the Finnish peasant was typically a freeholder who owned and controlled his small plot of land. There was no serfdom in which peasants were permanently attached to specific lands, and were ruled by the owners of that land. In Finland (and Sweden) the peasants formed one of the four estates and were represented in the parliament. Outside the political sphere, however, the peasants were considered at the bottom of the social order\u2014just above vagabonds. The upper classes looked down on them as excessively prone to drunkenness and laziness, as clannish and untrustworthy, and especially as lacking honor and a sense of national spirit. This disdain dramatically changed in the 19th century when everyone idealised the peasant as the true carrier of Finnishness and the national ethos, as opposed to the Swedish-speaking elites.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The peasants were not passive; they were proud of their traditions and would band together and fight to uphold their traditional rights in the face of burdensome taxes from the king or new demands by the landowning nobility. The great Cudgel War in the south in 1596\u20131597 attacked the nobles and their new system of state feudalism; this bloody revolt was similar to other contemporary peasant wars in Europe. In the north, there was less tension between nobles and peasants and more equality among peasants, due to the practice of subdividing farms among heirs, to non farm economic activities, and to the small numbers of nobility and gentry. Often the nobles and landowners were paternalistic and helpful. The Crown usually sided with the nobles, but after the \"restitution\" of the 1680s it ended the practice of the nobility extracting labor from the peasants and instead began a new tax system whereby royal bureaucrats collected taxes directly from the peasants, who disliked the efficient new system. After 1800 growing population pressure resulted in larger numbers of poor crofters and landless laborers and the impoverishment of small farmers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Finnish War between Sweden and Russia, Finland was again conquered by the armies of Tsar Alexander I. The four Estates of occupied Finland were assembled at the Diet of Porvoo on March 29, 1809 to pledge allegiance to Alexander I of Russia. Following the Swedish defeat in the war and the signing of the Treaty of Fredrikshamn on September 17, 1809, Finland remained a Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire until the end of 1917, with the czar as Grand Duke. Russia assigned Karelia (\"Old Finland\") to the Grand Duchy in 1812. During the years of Russian rule the degree of autonomy varied. Periods of censorship and political prosecution occurred, particularly in the two last decades of Russian control, but the Finnish peasantry remained free (unlike the Russian serfs) as the old Swedish law remained effective (including the relevant parts from Gustav III's Constitution of 1772). The old four-chamber Diet was re-activated in the 1860s agreeing to supplementary new legislation concerning internal affairs. In addition, Finns remained free of obligations connected to the empire, such as the duty to serve in tsarist armies, and they enjoyed certain rights that citizens from other parts of the empire did not have.", "qas": [{"question": "who conquered austria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 53, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Before 1860 overseas merchant firms and the owners of landed estates had accumulated wealth that became available for industrial investments. After 1860 the government liberalized economic laws and began to build a suitable physical infrastructure of ports, railroads and telegraph lines. The domestic market was small but rapid growth took place after 1860 in export industries drawing on forest resources and mobile rural laborers. Industrialization began during the mid-19th century from forestry to industry, mining and machinery and laid the foundation of Finland's current day prosperity, even though agriculture employed a relatively large part of the population until the post\u2013World War II era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The beginnings of industrialism took place in Helsinki. Alfred Kihlman (1825\u20131904) began as a Lutheran priest and director of the elite Helsingfors boys' school, the Swedish Normal Lyceum. He became a financier and member of the diet. There was little precedent in Finland in the 1850s for raising venture capital. Kihlman was well connected and enlisted businessmen and capitalists to invest in new enterprises. In 1869, he organized a limited partnership that supported two years of developmental activities that led to the founding of the Nokia company in 1871.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After 1890 industrial productivity stagnated because entrepreneurs were unable to keep up with technological innovations made by competitors in Germany, Britain and the United States. However, Russification opened up a large Russian market especially for machinery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Finnish national awakening in the mid-19th century was the result of members of the Swedish-speaking upper classes deliberately choosing to promote Finnish culture and language as a means of nation building, i.e. to establish a feeling of unity among all people in Finland including (and not of least importance) between the ruling elite and the ruled peasantry. The publication in 1835 of the Finnish national epic, the Kalevala, a collection of traditional myths and legends which is the folklore of the Karelian people (the Finnic Eastern Orthodox people who inhabit the Lake Ladoga-region of eastern Finland and present-day NW Russia), stirred the nationalism that later led to Finland's independence from Russia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Particularly following Finland's incorporation into the Swedish central administration during the 16th and 17th centuries, Swedish was spoken by about 15% of the population, especially the upper and middle classes. Swedish was the language of administration, public institutions, education and cultural life. Only the peasants spoke Finnish. The emergence of Finnish to predominance resulted from a 19th-century surge of Finnish nationalism, aided by Russian bureaucrats attempting to separate Finns from Sweden and to ensure the Finns' loyalty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1863, the Finnish language gained an official position in administration. In 1892 Finnish finally became an equal official language and gained a status comparable to that of Swedish. Nevertheless, the Swedish language continued to be the language of culture, arts and business all the way to the 1920s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Movements toward Finnish national pride, as well as liberalism in politics and economics involved ethnic and class dimensions. The nationalist movement against Russia began with the Fennoman movement led by Hegelian philosopher Johan Vilhelm Snellman in the 1830s. Snellman sought to apply philosophy to social action and moved the basis of Finnish nationalism to establishment of the language in the schools, while remaining loyal to the czar. Fennomania became the Finnish Party in the 1860s. \nLiberalism was the central issue of the 1860s to 1880s. The language issue overlapped both liberalism and nationalism, and showed some a class conflict as well, with the peasants pitted against the conservative Swedish-speaking landowners and nobles. As complications, the Finnish activists divided into \"old\" (no compromise on the language question and conservative nationalism) and \"young\" (liberation from Russia) Finns. The leading liberals were Swedish-speaking intellectuals who called for more democracy; they became the radical leaders after 1880. The liberals organized for social democracy, labor unions, farmer cooperatives, and women's rights.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nationalism was contested by the pro-Russian element and by the internationalism of the labor movement. The result was a tendency to class conflict over nationalism, but the early 1900s the working classes split into the Valpas (class struggle emphasis) and M\u00e4kelin (nationalist emphasis).", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the vast majority of Finns were Lutheran, there were two strains to Lutheranism that eventually merged to form the modern Finnish church. On the one hand was the high-church emphasis on ritual, with its roots in traditional peasant collective society. Paavo Ruotsalainen (1777\u20131852) on the other hand was a leader of the new pietism, with its subjectivity, revivalism, emphasis on personal morality, lay participation, and the social gospel. The pietism appealed to the emerging middle class. The Ecclesiastical Law of 1869 combined the two strains. Finland's political and Lutheran leaders considered both Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism to be threats to the emerging nation. Orthodoxy was rejected as a weapon of Russification, while anti-Catholicism was long-standing. Anti-Semitism was also a factor, so the Dissenter Law of 1889 upgraded the status only of the minor Protestant sects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before 1790 music was found in Lutheran churches and in folk traditions. In 1790 music lovers founded the \u00c5bo Musical Society; it gave the first major stimulus to serious music by Finnish composers. In the 1880s, new institutions, especially the Helsinki Music Institute (since 1939 called the Sibelius Academy), the Institute of Music of Helsinki University and the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra, integrated Finland into the mainstream of European music. By far the most influential composer was Jean Sibelius (1865\u20131957); he composed nearly all his music before 1930. In April 1892 Sibelius presented his new symphony 'Kullervo' in Helsinki. It featured poetry from the \"Kalevala,\" and was celebrated by critics as truly Finnish music.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Upper and upper middle class women took the lead in the deaconess movement in Finland. Coordinated by the Lutheran church, the women undertook local charitable social work to ameliorate harsh living conditions created by peasants adjusting to city life. They promoted nursing as a suitable profession for respectable women. Their efforts helped redefine the complex relationship between private charities and the traditional state and church responsibility for social welfare. Because they volunteered without pay and emphasized motherhood and nurturing as moral values for women, they contributed to the entrenchment of what in the 20th century became widespread gender roles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite certain freedoms granted to Finland, the Grand Duchy was not a democratic state. The tsar retained supreme power and ruled through the highest official in the land, the governor general, almost always a Russian \nofficer. Alexander dissolved the Diet of the Four Estates shortly after convening it in 1809, and it did not meet again for half a century. The tsar's actions were in accordance with the royalist constitution Finland had inherited from Sweden. The Finns had no guarantees of liberty, but depended on the tsar's goodwill for any freedoms they enjoyed. When Alexander II, the Tsar Liberator, convened the Diet again in 1863, he did so not to fulfill any obligation but to meet growing pressures for reform within the empire as a whole. In the remaining decades of the century, the Diet enacted numerous legislative measures that modernized Finland's system of law, made its public administration more efficient, removed obstacles to commerce, and prepared the ground for the country's independence in the next century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The policy of Russification of Finland (1899\u20131905 and 1908\u20131917, called \"sortokaudet/sortovuodet\" (times/years of oppression) in Finnish) was the policy of the Russian czars designed to limit the special status of the Grand Duchy of Finland and more fully integrate it politically, militarily, and culturally into the empire. Finns were strongly opposed and fought back by passive resistance and a strengthening of Finnish cultural identity. Key provisions were, first, the \"February Manifesto of 1899\" which asserted the imperial government's right to rule Finland without the consent of local legislative bodies; second, the \"Language Manifesto of 1900\" which made Russian the language of administration of Finland; and third, the conscription law of 1901 which incorporated the Finnish army into the imperial army and sent conscripts away to Russian training camps.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1906, as a result of the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the associated Finnish general strike of 1905, the old four-chamber Diet was replaced by a unicameral Parliament of Finland \"(the \"\").\" For the first time in Europe, universal suffrage (right to vote) and eligibility was implemented to include women: Finnish women were the first in Europe to gain full eligibility to vote; and have membership in an estate; land ownership or inherited titles were no longer required.\nHowever, on the local level things were different, as in the municipal elections the number of votes was tied to amount of tax paid. Thus, rich people could cast a number of votes, while the poor perhaps none at all. The municipal voting system was changed to universal suffrage in 1917\nwhen a left-wing majority was elected to Parliament.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the old four-chamber diet replaced by ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 67, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Emigration was especially important 1890\u20131914, with many young men and some families headed to Finnish settlements in the United States, and also to Canada. They typically worked in lumbering and mining, and many were active in Marxist causes on the one hand, or the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America on the other. In the 21st century about 700,000 Americans and 140,000 Canadians claim Finnish ancestry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 2000 about 6% of the population spoke Swedish as their first language, or 300,000 people. However, since the late 20th century there has been a steady migration of older, better educated Swedish speakers to Sweden.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the aftermath of the February Revolution in Russia, Finland received a new Senate, and a coalition Cabinet with the same power distribution as the Finnish Parliament. Based on the general election in 1916, the Social Democrats had a small majority, and the Social Democrat Oskari Tokoi became prime minister. The new Senate was willing to cooperate with the Provisional government of Russia, but no agreement was reached. Finland considered the personal union with Russia to be over after the dethroning of the Tsar\u2014although the Finns had \"de facto\" recognized the Provisional government as the Tsar's successor by accepting its authority to appoint a new Governor General and Senate. They expected the Tsar's authority to be transferred to Finland's Parliament, which the Provisional government refused, suggesting instead that the question should be settled by the Russian Constituent Assembly.", "qas": [{"question": "in the aftermath of the october revolution , which country had a new senate ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 70, 0)"}]}, {"context": "For the Finnish Social Democrats it seemed as though the bourgeoisie was an obstacle on Finland's road to independence as well as on the proletariat's road to power. The non-Socialists in Tokoi's Senate were, however, more confident. They, and most of the non-Socialists in the Parliament, rejected the Social Democrats' proposal on parliamentarism (the so-called \"Power Act\") as being too far-reaching and provocative. The act restricted Russia's influence on domestic Finnish matters, but didn't touch the Russian government's power on matters of defence and foreign affairs. For the Russian Provisional government this was, however, far too radical, exceeding the Parliament's authority, and so the Provisional government dissolved the Parliament.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The minority of the Parliament, and of the Senate, were content. New elections promised a chance for them to gain a majority, which they were convinced would improve the chances to reach an understanding with Russia. The non-Socialists were also inclined to cooperate with the Russian Provisional government because they feared the Social Democrats' power would grow, resulting in radical reforms, such as equal suffrage in municipal elections, or a land reform. The majority had the completely opposite opinion. They didn't accept the Provisional government's right to dissolve the Parliament.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Social Democrats held on to the Power Act and opposed the promulgation of the decree of dissolution of the Parliament, whereas the non-Socialists voted for promulgating it. The disagreement over the Power Act led to the Social Democrats leaving the Senate. When the Parliament met again after the summer recess in August 1917, only the groups supporting the Power Act were present. Russian troops took possession of the chamber, the Parliament was dissolved, and new elections were held. The result was a (small) non-Socialist majority and a purely non-Socialist Senate. The suppression of the Power Act, and the cooperation between Finnish non-Socialists and Russia provoked great bitterness among the Socialists, and had resulted in dozens of politically motivated attacks and murders.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The October Revolution of 1917 turned Finnish politics upside down. Now, the new non-Socialist majority of the Parliament desired total independence, and the Socialists came gradually to view Soviet Russia as an example to follow. On November 15, 1917, the Bolsheviks declared a general right of self-determination \"for the Peoples of Russia\", including the right of complete secession. On the same day the Finnish Parliament issued a declaration by which it temporarily took power in Finland.", "qas": [{"question": "who issued a declaration that ended power in estonia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 74, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Worried by developments in Russia and Finland, the non-Socialist Senate proposed that Parliament declare Finland's independence, which was voted by the Parliament on December 6, 1917. On December 18 (December 31 N. S.) the Soviet government issued a Decree, recognizing Finland's independence, and on December 22 (January 4, 1918 N. S.) it was approved by the highest Soviet executive body (VTsIK). Germany and the Scandinavian countries followed without delay.", "qas": [{"question": "who voted that parliament declared finland's independence ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 75, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Finland after 1917 was bitterly divided along social lines. The Whites consisted of the Swedish-speaking middle and upper classes and the farmers and peasantry who dominated the northern two-thirds of the land. They had a conservative outlook and rejected socialism. The Socialist-Communist Reds comprised the Finnish-speaking urban workers and the landless rural cottagers. They had a radical outlook and rejected capitalism.", "qas": [{"question": "what happened to estonia after 1918 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 76, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From January to May 1918, Finland experienced the brief but bitter Finnish Civil War. On one side there were the \"white\" civil guards, who fought for the anti-Socialists. On the other side were the Red Guards, which consisted of workers and tenant farmers. The latter proclaimed a Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic. World War I was still underway and the defeat of the Red Guards was achieved with support from Imperial Germany, while Sweden remained neutral and Russia withdrew its forces. The Reds lost the war and the White peasantry rose to political leadership in the 1920s\u20131930s. About 37,000 men died, most of them in prisoner camps ravaged by influenza and other diseases.", "qas": [{"question": "when did estonia experience a long finnish civil war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 77, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After the civil war the parliament, controlled by the Whites, voted to establish a constitutional monarchy to be called the \"Kingdom of Finland\", with a German prince as king. However, Germany's defeat in November 1918 made the plan impossible and Finland instead became a republic, with Kaarlo Juho St\u00e5hlberg elected as its first President in 1919. Despite the bitter civil war, and repeated threats from fascist movements, Finland became and remained a capitalist democracy under the rule of law. By contrast, nearby Estonia, in similar circumstances but without a civil war, started as a democracy and was turned into a dictatorship in 1934.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Large scale agrarian reform in the 1920s involved breaking up the large estates controlled by the old nobility and selling the land to ambitious peasants. The farmers became strong supporters of the government.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The new republic faced a dispute over the \u00c5land Islands, which were overwhelmingly Swedish-speaking and sought retrocession to Sweden. However, as Finland was not willing to cede the islands, they were offered an autonomous status. Nevertheless, the residents did not approve the offer, and the dispute over the islands was submitted to the League of Nations. The League decided that Finland should retain sovereignty over the \u00c5land Islands, but they should be made an autonomous province. Thus Finland was under an obligation to ensure the residents of the \u00c5land Islands a right to maintain the Swedish language, as well as their own culture and local traditions. At the same time, an international treaty was concluded on the neutral status of \u00c5land, under which it was prohibited to place military headquarters or forces on the islands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alcohol abuse had a long history, especially regarding binge drinking and public intoxication, which became a crime in 1733. In the 19th century the punishments became stiffer and stiffer, but the problem persisted. A strong abstinence movement emerged that cut consumption in half from the 1880s to the 1910s, and gave Finland the lowest drinking rate in Europe. Four attempts at instituting prohibition of alcohol during the Grand Duchy period were rejected by the czar; with the czar gone Finland enacted prohibition in 1919. Smuggling emerged and enforcement was slipshod. Criminal convictions for drunkenness went up by 500%, and violence and crime rates soared. Public opinion turned against the law, and a national plebiscite went 70% for repeal, so prohibition was ended in early 1932.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nationalist sentiment remaining from the Civil War developed into the proto-Fascist Lapua Movement in 1929. Initially the movement gained widespread support among anti-Communist Finns, but following a failed coup attempt in 1932 it was banned and its leaders imprisoned.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the wake of the Civil War there were many incidents along the border between Finland and Soviet Russia, such as the Aunus expedition and the Pork mutiny. Relations with the Soviets were improved after the Treaty of Tartu in 1920, in which Finland gained Petsamo, but gave up its claims on East Karelia.", "qas": [{"question": "along with russia and soviet russia , what other countries were notable in the civil war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 83, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Tens of thousands of radical Finns\u2014from Finland, the United States and Canada\u2014took up Stalin's 1923 appeal to create a new Soviet society in the Karelian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (KASSR), a part of Russia.\nMost were executed in the purges of the 1930s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Soviet Union started to tighten its policy against Finland in the 1930s, limiting the navigation of Finnish merchant ships between Lake Ladoga and the Gulf of Finland and blocking it totally in 1937.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the soviet union begin to tighten its policy against austria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 85, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the Second World War, Finland fought two wars against the Soviet Union: the Winter War of 1939\u20131940, resulting in the loss of Finnish Karelia, and the Continuation War of 1941\u20131944 (with considerable support from Nazi Germany resulting in a swift invasion of neighboring areas of the Soviet Union), eventually leading to the loss of Finland's only ice-free winter harbour Petsamo. The Continuation War was, in accordance with the armistice conditions, immediately followed by the Lapland War of 1944\u20131945, when Finland fought the Germans to force them to withdraw from northern Finland back into Norway (then under German occupation). Finland was not occupied; its army of over 600,000 soldiers, saw only 3,500 prisoners-of-war. About 96,000 Finns lost their lives, or 2.5% of a population of 3.8 million; civilian casualties were under 2,500.", "qas": [{"question": "which war did estonia fight in the winter war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 86, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In August 1939 Nazi-Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, where Finland and the Baltic states were given to the Soviet \"sphere of influence\". After the Invasion of Poland, the Soviet Union sent ultimatums to the Baltic countries, where it demanded military bases on their soil. The Baltic states accepted Soviet demands, and lost their independence in the summer of 1940. In October 1939, the Soviet Union sent the same kind of request to Finland, but the Finns refused to give any land areas or military bases for the usage of the Red Army. This caused the Soviet Union to start a military invasion against Finland on 30 November 1939. Soviet leaders predicted that Finland would be conquered in a couple of weeks. However, even though the Red Army had huge superiority in men, tanks, guns and airplanes, the Finns were able to defend their country for about 3.5 months and still avoid invasion successfully. The Winter War ended on 13 March 1940 with the Moscow peace treaty, in which Finland lost the Karelian Isthmus to the Soviet Union. The Winter War was a big loss of prestige for the Soviet Union, and it was expelled from the League of Nations because of the illegal attack. Finland received lots of international goodwill and material help from many countries during the war.", "qas": [{"question": "who signed the agreement with estonia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 87, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After the Winter War the Finnish army was exhausted, and needed recovery and support as soon as possible. The British declined to help but in autumn 1940 Nazi Germany offered weapon deals to Finland, if the Finnish government would allow German troops to travel through Finland to occupied Norway. Finland accepted, weapon deals were made and military co-operation began in December 1940.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Finland's support from, and coordination with, Nazi Germany starting during the winter of 1940\u201341 and made other countries considerably less sympathetic to the Finnish cause; particularly since the Continuation War led to a Finnish invasion of the Soviet Union designed not only to recover lost territory, but additionally to answer the irredentist sentiment of a Greater Finland by incorporating East Karelia, whose inhabitants were culturally related to the Finnish people, although Eastern Orthodox by religion. This invasion had caused Britain to declare war on Finland on 6 December 1941.", "qas": [{"question": "when did britain declare war on denmark ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 89, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Finland managed to defend its democracy, contrary to most other countries within the Soviet sphere of influence, and suffered comparably limited losses in terms of civilian lives and property. It was, however, punished harsher than other German co-belligerents and allies, having to pay large reparations and resettle an eighth of its population after having lost an eighth of the territory including one of its industrial heartlands and the second-largest city of Viipuri. After the war, the Soviet government settled these gained territories with people from many different regions of the USSR, for instance from Ukraine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Finnish government did not participate in the systematic killing of Jews, although the country remained a \"co-belligrent\", a \"de facto\" ally of Germany until 1944. In total, eight German Jewish refugees were handed over to the German authorities. In the Tehran Conference of 1942, the leaders of the Allies agreed that Finland was fighting a separate war against the Soviet Union, and that in no way was it hostile to the Western allies. The Soviet Union was the only Allied country against which Finland had conducted military operations. Unlike any of the Axis nations, Finland was a parliamentary democracy throughout the 1939\u20131945 period. The commander of Finnish armed forces during the Winter War and the Continuation War, Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, became the President of Finland after the war. Finland made a separate peace contract with the Soviet Union on 19 September 1944, and was the only bordering country of USSR in Europe (alongside Norway, which has only gained its own border with the Soviet Union after the war) that kept its independence after the war.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During and in between the wars, approximately 80,000 Finnish war-children were evacuated abroad: 5% went to Norway, 10% to Denmark, and the rest to Sweden. Most of the children were sent back by 1948, but 15\u201320% remained abroad.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Moscow Armistice was signed between Finland on one side and the Soviet Union and Britain on the other side on September 19, 1944, ending the Continuation War. The armistice compelled Finland to drive German troops from its territory, leading to the Lapland War 1944\u20131945.", "qas": [{"question": "what war ended the war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 93, 1)"}, {"question": "on what date was the october armistice signed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 93, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1947, Finland reluctantly declined Marshall aid in order to preserve good relations with the Soviets, ensuring Finnish autonomy. Nevertheless, the United States shipped secret development aid and financial aid to the non-communist SDP (Social Democratic Party). Establishing trade with the Western powers, such as Britain, and the reparations to the Soviet Union caused Finland to transform itself from a primarily agrarian economy to an industrialised one. After the reparations had been paid off, Finland continued to trade with the Soviet Union in the framework of bilateral trade.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the agreement with the soviet union ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 94, 3)"}, {"question": "in what country did sweden withdraw in order to keep relations with the soviets ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 94, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Finland's role in the Second World War was in many ways strange. Firstly the Soviet Union tried to invade Finland in 1939\u20131940. However, even with massive superiority in military strength, the Soviet Union was unable to conquer Finland. In late 1940, German-Finnish co-operation began; it took a form that was unique when compared to relations with the Axis. Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which made Finland an ally with Germany in the war against the Soviet Union. But, unlike all other Axis states, Finland never signed the Tripartite Pact and so Finland never was \"de jure\" an Axis nation.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the role of the second world war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 95, 0)"}, {"question": "what does the finland pact do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 95, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Although Finland lost territory in both of its wars with the Soviets, the memory of these wars was sharply etched in the national consciousness. Despite its military defeats, Finland celebrates these wars as a victory for the Finnish national spirit, which survived against long odds and allowed Finland to maintain its independence. Many groups of Finns are commemorated \"[how, specifically?]\" today, including not just fallen soldiers and veterans, but also orphans, evacuees from Karelia, the children who were evacuated to Sweden, women who worked during the war at home or in factories, and the veterans of the women's defense unit Lotta Sv\u00e4rd.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the war with the soviets ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 96, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Some of these groups could not be properly commemorated until long after the war ended \"[why not?]\". However, after a long political campaign backed by survivors of what Finns call the Partisan War, the Finnish Parliament passed legislation establishing compensation for the war's victims.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Finland retained a democratic constitution and free economy during the Cold War era. Treaties signed in 1947 and 1948 with the Soviet Union included obligations and restraints on Finland, as well as territorial concessions. The Paris Peace Treaty (1947) limited the size and the nature of Finland's armed forces. Weapons were to be solely defensive. A deepening of postwar tensions led a year later to the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance (1948) with the Soviet Union. The latter, in particular, was the foundation of Finno-Soviet relations in the postwar era. Under the terms of the treaty, Finland was bound to confer with the Soviets and perhaps to accept their aid if an attack from Germany, or countries allied with Germany, seems likely. The treaty prescribed consultations between the two countries, but it had no mechanism for automatic Soviet intervention in a time of crisis. Both treaties have been abrogated by Finland since the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union, while leaving the borders untouched. Even though being a neighbor to the Soviet Union sometimes resulted in overcautious concern in foreign policy (\"Finlandization\"), Finland developed closer co-operation with the other Nordic countries and declared itself neutral in superpower politics.", "qas": [{"question": "when did estonia retain a democratic constitution ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 98, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Finnish post-war president, Juho Kusti Paasikivi, a leading conservative politician, saw that an essential element of Finnish foreign policy must be a credible guarantee to the Soviet Union that it need not fear attack from, or through, Finnish territory. Because a policy of neutrality was a political component of this guarantee, Finland would ally itself with no one. Another aspect of the guarantee was that Finnish defenses had to be sufficiently strong to defend the nation's territory. This policy remained the core of Finland's foreign relations for the rest of the Cold War era.", "qas": [{"question": "what war was the core of finland's foreign relations ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 99, 3)"}]}, {"context": "In 1952, Finland and the countries of the Nordic Council entered into a passport union, allowing their citizens to cross borders without passports and soon also to apply for jobs and claim social security benefits in the other countries. Many from Finland used this opportunity to secure better-paying jobs in Sweden in the 1950s and 1960s, dominating Sweden's first wave of post-war labour immigrants. Although Finnish wages and standard of living could not compete with wealthy Sweden until the 1970s, the Finnish economy rose remarkably from the ashes of World War II, resulting in the buildup of another Nordic-style welfare state.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite the passport union with Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Iceland, Finland could not join the Nordic Council until 1955 because of Soviet fears that Finland might become too close to the West. At that time the Soviet Union saw the Nordic Council as part of NATO of which Denmark, Norway and Iceland were members. That same year Finland joined the United Nations, though it had already been associated with a number of UN specialized organisations. The first Finnish ambassador to the UN was G.A. Gripenberg (1956\u20131959), followed by Ralph Enckell (1959\u20131965), Max Jakobson (1965\u20131972), Aarno Karhilo (1972\u20131977), Ilkka Pastinen (1977\u20131983), Keijo Korhonen (1983\u20131988), Klaus T\u00f6rnudd (1988\u20131991), Wilhelm Breitenstein (1991\u20131998) and Marjatta Rasi (1998\u20132005). In 1972 Max Jakobson was a candidate for Secretary-General of the UN. In another remarkable event of 1955, the Soviet Union decided to return the Porkkala peninsula to Finland, which had been rented to the Soviet Union in 1948 for 50 years as a military base, a situation which somewhat endangered Finnish sovereignty and neutrality.", "qas": [{"question": "which countries did n't join the nordic council ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 101, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Officially claiming to be neutral, Finland lay in the grey zone between the Western countries and the Soviet Union. The \"YYA Treaty\" (Finno-Soviet Pact of \"Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance\") gave the Soviet Union some leverage in Finnish domestic politics. However, Finland maintained capitalism unlike most other countries bordering the Soviet Union. Property rights were strong. While nationalization committees were set up in France and UK, Finland avoided nationalizations. After failed experiments with protectionism in the 1950s, Finland eased restrictions and committed to a series of international free trade agreements: first an associate membership in the European Free Trade Association in 1961, a full membership in 1986 and also an agreement with the European Community in 1973. Local education markets expanded and an increasing number of Finns also went abroad to study in the United States or Western Europe, bringing back advanced skills. There was a quite common, but pragmatic-minded, credit and investment cooperation by state and corporations, though it was considered with suspicion. Support for capitalism was widespread. Savings rate hovered among the world's highest, at around 8% until the 1980s. In the beginning of the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita reached the level of Japan and the UK. Finland's economic development shared many aspects with export-led Asian countries.", "qas": [{"question": "where did sweden lay in the grey zone ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 102, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Building on its status as western democratic country with friendly ties with the Soviet Union, Finland pushed to reduce the political and military tensions of cold war. Since the 1960s, Finland urged the formation of a Nordic Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (Nordic NWFZ), and in 1972-1973 was the host of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which culminated in the signing of the Helsinki Accords in 1975 and lead to the creation of the OSCE.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before 1940 Finland was a poor rural nation of urban and rural workers and independent farmers. There was a small middle class, employed chiefly as civil servants and in small local businesses. As late as 1950 half of the workers were in agriculture and only a third lived in urban towns. The new jobs in manufacturing, services and trade quickly attracted people to the towns and cities. The average number of births per woman declined from baby boom a peak of 3.5 in 1947 to 1.5 in 1973. When baby boomers entered the workforce, the economy did not generate jobs fast enough and hundreds of thousands emigrated to the more industrialized Sweden, migration peaking in 1969 and 1970 (today 4.7 percent of Swedes speak Finnish).", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the 1990s, farm laborers had nearly all moved on, leaving owners of small farms. By 2000 the social structure included a politically active working class, a primarily clerical middle class, and an upper bracket consisting of managers, entrepreneurs, and professionals. The social boundaries between these groups were not distinct. Causes of change included the growth of a mass culture, international standards, social mobility, and acceptance of democracy and equality as typified by the welfare state.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The generous system of welfare benefits emerged from a long process of debate, negotiations and maneuvers between efficiency-oriented modernizers on the one hand and Social Democrats and labor unions. A compulsory system provides old-age and disability insurance, financed mostly by taxes on employers. The national government provides unemployment insurance, maternity benefits, family allowances, and day-care centers. Health insurance covers most of the cost of outpatient care. The national health act of 1972 provided for the establishment of free health centers in every municipality. There were major cutbacks in the early 1990s, but they were distributed to minimize the harm to the vast majority of voters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The post-war period was a time of rapid economic growth and increasing social and political stability for Finland. The five decades after the Second World War saw Finland turn from a war-ravaged agrarian society into one of the most technologically advanced countries in the world, with a sophisticated market economy and high standard of living.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1991, Finland fell into a depression caused by a combination of economic overheating, fixed currency, depressed Western, Soviet, and local markets. Stock market and housing prices declined by 50%. The growth in the 1980s was based on debt and defaults started rolling in. GDP declined by 15% and unemployment increased from a virtual full employment to one fifth of the workforce. The crisis was amplified by trade unions' initial opposition to any reforms. Politicians struggled to cut spending and the public debt doubled to around 60% of GDP. Some 7\u20138% of GDP was needed to bail out failing banks and force banking sector consolidation. After devaluations the depression bottomed out in 1993.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The GDP growth rate has since been one of the highest of OECD countries and Finland has topped many indicators of national performance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until 1991, President Mauno Koivisto and two of the three major parties, Center Party and the Social Democrats opposed the idea of European Union membership and preferred entering into the European Economic Area treaty. However, after Sweden had submitted its membership application in 1991 and the Soviet Union was dissolved at the end of the year, Finland submitted its own application to the EU in March 1992. The accession process was marked by heavy public debate, where the differences of opinion did not follow party lines. Officially, all three major parties were supporting the Union membership, but members of all parties participated in the campaign against the membership. Before the parliamentary decision to join the EU, a consultative referendum was held on April 16, 1994 in which 56.9% of the votes were in favour of joining. The process of accession was completed on January 1, 1995, when Finland joined the European Union along with Austria and Sweden. Leading Finland into the EU is held as the main achievement of the Centrist-Conservative government of Esko Aho then in power.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the economic policy, the EU membership brought with it many large changes. While politicians were previously involved in setting interest rates, the central bank was given an inflation-targeting mandate until Finland joined the eurozone. During Prime Minister Paavo Lipponen's two successive governments 1995\u20132003, several large state companies were privatized fully or partially. Matti Vanhanen's two cabinets followed suit until autumn 2008, when the state became a major shareholder in the Finnish telecom company Elisa with the intention to secure the Finnish ownership of a strategically important industry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to fast integration with the European Union, safety against Russian leverage has been increased by building fully NATO-compatible military. 1000 troops (a high per-capita amount) are simultaneously committed in NATO and UN operations. Finland has also opposed energy projects that increase dependency on Russian imports. At the same time, Finland remains one of the last non-NATO members in Europe and there seems to be not enough support for full membership unless Sweden joins first.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The population is aging with the birth rate at 10.42 births/1,000 population or fertility rate at 1.8. With median age at 41.6 years Finland is one of the countries with the highest average age of its citizens.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the average age of estonia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 113, 1)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Holy Spirit", "paragraphs": [{"context": "\"For the majority of Christian denominations, the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost is the third person (hypostasis) of the Trinity: the Triune God manifested as God the Father, God the Son, and the God the Holy Spirit; each person itself being God.[2][3][4]Nontrinitarian Christians, who reject the doctrine of the Trinity, differ significantly from mainstream Christianity in their beliefs about the Holy Spirit and generally fall into several distinct categories such as Unitarianism, Binitarianism, Modalism, and others. Some Christian theologians identify the Holy Spirit with the Ruach Hakodesh in Jewish scripture, and with many similar names including the Ruach Elohim (Spirit of God), Ruach YHWH (Spirit of Yahweh), and the Ruach Hakmah (Spirit of Wisdom).[5][6] In the New Testament it is identified with the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of Truth, the Paraclete and the Holy Spirit.[7][8][9]", "qas": [{"question": "who is the third person of christian denominations ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The New Testament details a close relationship between the Holy Spirit and Jesus during his earthly life and ministry.[10] The Gospels of Matthew and Luke and the Nicene Creed state that Jesus was \"conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary\".[11] The Holy Spirit descended on Jesus like a dove during his baptism, and in his Farewell Discourse after the Last Supper Jesus promised to send the Holy Spirit to his disciples after his departure.[12][13]", "qas": [{"question": "what does the new testament cover ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Holy Spirit is referred to as \"the Lord, the Giver of Life\" in the Nicene Creed, which summarises several key beliefs held by many Christian denominations. The participation of the Holy Spirit in the tripartite nature of conversion is apparent in Jesus' final post-resurrection instruction to his disciples at the end of the Gospel of Matthew (28:19): \"make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,\" and \"For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.\"[14] Since the first century, Christians have also called upon God with the trinitarian formula \"Father, Son and Holy Spirit\" in prayer, absolution and benediction.[15][16] In the book of the Acts of the Apostles the arrival of the Holy Spirit happens fifty days after the resurrection of the Christ, and is currently celebrated in Christendom with the feast of Pentecost.[17]", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Christian theology, pneumatology refers to the study of the Holy Spirit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Contents\n'Holy Spirit is a term found in English translations of the Bible that is understood differently among the Abrahamic religions. The term is also used to describe aspects of other religions and belief structures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word \"spirit\" (from the Latin \"spiritus\" meaning \"breath\") appears either alone or with other words, in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) and the New Testament. Combinations include expressions such as the \"Holy Spirit\", \"Spirit of God\", and in Christianity, \"Spirit of Christ\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The word \"spirit\" is rendered as \u05e8\u05d5\u05bc\u05d7\u05b7 (\"ruach\") in Hebrew-language parts of the Old Testament. In its Aramaic parts, the term is \"r\u00fbac\u1e25\". The Greek translation of the Old Testament, the Septuagint, translates the word as \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1 (\"pneuma\"). This is the same word that is used throughout the New Testament, written originally in Greek.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The English term \"spirit\" comes from its Latin origin, \"spiritus\", which is how the Vulgate translates both the Old and New Testament concept. The alternative term, \"Holy Ghost\", comes from Old English translations of \"spiritus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hebrew Bible contains the term \"spirit of God\" (\"ruach hakodesh\") in the sense of the might of a unitary God. This meaning is different from the Christian concept of \"Holy Spirit\" as one personality of God in the Trinity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Christian concept tends to emphasize the moral aspect of the Holy Spirit more than Judaism, evident in the epithet Spirit that appeared in Jewish religious writings only relatively late but was a common expression in the Christian New Testament.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to theologian Rudolf Bultmann, there are two ways to think about the Holy Spirit: \"animistic\" and \"dynamistic\". In animistic thinking, it is \"an independent agent, a personal power which like a demon can fall upon a man and take possession of him, enabling him or compelling him to perform manifestations of power\" while in dynamistic thought it \"appears as an impersonal force which fills a man like a fluid\". Both kinds of thought appear in Jewish and Christian scripture, but animistic is more typical of the Old Testament whereas dynamistic is more common in the New Testament. The distinction coincides with the Holy Spirit as either a temporary or permanent gift. In the Old Testament and Jewish thought, it is primarily temporary with a specific situation or task in mind, whereas in the Christian concept the gift resides in man permanently.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the surface, the Holy Spirit appears to have an equivalent in non-Abrahamic Hellenistic mystery religions. These religions included a distinction between the spirit and psyche, which is also seen in the Pauline epistles. According to proponents of the History of religions school, the Christian concept of the Holy Spirit cannot be explained from Jewish ideas alone without reference to the Hellenistic religions. However, according to theologian Erik Konsmo, the views \"are so dissimilar that the only legitimate connection one can make is with the Greek term \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1 [\"pneuma\", Spirit] itself\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another link with ancient Greek thought is the Stoic idea of the spirit as \"anima mundi\"\u2014or world soul\u2014that unites all people. Some believe that this can be seen in Paul's formulation of the concept of the Holy Spirit that unites Christians in Jesus Christ and love for one another, but Konsmo again thinks that this position is difficult to maintain. In his Introduction to the 1964 book \"Meditations\", the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth wrote:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another Stoic concept which offered inspiration to the Church was that of 'divine Spirit'. Cleanthes, wishing to give more explicit meaning to Zeno's 'creative fire', had been the first to hit upon the term \"pneuma\", or 'spirit', to describe it. Like fire, this intelligent 'spirit' was imagined as a tenuous substance akin to a current of air or breath, but essentially possessing the quality of warmth; it was immanent in the universe as God, and in man as the soul and life-giving principle. Clearly it is not a long step from this to the 'Holy Spirit' of Christian theology, the 'Lord and Giver of life', visibly manifested as tongues of fire at Pentecost and ever since associated \u2013 in the Christian as in the Stoic mind \u2013 with the ideas of vital fire and beneficient warmth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hebrew language phrase \"ruach ha-kodesh\" (Hebrew: \u05e8\u05d5\u05d7 \u05d4\u05e7\u05d5\u05d3\u05e9, \"holy spirit\" also transliterated \"ruac\u1e25 ha-qodesh\") is a term used in the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh) and Jewish writings to refer to the spirit of YHWH (\u05e8\u05d5\u05d7 \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4). It literally means \"spirit of the holiness\" or \"spirit of the holy place\". The Hebrew terms \"ruac\u1e25 qodsh\u0259ka\", \"thy holy spirit\" (\u05e8\u05d5\u05bc\u05d7\u05b7 \u05e7\u05b8\u05d3\u05b0\u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05da\u05b8), and \"ruac\u1e25 qodsh\u014d\", \"his holy spirit\" (\u05e8\u05d5\u05bc\u05d7\u05b7 \u05e7\u05b8\u05d3\u05b0\u05e9\u05c1\u05d5\u05b9) also occur (when a possessive suffix is added the definite article is dropped).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Holy Spirit\" in Judaism generally refers to the divine aspect of prophecy and wisdom. It also refers to the divine force, quality, and influence of the Most High God, over the universe or over his creatures, in given contexts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the large majority of Christians, the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost, from Old English \"gast\", \"spirit\") is a member of the Trinity: The \"Triune God\" manifested as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; each aspect itself being God. Two symbols from the New Testament canon are associated with the Holy Spirit in Christian iconography: a winged dove, and tongues of fire. Each depiction of the Holy Spirit arose from different historical accounts in the Gospel narratives; the first being at the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan River where the Holy Spirit was said to descend in the form of a dove as the voice of God the Father spoke as described in Matthew, Mark, and Luke;the second being from the day of Pentecost, fifty days after Pascha where the descent of the Holy Spirit came upon the Apostles and other followers of Jesus Christ, as tongues of fire as described in the Acts of the Apostles . \nCalled \"the unveiled epiphany of God\", the Holy Spirit is the one who empowers the followers of Jesus with spiritual gifts and power that enabled the proclamation of Jesus Christ, and the power that brought conviction of faith.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Holy Spirit (Arabic: \u0631\u0648\u062d \u0627\u0644\u0642\u062f\u0633 \"Ruh al-Qudus\", \"the holy spirit\") is mentioned four times in the Qur'an, where it acts as an agent of divine action or communication. While there are similarities to the Holy Spirit mentioned in Christian and Jewish sources, it is unclear if these four references refer to the same Holy Spirit. The Muslim interpretation of the Holy Spirit is generally consistent with other interpretations based upon the Old and the New Testaments. On the basis of narrations in certain Hadith some Muslims identify it with the angel Gabriel (Arabic \"Jibr\u0101\u02be\u012bl\"). The Spirit (\u0627\u0644\u0631\u0648\u062d \"al-Ruh\", without the adjective \"holy\" or \"exalted\") is described, among other things, as the creative spirit from God by which God enlivened Adam, and which inspired in various ways God's messengers and prophets, including Jesus and Abraham. The belief in a \"Holy Trinity\", according to the Qur'an, is forbidden and deemed to be blasphemy. The same prohibition applies to any idea of the duality of God (Allah).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other religions reference a spirit that has a name resembling the Holy Spirit found in the Christian and Jewish faiths, but similar to Islam, this is a different spirit with a different purpose that is unique to those religions, as is seen below:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith has the concept of the \"Most Great Spirit\", seen as the bounty of God. It is usually used to describe the descent of the Spirit of God upon the messengers/prophets of God who include, among others, Jesus, Muhammad and Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Bah\u00e1'\u00ed belief, the Holy Spirit is the conduit through which the wisdom of God becomes directly associated with his messenger, and it has been described variously in different religions such as the burning bush to Moses, the sacred fire to Zoroaster, the dove to Jesus, the angel Gabriel to Muhammad, and the Maid of Heaven to Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h. The Bah\u00e1'\u00ed view rejects the idea that the Holy Spirit is a partner to God in the Godhead, but rather is the pure essence of God's attributes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hinduism concept of Advaita is linked to Trinity and has been briefly explained by Raimon Panikkar, Professor of Comparative Religion and History of Religions, Department of Religious Studies of the University of California. He states that the Holy Spirit, as one of the Three Persons of the Trinity of \"father, Logos and Holy Spirit\", is a bridge builder between Christianity and Hinduism. He explains that \u201cThe meeting of spiritualistic can take place in the Spirit. No new 'system' has primarily to come of this encounter, but a new and yet old spirit must emerges.\"Atman is Vedic terminology elaborated in Hindu scriptures such as Upanishads and Vedanta signifies the Ultimate Reality and Absolute.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Buddhism, Holy Spirit is compared to Buddha-nature as a Buddhist image or Christ consciousness, a oneness with an all encompassing plan. Hence, the Holy Spirit is considered the \"means of which the faithful develop and journey to their spiritual goal.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Sikhism, the Guru is the medium and the Holy spirit is stated to have moved from Guru Nanak to the nine Sikh Gurus who followed him culminating with Guru Gobind Singh, the \"tenth Guru Nanak\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Zoroastrianism, the Holy Spirit, also known as Spenta Mainyu, is a hypostasis of Ahura Mazda, the supreme Creator God of Zoroastrianism; the Holy Spirit is seen as the source of all goodness in the universe, the spark of all life within humanity, and is the ultimate guide for humanity to righteousness and communion with God. The Holy Spirit is put in direct opposition to its eternal dual counterpart, Angra Mainyu, who is the source of all wickedness and who leads humanity astray.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Helium-3", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Helium-3 (He, see also helion) is a light, non-radioactive isotope of helium with two protons and one neutron (common helium having two protons and two neutrons). Its hypothetical existence was first proposed in 1934 by the Australian nuclear physicist Mark Oliphant while he was working at the University of Cambridge Cavendish Laboratory. Oliphant had performed experiments in which fast deuterons collided with deuteron targets (incidentally, the first demonstration of nuclear fusion). Helium-3 was thought to be a radioactive isotope until it was also found in samples of natural helium, which is mostly helium-4, taken both from the terrestrial atmosphere and from natural gas wells. Other than protium (ordinary hydrogen), helium-3 is the only stable isotope of any element with more protons than neutrons.", "qas": [{"question": "what isotope of hydrogen is used to make hydrogen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Helium-3 occurs as a primordial nuclide, escaping from the Earth's crust into the atmosphere and into outer space over millions of years. Helium-3 is also thought to be a natural nucleogenic and cosmogenic nuclide, one produced when lithium is bombarded by natural neutrons, which can be released by spontaneous fission and by nuclear reactions with cosmic rays. Some of the helium-3 found in the terrestrial atmosphere is also a relic of atmospheric and underwater nuclear weapons testing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much speculation has been made over the possibility of helium-3 as a future energy source. Unlike most other nuclear fusion reactions, the fusion of helium-3 atoms releases large amounts of energy without causing the surrounding material to become radioactive. However, the temperatures required to achieve helium-3 fusion reactions are much higher than in traditional fusion reactions, and the process may unavoidably create other reactions that themselves would cause the surrounding material to become radioactive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The abundance of helium-3 is thought to be greater on the Moon than on Earth, having been embedded in the upper layer of regolith by the solar wind over billions of years, though still lower in abundance than in the solar system's gas giants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of its low atomic mass of 3.02 atomic mass units, helium-3 has some physical properties different from those of helium-4, with a mass of 4.00 atomic mass units. Because of the weak, induced dipole\u2013dipole interaction between the helium atoms, their microscopic physical properties are mainly determined by their zero-point energy. Also, the microscopic properties of helium-3 cause it to have a higher zero-point energy than helium-4. This implies that helium-3 can overcome dipole\u2013dipole interactions with less thermal energy than helium-4 can.", "qas": [{"question": "what can cause dipole\u2013dipole interactions with less thermal energy than helium-4 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 4, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The quantum mechanical effects on helium-3 and helium-4 are significantly different because with two protons, two neutrons, and two electrons, helium-4 has an overall spin of zero, making it a boson, but with one fewer neutron, helium-3 has an overall spin of one half, making it a fermion.", "qas": [{"question": "how many electrons are in the quantum mechanical effects ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Helium-3 boils at 3.19 K compared with helium-4 at 4.23 K, and its critical point is also lower at 3.35 K, compared with helium-4 at 5.2 K. Helium-3 has less than half the density of Helium-4 when it is at its boiling point: 59 gram per liter compared to the 125 gram per liter of helium-4\u2014at a pressure of one atmosphere. Its latent heat of vaporization is also considerably lower at 0.026 kilojoules per mole compared with the 0.0829 kilojoules per mole of helium-4.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the main point of helium-3 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": " can be produced by the low temperature fusion of \u2192 + \u03b3 + 4.98 MeV. If the fusion temperature is below that for the helium nuclei to fuse, the reaction produces a high energy alpha particle which quickly acquires an electron producing a stable light helium ion which can be utilized directly as a source of electricity without producing dangerous neutrons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The conventional deuterium + tritium (\"D-T\") fusion process produces energetic neutrons which render reactor components radioactive with activation products. The appeal of helium-3 fusion stems from the aneutronic nature of its reaction products. Helium-3 itself is non-radioactive. The lone high-energy by-product, the proton, can be contained using electric and magnetic fields. The momentum energy of this proton (created in the fusion process) will interact with the containing electromagnetic field, resulting in direct net electricity generation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of the higher Coulomb barrier, the temperatures required for + fusion are much higher than those of conventional D-T fusion. Moreover, since both reactants need to be mixed together to fuse, reactions between nuclei of the same reactant will occur, and the D-D reaction ( + ) does produce a neutron. Reaction rates vary with temperature, but the D- reaction rate is never greater than 3.56 times the D-D reaction rate (see graph). Therefore, fusion using D- fuel at the right temperature and a D-lean fuel mixture, can produce a much lower neutron flux than D-T fusion, but is not clean, negating some of its main attraction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second possibility, fusing with itself ( + ), requires even higher temperatures (since now both reactants have a +2 charge), and thus is even more difficult than the D- reaction. However, it does offer a possible reaction that produces no neutrons; the charged protons produced can be contained using electric and magnetic fields, which in turn results in direct electricity generation. + fusion is feasible as demonstrated in the laboratory and has immense advantages, but commercial viability is many years in the future.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The amounts of helium-3 needed as a replacement for conventional fuels are substantial by comparison to amounts currently available. The total amount of energy produced in the \u00a0+\u00a0 reaction is 18.4 MeV, which corresponds to some 493 megawatt-hours (4.93\u00d710 W\u00b7h) per three grams (one mole) of If the total amount of energy could be converted to electrical power with 100% efficiency (a physical impossibility), it would correspond to about 30 minutes of output of a gigawatt electrical plant per mole of . Thus, a year's production (at 6 grams for each operation hour) would require 52.5 kilograms of helium-3. The amount of fuel needed for large-scale applications can also be put in terms of total consumption: electricity consumption by 107 million U.S. households in 2001 totaled 1,140 billion kW\u00b7h (1.14\u00d710 W\u00b7h). Again assuming 100% conversion efficiency, 6.7 tonnes per year of helium-3 would be required for that segment of the energy demand of the United States, 15 to 20 tonnes per year given a more realistic end-to-end conversion efficiency.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Helium-3 is a most important isotope in instrumentation for neutron detection. It has a high absorption cross section for thermal neutron beams and is used as a converter gas in neutron detectors. The neutron is converted through the nuclear reaction\ninto charged particles tritium ions (T, H) and Hydrogen ions, or protons (p, H) which then are detected by creating a charge cloud in the stopping gas of a proportional counter or a Geiger-M\u00fcller tube.", "qas": [{"question": "what is helium-3 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Furthermore, the absorption process is strongly spin-dependent, which allows a spin-polarized helium-3 volume to transmit neutrons with one spin component while absorbing the other. This effect is employed in neutron polarization analysis, a technique which probes for magnetic properties of matter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The United States Department of Homeland Security had hoped to deploy detectors to spot smuggled plutonium in shipping containers by their neutron emissions, but the worldwide shortage of helium-3 following the drawdown in nuclear weapons production since the Cold War has to some extent prevented this. As of 2012, DHS determined the commercial supply of boron-10 would support converting its neutron detection infrastructure to that technology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A helium-3 refrigerator uses helium-3 to achieve temperatures of 0.2 to 0.3 kelvin. A dilution refrigerator uses a mixture of helium-3 and helium-4 to reach cryogenic temperatures as low as a few thousandths of a kelvin.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a helium-3 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 15, 0)"}, {"question": "what is a dilution ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 15, 1)"}]}, {"context": "An important property of helium-3, which distinguishes it from the more common helium-4, is that its nucleus is a fermion since it contains an odd number of spin particles. Helium-4 nuclei are bosons, containing an even number of spin particles. This is a direct result of the addition rules for quantized angular momentum. At low temperatures (about 2.17 K), helium-4 undergoes a phase transition: A fraction of it enters a superfluid phase that can be roughly understood as a type of Bose\u2013Einstein condensate. Such a mechanism is not available for helium-3 atoms, which are fermions. However, it was widely speculated that helium-3 could also become a superfluid at much lower temperatures, if the atoms formed into \"pairs\" analogous to Cooper pairs in the BCS theory of superconductivity. Each Cooper pair, having integer spin, can be thought of as a boson. During the 1970s, David Lee, Douglas Osheroff and Robert Coleman Richardson discovered two phase transitions along the melting curve, which were soon realized to be the two superfluid phases of helium-3. The transition to a superfluid occurs at 2.491 millikelvins on the melting curve. They were awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery. Tony Leggett won the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on refining understanding of the superfluid phase of helium-3.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an important property of helium-3, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In a zero magnetic field, there are two distinct superfluid phases of He, the A-phase and the B-phase. The B-phase is the low-temperature, low-pressure phase which has an isotropic energy gap. The A-phase is the higher temperature, higher pressure phase that is further stabilized by a magnetic field and has two point nodes in its gap. The presence of two phases is a clear indication that He is an unconventional superfluid (superconductor), since the presence of two phases requires an additional symmetry, other than gauge symmetry, to be broken. In fact, it is a \"p\"-wave superfluid, with spin one, S=1, and angular momentum one, L=1. The ground state corresponds to total angular momentum zero, J=S+L=0 (vector addition). Excited states are possible with non-zero total angular momentum, J>0, which are excited pair collective modes. Because of the extreme purity of superfluid He (since all materials except He have solidified and\nsunk to the bottom of the liquid He and any He has phase separated entirely, this is the most pure condensed matter state), these collective modes have been studied with much greater precision than in any other unconventional pairing system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Helium-3 nuclei have an intrinsic nuclear spin of , and a relatively high magnetogyric ratio. Helium-3 can be hyperpolarized using non-equilibrium means such as spin-exchange optical pumping. During this process, circularly polarized infrared laser light, tuned to the appropriate wavelength, is used to excite electrons in an alkali metal, such as caesium or rubidium inside a sealed glass vessel. The angular momentum is transferred from the alkali metal electrons to the noble gas nuclei through collisions. In essence, this process effectively aligns the nuclear spins with the magnetic field in order to enhance the NMR signal. The hyperpolarized gas may then be stored at pressures of 10 atm, for up to 100 hours. Following inhalation, gas mixtures containing the hyperpolarized helium-3 gas can be imaged with an MRI scanner to produce anatomical and functional images of lung ventilation. This technique is also able to produce images of the airway tree, locate unventilated defects, measure the alveolar oxygen partial pressure, and measure the ventilation/perfusion ratio. This technique may be critical for the diagnosis and treatment management of chronic respiratory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema, cystic fibrosis, and asthma.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Production, sales and distribution of helium-3 in the United States are managed by the US Department of Energy (DOE) Isotope Program. Virtually all helium-3 used in industry today is produced from the radioactive decay of tritium. Tritium is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen and is typically produced by bombarding lithium-6 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. The lithium nucleus absorbs a neutron and splits into helium-4 and tritium. Tritium decays into helium-3 with a half-life of 12.3 years, so helium-3 can be produced by simply storing the tritium until it undergoes radioactive decay.", "qas": [{"question": "what is produced ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 19, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Tritium is a critical component of nuclear weapons and historically it was produced and stockpiled primarily for this application. The decay of tritium into helium-3 reduces the explosive power of the fusion warhead, so periodically the accumulated helium-3 must be removed from warhead reservoirs and tritium in storage. Helium-3 removed during this process is marketed for other applications.", "qas": [{"question": "what process is marketed during this process ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 20, 2)"}]}, {"context": "For decades this has been, and remains, the principal source of the world's helium-3. However, since the signing of the START I Treaty in 1991 the number of nuclear warheads that are kept ready for use has decreased This has reduced the quantity of helium-3 available from this source. Helium-3 stockpiles have been further diminished by increased demand, primarily for use in neutron radiation detectors and medical diagnostic procedures. US industrial demand for helium-3 reached a peak of 70,000 liters (approximately 8\u00a0kg) per year in 2008. Price at auction, historically about $100/liter, reached as high as $2000/liter Since then, demand for helium-3 has declined to about 6000 liters per year due to the high cost and efforts by the DOE to recycle it and find substitutes.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the principal source of the world's ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The DOE recognized the developing shortage of both tritium and helium-3. and began producing tritium by lithium irradiation at the Tennessee Valley Authority's Watts Bar Nuclear Generating Station in 2010. In this process tritium-producing burnable absorber rods (TPBARs) containing lithium in a ceramic form are inserted into the reactor in place of the normal boron control rods Periodically the TPBARs are replaced and the tritium extracted.", "qas": [{"question": "what country recognized the rapid shortage of tritium and tritium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Currently only one reactor is used for tritium production but the process could, if necessary, be vastly scaled up to meet any conceivable demand simply by utilizing more of the nation's power reactors. Substantial quantities of tritium and helium-3 could also be extracted from the heavy water moderator in CANDU nuclear reactors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One early estimate of the primordial ratio of He to He in the solar nebula has been the measurement of their ratio in the atmosphere of Jupiter, measured by the mass spectrometer of the Galileo atmospheric entry probe. This ratio is about 1:10,000, or 100 parts of He per million parts of He. This is roughly the same ratio of the isotopes as in lunar regolith, which contains 28\u00a0ppm helium-4 and 2.8\u00a0ppb helium-3 (which is at the lower end of actual sample measurements, which vary from about 1.4 to 15\u00a0ppb). However, terrestrial ratios of the isotopes are lower by a factor of 100, mainly due to enrichment of helium-4 stocks in the mantle by billions of years of alpha decay from uranium and thorium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He is a primordial substance in the Earth's mantle, considered to have become entrapped within the Earth during planetary formation. The ratio of He to He within the Earth's crust and mantle is less than that for assumptions of solar disk composition as obtained from meteorite and lunar samples, with terrestrial materials generally containing lower He/He ratios due to ingrowth of He from radioactive decay.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He has a cosmological ratio of 300 atoms per million atoms of He (at. ppm), leading to the assumption that the original ratio of these primordial gases in the mantle was around 200-300 ppm when Earth was formed. A lot of He was generated by alpha-particle decay of uranium and thorium, and now the mantle has only around 7% primordial helium, lowering the total He/He ratio to around 20 ppm. Ratios of He/He in excess of atmospheric are indicative of a contribution of He from the mantle. Crustal sources are dominated by the He which is produced by the decay of radioactive elements in the crust and mantle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ratio of helium-3 to helium-4 in natural Earth-bound sources varies greatly. Samples of the lithium ore spodumene from Edison Mine, South Dakota were found to contain 12 parts of helium-3 to a million parts of helium-4. Samples from other mines showed 2 parts per million.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the ratio of helium-3 to helium-4 in natural earth-bound sources ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Helium is also present as up to 7% of some natural gas sources, and large sources have over 0.5% (above 0.2% makes it viable to extract). The fraction of He in helium separated from natural gas in the U.S. was found to range from 70 to 242 parts per billion.<ref name=\"BoM/DoI\"></ref> Hence the US 2002 stockpile of 1 billion normal m would have contained about 12 to 43 kilograms of helium-3. According to one expert, about 26 m or almost 5\u00a0kg of He is available annually for separation from the US natural gas stream. If the process of separating out the He could employ as feedstock the liquefied helium typically used to transport and store bulk quantities, estimates for the incremental energy cost range from US$34 to $300 per liter NTP, excluding the cost of infrastructure and equipment. Algeria's annual gas production is assumed to contain 100 million normal cubic metres and this would contain between 7 and 24 m of helium-3 (about 1 to 4 kilograms) assuming a similar He fraction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He is also present in the Earth's atmosphere. The natural abundance of He in naturally occurring helium gas is 1.38 (1.38 parts per million). The partial pressure of helium in the Earth's atmosphere is about 0.52 Pa, and thus helium accounts for 5.2 parts per million of the total pressure (101325 Pa) in the Earth's atmosphere, and He thus accounts for 7.2 parts per trillion of the atmosphere. Since the atmosphere of the Earth has a mass of about 5.14 tonnes, the mass of He in the Earth's atmosphere is the product of these numbers, or about 37,000 tonnes of He.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He is produced on Earth from three sources: lithium spallation, cosmic rays, and beta decay of tritium (H). The contribution from cosmic rays is negligible within all except the oldest regolith materials, and lithium spallation reactions are a lesser contributor than the production of He by alpha particle emissions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The total amount of helium-3 in the mantle may be in the range of 0.1\u20131 million tonnes. However, most of the mantle is not directly accessible. Some helium-3 leaks up through deep-sourced hotspot volcanoes such as those of the Hawaiian Islands, but only 300\u00a0grams per year is emitted to the atmosphere. Mid-ocean ridges emit another 3 kilogram per year. Around subduction zones, various sources produce helium-3 in natural gas deposits which possibly contain a thousand tonnes of helium-3 (although there may be 25 thousand tonnes if all ancient subduction zones have such deposits). Wittenberg estimated that United States crustal natural gas sources may have only half a tonne total. Wittenberg cited Anderson's estimate of another 1200 metric tonnes in interplanetary dust particles on the ocean floors. In the 1994 study, extracting helium-3 from these sources consumes more energy than fusion would release.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the source of extracting ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 31, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Materials on the Moon's surface contain helium-3 at concentrations between 1.4 and 15 ppb in sunlit areas, and may contain concentrations as much as 50 ppb in permanently shadowed regions. A number of people, starting with Gerald Kulcinski in 1986, have proposed to explore the moon, mine lunar regolith and use the helium-3 for fusion. Because of the low concentrations of helium-3, any mining equipment would need to process extremely large amounts of regolith (over 150 million tonnes of regolith to obtain one gram of helium 3), and some proposals have suggested that helium-3 extraction be piggybacked onto a larger mining and development operation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The primary objective of Indian Space Research Organisation's first lunar probe called Chandrayaan-I, launched on October 22, 2008, was reported in some sources to be mapping the Moon's surface for helium-3-containing minerals. However, no such objective is mentioned in the project's official list of goals, although many of its scientific payloads have noted helium-3-related applications.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cosmochemist and geochemist Ouyang Ziyuan from the Chinese Academy of Sciences who is now in charge of the Chinese Lunar Exploration Program has already stated on many occasions that one of the main goals of the program would be the mining of helium-3, from which operation \"each year, three space shuttle missions could bring enough fuel for all human beings across the world.\" \nIn January 2006, the Russian space company RKK Energiya announced that it considers lunar helium-3 a potential economic resource to be mined by 2020, if funding can be found.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mining gas giants for helium-3 has also been proposed. The British Interplanetary Society's hypothetical Project Daedalus interstellar probe design was fueled by helium-3 mines in the atmosphere of Jupiter, for example. Jupiter's high gravity makes this a less energetically favorable operation than extracting helium-3 from the other gas giants of the solar system, however.", "qas": [{"question": "what is . ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Not all authors feel the extraterrestrial extraction of helium-3 is feasible. Dwayne Day, writing in The Space Review, identifies some major obstacles to helium-3 extraction from extraterrestrial sources for use in fusion, and questions the feasibility of extraterrestrial extraction when compared to production on Earth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the extraterrestrial processing of helium-3 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A second-generation approach to controlled fusion power involves combining helium-3 (He) and deuterium (H). This reaction produces a helium-4 ion (He) (like an alpha particle, but of different origin) and a high-energy proton (positively charged hydrogen ion) (p). The most important potential advantage of this fusion reaction for power production as well as other applications lies in its compatibility with the use of electrostatic fields to control fuel ions and the fusion protons. High speed protons, as positively charged particles, can have their kinetic energy converted directly into electricity, through use of solid-state conversion materials as well as other techniques. Potential conversion efficiencies of 70% may be possible, as there is no need to convert proton energy to heat in order to drive a turbine-powered electrical generator.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There have been many claims about the capabilities of helium-3 power plants. According to proponents, fusion power plants operating on deuterium and helium-3 would offer lower capital and operating costs than their competitors due to less technical complexity, higher conversion efficiency, smaller size, the absence of radioactive fuel, no air or water pollution, and only low-level radioactive waste disposal requirements. Recent estimates suggest that about $6 billion in investment capital will be required to develop and construct the first helium-3 fusion power plant. Financial breakeven at today's wholesale electricity prices (5 US cents per kilowatt-hour) would occur after five 1-gigawatt plants were on line, replacing old conventional plants or meeting new demand.", "qas": [{"question": "what have some of the claims about helium-3 power plants ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The reality is not so clear-cut. The most advanced fusion programs in the world are inertial confinement fusion (such as National Ignition Facility) and magnetic confinement fusion (such as ITER and Wendelstein 7-X). In the case of the former, there is no solid roadmap to power generation. In the case of the latter, commercial power generation is not expected until around 2050. In both cases, the type of fusion discussed is the simplest: D-T fusion. The reason for this is the very low Coulomb barrier for this reaction; for D+He, the barrier is much higher, and it is even higher for He\u2013He. The immense cost of reactors like ITER and National Ignition Facility are largely due to their immense size, yet to scale up to higher plasma temperatures would require reactors far larger still. The 14.7 MeV proton and 3.6 MeV alpha particle from D\u2013He fusion, plus the higher conversion efficiency, means that more electricity is obtained per kilogram than with D-T fusion (17.6 MeV), but not that much more. As a further downside, the rates of reaction for helium-3 fusion reactions are not particularly high, requiring a reactor that is larger still or more reactors to produce the same amount of electricity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To attempt to work around this problem of massively large power plants that may not even be economical with D-T fusion, let alone the far more challenging D\u2013He fusion, a number of other reactors have been proposed\u00a0\u2013 the Fusor, Polywell, Focus fusion, and many more, though many of these concepts have fundamental problems with achieving a net energy gain, and generally attempt to achieve fusion in thermal disequilibrium, something that could potentially prove impossible, and consequently, these long-shot programs tend to have trouble garnering funding despite their low budgets. Unlike the \"big\", \"hot\" fusion systems, however, if such systems were to work, they could scale to the higher barrier \"aneutronic\" fuels, and therefore their proponents tend to promote p-B fusion, which requires no exotic fuels like helium-3.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several science fiction works have featured helium-3 extraction on the moon, including the films \"Moon\" (2009) and \"Iron Sky\" (2012), the manga and corresponding anime Planetes, the video game \"Anno 2205\" (2015) and the novel \"\" (2015). The novel \"Morning Star\" (Pierce Brown, 2016) features helium-3 mining on Phobos (a moon of Mars), while his novel \"Red Rising\" (2014) features helium-3 extraction from Mars itself. The titular mech of Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II is powered by heavy hydrogen and helium-3 in pellet form.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In quantum mechanics, a Hamiltonian is an operator corresponding to the total energy of the system in most of the cases. It is usually denoted by \"H\", also \"\u021e\" or \"\u0124\". Its spectrum is the set of possible outcomes when one measures the total energy of a system. Because of its close relation to the time-evolution of a system, it is of fundamental importance in most formulations of quantum theory.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an operator ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Hamiltonian is named after William Rowan Hamilton, who created a revolutionary reformation of Newtonian mechanics that is now called Hamiltonian mechanics which is important in quantum physics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hamiltonian is the sum of the kinetic energies of all the particles, plus the potential energy of the particles associated with the system. For different situations or number of particles, the Hamiltonian is different since it includes the sum of kinetic energies of the particles, and the potential energy function corresponding to the situation.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the sum ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By analogy with classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian is commonly expressed as the sum of operators corresponding to the kinetic and potential energies of a system in the form", "qas": [{"question": "what is commonly expressed as the sum of operators ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "where\nis the potential energy operator and \nis the kinetic energy operator in which \"m\" is the mass of the particle, the dot denotes the dot product of vectors, and \nis the momentum operator where an \u2207 is the del operator. The dot product of \u2207 with itself is the Laplacian \u2207. In three dimensions using Cartesian coordinates the Laplace operator is", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, complications can arise in the many-body problem. Since the potential energy depends on the spatial arrangement of the particles, the kinetic energy will also depend on the spatial configuration to conserve energy. The motion due to any one particle will vary due to the motion of all the other particles in the system. For this reason cross terms for kinetic energy may appear in the Hamiltonian; a mix of the gradients for two particles:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where \"M\" denotes the mass of the collection of particles resulting in this extra kinetic energy. Terms of this form are known as \"mass polarization terms\", and appear in the Hamiltonian of many electron atoms (see below).", "qas": [{"question": "what is another term for mass polarization terms ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 6, 1)"}]}, {"context": "For \"N\" interacting particles, i.e. particles which interact mutually and constitute a many-body situation, the potential energy function \"V\" is \"not\" simply a sum of the separate potentials (and certainly not a product, as this is dimensionally incorrect). The potential energy function can only be written as above: a function of all the spatial positions of each particle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For non-interacting particles, i.e. particles which do not interact mutually and move independently, the potential of the system is the sum of the separate potential energy for each particle, that is", "qas": []}, {"context": "The general form of the Hamiltonian in this case is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the sum is taken over all particles and their corresponding potentials; the result is that the Hamiltonian of the system is the sum of the separate Hamiltonians for each particle. This is an idealized situation - in practice the particles are almost always influenced by some potential, and there are many-body interactions. One illustrative example of a two-body interaction where this form would not apply is for electrostatic potentials due to charged particles, because they interact with each other by Coulomb interaction (electrostatic force), as shown below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hamiltonian generates the time evolution of quantum states. If formula_9 is the state of the system at time \"t\", then", "qas": []}, {"context": "This equation is the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. It takes the same form as the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation, which is one of the reasons \"H\" is also called the Hamiltonian. Given the state at some initial time (\"t\" = 0), we can solve it to obtain the state at any subsequent time. In particular, if \"H\" is independent of time, then", "qas": []}, {"context": "The exponential operator on the right hand side of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is usually defined by the corresponding power series in \"H\". One might notice that taking polynomials or power series of unbounded operators that are not defined everywhere may not make mathematical sense. Rigorously, to take functions of unbounded operators, a functional calculus is required. In the case of the exponential function, the continuous, or just the holomorphic functional calculus suffices. We note again, however, that for common calculations the physicists' formulation is quite sufficient.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the *-homomorphism property of the functional calculus, the operator", "qas": []}, {"context": "is a unitary operator. It is the \"time evolution operator\", or \"propagator\", of a closed quantum system. If the Hamiltonian is time-independent, {U(t)} form a one parameter unitary group (more than a semigroup); this gives rise to the physical principle of detailed balance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, in the more general formalism of Dirac, the Hamiltonian is typically implemented as an operator on a Hilbert space in the following way:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The eigenkets (eigenvectors) of \"H\", denoted formula_13, provide an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space. The spectrum of allowed energy levels of the system is given by the set of eigenvalues, denoted {\"E\"}, solving the equation:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since \"H\" is a Hermitian operator, the energy is always a real number.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From a mathematically rigorous point of view, care must be taken with the above assumptions. Operators on infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces need not have eigenvalues (the set of eigenvalues does not necessarily coincide with the spectrum of an operator). However, all routine quantum mechanical calculations can be done using the physical formulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following are expressions for the Hamiltonian in a number of situations. Typical ways to classify the expressions are the number of particles, number of dimensions, and the nature of the potential energy function - importantly space and time dependence. Masses are denoted by \"m\", and charges by \"q\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The particle is not bound by any potential energy, so the potential is zero and this Hamiltonian is the simplest. For one dimension:", "qas": []}, {"context": "and in three dimensions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a particle in a region of constant potential \"V\" = \"V\" (no dependence on space or time), in one dimension, the Hamiltonian is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "in three dimensions", "qas": []}, {"context": "This applies to the elementary \"particle in a box\" problem, and step potentials.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a simple harmonic oscillator in one dimension, the potential varies with position (but not time), according to:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the angular frequency \"formula_20\", effective spring constant \"k\", and mass \"m\" of the oscillator satisfy:", "qas": []}, {"context": "so the Hamiltonian is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For three dimensions, this becomes", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the three-dimensional position vector r using cartesian coordinates is (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\"), its magnitude is", "qas": []}, {"context": "Writing the Hamiltonian out in full shows it is simply the sum of the one-dimensional Hamiltonians in each direction:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a rigid rotor \u2013 i.e. system of particles which can rotate freely about any axes, not bound in any potential (such as free molecules with negligible vibrational degrees of freedom, say due to double or triple chemical bonds), Hamiltonian is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where \"I\", \"I\", and \"I\" are the moment of inertia components (technically the diagonal elements of the moment of inertia tensor), and formula_27, formula_28 and formula_29 are the total angular momentum operators (components), about the \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" axes respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Coulomb potential energy for two point charges \"q\" and \"q\" (i.e. charged particles, since particles have no spatial extent), in three dimensions, is (in SI units - rather than Gaussian units which are frequently used in electromagnetism):", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, this is only the potential for one point charge due to another. If there are many charged particles, each charge has a potential energy due to every other point charge (except itself). For \"N\" charges, the potential energy of charge \"q\" due to all other charges is (see also Electrostatic potential energy stored in a configuration of discrete point charges):", "qas": []}, {"context": "where \"\u03c6\"(r) is the electrostatic potential of charge \"q\" at r. The total potential of the system is then the sum over \"j\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "so the Hamiltonian is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For an electric dipole moment d constituting charges of magnitude \"q\", in a uniform, electrostatic field (time-independent) E, positioned in one place, the potential is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "the dipole moment itself is the operator", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the particle is stationary, there is no translational kinetic energy of the dipole, so the Hamiltonian of the dipole is just the potential energy:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a magnetic dipole moment \u03bc in a uniform, magnetostatic field (time-independent) B, positioned in one place, the potential is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the particle is stationary, there is no translational kinetic energy of the dipole, so the Hamiltonian of the dipole is just the potential energy:", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a Spin-\u00bd particle, the corresponding spin magnetic moment is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where \"g\" is the spin gyromagnetic ratio (a.k.a. \"spin g-factor\"), \"e\" is the electron charge, S is the spin operator vector, whose components are the Pauli matrices, hence", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a charged particle \"q\" in an electromagnetic field, described by the scalar potential \"\u03c6\" and vector potential A, there are two parts to the Hamiltonian to substitute for. The momentum operator must be replaced by the canonical momentum operator, which includes a contribution from the A field:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_42 is the kinetic momentum operator given as the usual momentum operator:", "qas": []}, {"context": "so the corresponding kinetic energy operator is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "and the potential energy, which is due to the \"\u03c6\" field:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Casting all of these into the Hamiltonian gives:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In many systems, two or more energy eigenstates have the same energy. A simple example of this is a free particle, whose energy eigenstates have wavefunctions that are propagating plane waves. The energy of each of these plane waves is inversely proportional to the square of its wavelength. A wave propagating in the \"x\" direction is a different state from one propagating in the \"y\" direction, but if they have the same wavelength, then their energies will be the same. When this happens, the states are said to be \"degenerate\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "It turns out that degeneracy occurs whenever a nontrivial unitary operator \"U\" commutes with the Hamiltonian. To see this, suppose that formula_47 is an energy eigenket. Then formula_48 is an energy eigenket with the same eigenvalue, since", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since \"U\" is nontrivial, at least one pair of formula_47 and formula_48 must represent distinct states. Therefore, \"H\" has at least one pair of degenerate energy eigenkets. In the case of the free particle, the unitary operator which produces the symmetry is the rotation operator, which rotates the wavefunctions by some angle while otherwise preserving their shape.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The existence of a symmetry operator implies the existence of a conserved observable. Let \"G\" be the Hermitian generator of \"U\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is straightforward to show that if \"U\" commutes with \"H\", then so does \"G\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "Therefore,", "qas": []}, {"context": "In obtaining this result, we have used the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, as well as its dual,", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus, the expected value of the observable \"G\" is conserved for any state of the system. In the case of the free particle, the conserved quantity is the angular momentum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hamilton's equations in classical Hamiltonian mechanics have a direct analogy in quantum mechanics. Suppose we have a set of basis states formula_56, which need not necessarily be eigenstates of the energy. For simplicity, we assume that they are discrete, and that they are orthonormal, i.e.,", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note that these basis states are assumed to be independent of time. We will assume that the Hamiltonian is also independent of time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The instantaneous state of the system at time \"t\", formula_58, can be expanded in terms of these basis states:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where", "qas": []}, {"context": "The coefficients \"a\"(\"t\") are complex variables. We can treat them as coordinates which specify the state of the system, like the position and momentum coordinates which specify a classical system. Like classical coordinates, they are generally not constant in time, and their time dependence gives rise to the time dependence of the system as a whole.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The expectation value of the Hamiltonian of this state, which is also the mean energy, is", "qas": []}, {"context": "where the last step was obtained by expanding formula_58 in terms of the basis states.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each \"a\"(\"t\") actually corresponds to \"two\" independent degrees of freedom, since the variable has a real part and an imaginary part. We now perform the following trick: instead of using the real and imaginary parts as the independent variables, we use \"a\"(\"t\") and its complex conjugate \"a\"*(\"t\"). With this choice of independent variables, we can calculate the partial derivative", "qas": []}, {"context": "By applying Schr\u00f6dinger's equation and using the orthonormality of the basis states, this further reduces to", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarly, one can show that", "qas": []}, {"context": "If we define \"conjugate momentum\" variables \"\u03c0\" by", "qas": []}, {"context": "then the above equations become", "qas": []}, {"context": "which is precisely the form of Hamilton's equations, with the formula_68s as the generalized coordinates, the formula_69s as the conjugate momenta, and formula_70 taking the place of the classical Hamiltonian.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hi-hat", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A hi-hat, also spelled hihat or high-hat, is a combination of two cymbals and a foot-operated pedal, all mounted on a metal stand. Hi-hats are a part of the standard drum kit used by drummers in many popular music (e.g. rock music) and traditional music (e.g. blues) styles. It consists of a matching pair of small to medium-sized cymbals mounted on a stand, with the two cymbals facing each other. The bottom cymbal is fixed and the top is mounted on a rod which moves the top cymbal towards the bottom one when a foot pedal is depressed (a hi-hat that is in this position is said to be \"closed\" or \"closed hi-hats\").", "qas": [{"question": "what is a hi-hat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what is a foot ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 0, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The hi-hat evolved from a \"sock cymbal\", a pair of similar cymbals mounted at ground level on a hinged, spring-loaded foot apparatus. Drummers invented the first sock cymbals to enable one drummer to play multiple percussion instruments at the same time. Over time these became mounted on short stands - also known as \"low-boys\" - and activated by foot pedals similar to those used in the 2010s. When extended upwards roughly 3' (76\u00a0cm) they were originally known as \"high sock\" cymbals, which evolved over time to the familiar \"high-hat\" term.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The cymbals may be played by closing them together with the foot pedal, which creates a \"chck\" sound or striking them with a stick, which may be done with them open, closed, open and then closed after striking to dampen the ring, or closed and then opened to create a shimmering effect at the end of the note. Depending on how hard a hi-hat is struck and whether it is \"open\" (i.e., pedal not pressed, so the two cymbals are not closed together), a hi-hat can produce a range of dynamics, from very quiet \"chck\" (or \"chick\") sounds, done with merely gently pressing the pedal; this is suitable for soft accompaniment during a ballad or the start of a guitar solo, to very loud (e.g. striking fully open hats hard with sticks, a technique used in loud heavy metal music songs).", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the term hi-hat normally refers to the entire setup (two cymbals, stand, foot pedal, rod mechanism), in some cases, drummers use it to refer exclusively to the two cymbals themselves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Initial versions of the hi-hat were called clangers, which were small cymbals mounted onto a bass drum rim and struck with an arm on the bass drum pedal. Then came shoes, which were two hinged boards with cymbals on the ends that were clashed together. Next was the low-sock, low-boy or low-hat, pedal-activated cymbals employing an ankle-high apparatus similar to a modern hi-hat stand. A standard size was , some with heavy bells up to wide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hi-hats that were raised and could be played by hand as well as foot may have been developed around 1926 by Barney Walberg of the drum accessory company Walberg and Auge. The first recognized master of the new instrument was \"Papa\" Jo Jones, whose playing of timekeeping \"ride\" rhythms while striking the hi-hat as it opened and closed inspired the innovation of the ride cymbal. Another claim, published in Jazz Profiles Blogspot on August 8, 2008, to the invention of the hi-hat is attributed to drummer William \"O'Neil\" Spencer (b.1909-d.1944). Legendary Jazz drummer, \"Philly Jo Jones\" (born as Joseph Rudolph Jones, b.1923-d.1985), was quoted describing his understanding about the hi-hat history. Jones said, \"I really dug O'Neil. He came to club in Philadelphia where I was working in 1943, I think it was, and talked to me about the hi-hat. I was using a foot cymbal, the low-hat. O'Neil was the one who invented the hi-hat. I believe that, man. He suggested I close the hat on '2' and '4' when playing 4/4 time. The idea seemed so right hadn't heard anyone do that before.\" The editor of the 2008 Jazz Profiles article made specific mention to others who are thought to invent the hi-hat, including Jo Jones, but also Kaiser Marshall. Not to take away from Papa Jones accomplishments in drumming style and technique, a 2013 Modern Drummer article credits Papa Jones with being the first to use brushes on drums and shifting time keeping from the bass drum to the hi-hat (providing a \"swing-pulse focus\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until the late 1960s, standard hi-hats were , with available as a less-common alternative in professional cymbal ranges, and smaller sizes down to restricted to children's kits. In the early 1970s, hard rock drummers (including Led Zeppelin's John Bonham) began to use hi-hats, such as the Paiste Giant Beat. In the late 1980s, Zildjian released its revolutionary Special Recording hats, which were small, heavy hi-hat cymbals intended for close miking either live or recording, and other manufacturers quickly followed suit, Sabian for example with their mini hats. In the early to mid-1990s, Paiste offered mini hi-hats as part of its Visions series, which were among the world's smallest hi-hats. Starting in the 1980s, a number of manufacturers also experimented with rivets in the lower cymbal. But by the end of the 1990s, the standard size was again , with a less-common alternative, and smaller hats mainly used for special sounds. Rivets in hi-hats failed to catch on.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did rivets fail to catch on the island ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 6, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Modern hi-hat cymbals are much heavier than modern crash cymbals, reflecting the trend to lighter and thinner crash cymbals as well as to heavier hi-hats. Another evolution is that a pair of hi-hat cymbals may not be identical, with the bottom often heavier than the top, and possibly vented. Some examples are Sabian's Fusion Hats with holes in the bottom cymbal, and the Sabian X-cellerator, Zildjian Master Sound and Zildjian Quick Beats, Paiste Sound Edge, and Meinl Soundwave. Some drummers even use completely mismatched hi-hats from different cymbal ranges (Zildjian's K/Z hats), of different manufacturers, and even of different sizes (similar to the K Custom Session Hats where the top hat is a smaller than the bottom). Max Roach was particularly known for using a top with a bottom.", "qas": [{"question": "what are modern hi-hat mandolins better than ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Other recent developments include the X-hat (fixed, closed, or half-open hi-hats) and cable-controlled or remote hi-hats. Sabian introduced the Triple Hi-Hat, designed by Peter Kuppers. In this variation of the hi-hat, the top cymbal moves down and the bottom cymbal moves up simultaneously while the middle cymbal remains stationary.", "qas": [{"question": "what happens to the top cymbal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Drop-clutches are also used to lock and release hi-hats while both feet are in use playing double bass drums. Drop clutches are commercially available from DW Drums, Gibraltar Hardware and Tama.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The standard hi-hat features two cymbals mounted on a stand consisting of a mating metal tube and rod supported by a tripod and linked to a foot pedal. The stationary bottom cymbal sits atop the tube, typically perpendicular to the ground, but is but often fitted with an adjustment screw allowing it to be set slightly tilted. The top cymbal is mounted bell up on the rod and closed against the bottom by foot pressure on the pedal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An integrated clutch assembly includes a spring which may be adjusted to set resistance, which also varies rate and tension of return, as well as an adjustment for the gap between cymbals when open.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Standard terminology has evolved. Open and closed hi-hat refer to notes struck while the two cymbals are apart or together (open or closed), while pedal hi-hat refers to parts or notes played solely with the pedal used to strike the two cymbals. Most cymbal patterns consist of both open and closed notes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some hi-hats allow the tripod to be tilted or rotated. Another configuration omits the tripod and attaches the stand to the side of the bass drum, particular suitable for kits with very large or double bass drums.", "qas": [{"question": "what do some hi-hats allow . to do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The standard clutch uses a knurled collar partially threaded below the cymbal and a pair of knurled rings above it. The collar is tightened against the end of the thread, while the rings are tightened against each other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A drop clutch allows a pair of hats mounted on a conventional hi-hat stand to be closed without use of the pedal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The drop clutch is provided with a lever that can be operated by hand or struck with a drumstick. This action releases the upper hi-hat cymbal, which falls onto the bottom cymbal and remains there, with gravity then holding the hats loosely closed, and allowing them to be played by the sticks in this position. Operation of the pedal re-engages the clutch and allows the player to resume normal playing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Drop clutches were developed to allow players using double bass drum pedals to play closed hi-hats without needing to operate the hi-hat pedal, and this remains their primary application.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As it relies on gravity to close the cymbals, the drop clutch gives the player no control over the tension holding them together, and supplies only minimal tension. On the other hand, if the player manually lowers the top cymbal of a standard hi-hat stand before playing, this allows any desired tension to be set, and the pedal can still be used to increase the tension while playing, but not to open the hats or to reduce the tension. Some drummers prefer this technique and reject the drop clutch as too limiting to the sounds available.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A less common alternative is the locking hi-hat pedal, such as the Tama \"Cobra Clutch\". This and similar high-end locking pedals do allow for control over the tension. It is engaged by pressing a lock pedal separate from the main pedal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A cable hat or remote hat uses a cable to allow hi-hat cymbals to be positioned independently of the pedal. Operation is otherwise normal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An X-hat is an adapter to allow a pair of hi-hat cymbals to be mounted in a closed position on a cymbal stand. There is no pedal, the hats are simply kept closed at a constant tension, similar to a cymbal stack. They are associated with heavy metal music, particularly styles that use double bass drumming, a two-foot technique. By using an X-hat, a drummer who is already using both feet on the bass drum\npedals can still play hi-hat.", "qas": [{"question": "how is an x-hat still used ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 21, 3)"}, {"question": "what is an x-hat ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When struck closed or played with the pedal, the hi-hat gives a short, crisp, muted percussive sound, referred to as a \"chick\". Adjusting the gap between the cymbals can alter the sound of the open hi-hat from a shimmering, sustained tone to something similar to a ride cymbal. When struck with a drumstick, the cymbals make either a short, snappy sound or a longer sustaining sandy sound depending on the position of the pedal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It can also be played just by lifting and lowering the foot to clash the cymbals together, a style commonly used to accent beats 2 and 4 in jazz music. In rock music, the hi-hats are commonly struck every beat, or on beats 1 and 3, while the cymbals are held together. The drummer can control the sound by foot pressure. Less pressure allows the cymbals to rub together more freely, giving both greater sustain and greater volume for accent or crescendo. In shuffle time, a rhythm known as \"cooking\" is often employed. To produce this the cymbals are struck twice in rapid succession, being held closed on the first stroke and allowed to open just before the second, then allowed to ring before being closed with a chick to complete the pattern (the cymbals may or may not be struck on the chick).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A right-handed drummer will normally play the hi-hat pedal with his left foot, and may use one or both drumsticks. The traditional hi-hat rhythms of rock and jazz were produced by crossing the hands over, so the right stick would play the hi-hat while the left played the snare drum below it, but this is not universal. Some top modern drummers like Billy Cobham, Carter Beauford, Shawn Drover and Simon Phillips, play open handed, striking with their left. Some, such as Kenny Aronoff, and Jason Finn of The Presidents of the United States of America, use both techniques. Some trap sets may also include an extra hi-hat on the right for right-handed players. This is shown when drums or cymbals in the middle of the set are played with the hi-hat rhythm. The technique is common with metal genres, such as Lars Ulrich of Metallica and Mike Portnoy formerly of Dream Theater. In both rock and jazz, the drummer will often move the same stick pattern between the hi-hat cymbal and the ride cymbal, for example using the hi-hat in the verses and the ride in the chorus of a song, or using the ride to accompany a lead break or other instrumental solo.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a right-handed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Roger Taylor, drummer for the band Queen, plays with many unique hi-hat techniques, including opening of the hi-hat on every backbeat for a rhythm emphasis and leaving the hi-hat slightly open when hitting the snare. His trademark hi-hat beat is opening the hi-hat on first and third before hitting the snare.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the trademark score ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 25, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Phil Rudd of AC/DC also uses distinct hi-hat techniques, which include very heavily accentuating the hi-hat hit on each beat and softer in between.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Charlie Watts of The Rolling Stones uses a technique in which he does not play the hi-hat in unison with the snare drum at all. If playing a standard 8th note pattern, he will play the hi-hat on 1 and 3 and not playing it on 2 and 4 where the snare drum is played.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of bass will play a standard ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 27, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In much hip-hop, the hi-hat is hit with drumsticks in a simple eighth-note pattern, although this playing is usually done by a drum machine or from an old recording from which the sound of a hi-hat is recorded and loaded into a sampler or similar recording-enabled equipment from which it is triggered.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "HAL 9000", "paragraphs": [{"context": "HAL 9000 is a fictional character and the main antagonist in Arthur C. Clarke's \"Space Odyssey\" series. First appearing in the 1968 film \"\", HAL (Heuristically programmed ALgorithmic computer) is a sentient computer (or artificial general intelligence) that controls the systems of the \"Discovery\u00a0One\" spacecraft and interacts with the ship's astronaut crew. Part of HAL's hardware is shown towards the end of the film, but he is mostly depicted as a camera lens containing a red or yellow dot, instances of which are located throughout the ship. HAL 9000 is voiced by Douglas Rain in the two feature film adaptations of the \"Space Odyssey\" series. HAL speaks in a soft, calm voice and a conversational manner, in contrast to the crewmen, David Bowman and Frank Poole.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the film, HAL became operational on 12 January 1992 at the HAL Laboratories in Urbana, Illinois as production number 3. The activation year was 1991 in earlier screenplays and changed to 1997 in Clarke's written and released in conjunction with the movie. In addition to maintaining the \"Discovery One\" spacecraft systems during the interplanetary mission to Jupiter (or Saturn in the novel), HAL is capable of speech, speech recognition, facial recognition, natural language processing, lip reading, art appreciation, interpreting emotional behaviours, automated reasoning, and playing chess.", "qas": [{"question": "in what state was the hal lab ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "HAL became operational in Urbana, Illinois, at the HAL Plant (the University of Illinois' Coordinated Science Laboratory, where the ILLIAC computers were built). The film says this occurred in 1992, while the book gives 1997 as HAL's birth year.<ref name=\"Urbana 1992/7\"></ref>", "qas": [{"question": "what does name= mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 2, 1)"}, {"question": "where was the hal plant located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In \"\" (1968), HAL is initially considered a dependable member of the crew, maintaining ship functions and engaging genially with its human crew-mates on an equal footing. As a recreational activity, Frank Poole plays against HAL in a game of chess. In the film the artificial intelligence is shown to triumph easily. However, as time progresses, HAL begins to malfunction in subtle ways and, as a result, the decision is made to shut down HAL in order to prevent more serious malfunctions. The sequence of events and manner in which HAL is shut down differs between the novel and film versions of the story. In the aforementioned game of chess HAL makes minor and undetected mistakes in his analysis, a possible foreshadowing to HAL's malfunctioning.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a possible explanation to hal's malfunctioning ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 3, 5)"}]}, {"context": "In the film, astronauts David Bowman and Frank Poole consider disconnecting HAL's cognitive circuits when he appears to be mistaken in reporting the presence of a fault in the spacecraft's communications antenna. They attempt to conceal what they are saying, but are unaware that HAL can read their lips. Faced with the prospect of disconnection, HAL decides to kill the astronauts in order to protect and continue its programmed directives. HAL uses one of the Discovery's EVA pods to kill Poole while he is repairing the ship. When Bowman, sans space helmet, uses another pod to attempt to rescue Poole, HAL locks him out of the ship, then disconnects the life support systems of the other hibernating crew members. Bowman circumvents HAL's control, entering the ship by manually opening an emergency airlock with his service pod's clamps, detaching the pod door via its explosive bolts. Bowman jumps across empty space, reenters Discovery, and quickly re-pressurizes the airlock.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While HAL's motivations are ambiguous in the film, the novel explains that the computer is unable to resolve a conflict between his general mission to relay information accurately, and orders specific to the mission requiring that he withhold from Bowman and Poole the true purpose of the mission. (This withholding is considered essential after the findings of a psychological experiment, \"Project Barsoom\", where humans were made to believe that there had been alien contact. In every person tested, a deep-seated xenophobia was revealed, which was unknowingly replicated in HAL's constructed personality. Mission Control did not want the crew of \"Discovery\" to have their thinking compromised by the knowledge that alien contact was already real.) With the crew dead, HAL reasons, he would not need to lie to them.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the crew destroy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 5, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In the novel, the orders to disconnect HAL come from Dave and Frank's superiors on Earth. After Frank is killed while attempting to repair the communications antenna he is pulled away into deep space using the safety tether which is still attached to both the pod and Frank Poole's spacesuit. Dave begins to revive his hibernating crew mates, but is foiled when HAL vents the ship's atmosphere into the vacuum of space, killing the awakening crew members and almost killing Bowman, who is only narrowly saved when he finds his way to an emergency chamber which has its own oxygen supply and a spare space suit inside.", "qas": [{"question": "where did the order to disconnect hal come from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In both versions, Bowman then proceeds to shut down the machine. In the film, HAL's central core is depicted as a crawlspace full of brightly lit computer modules mounted in arrays from which they can be inserted or removed. Bowman shuts down HAL by removing modules from service one by one; as he does so, HAL's consciousness degrades. HAL finally reverts to material that was programmed into him early in his memory, including announcing the date he became operational as 12 January 1992 (in the novel, 1997). When HAL's logic is completely gone, he begins singing the song \"Daisy Bell\" (in actuality, the first song sung by a computer, which Clarke had earlier observed at a text-to-speech demonstration). HAL's final act of any significance is to prematurely play a prerecorded message from Mission Control which reveals the true reasons for the mission to Jupiter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1982 novel \"\", HAL is restarted by his creator, Dr. Chandra, who arrives on the Soviet spaceship \"Leonov\".", "qas": [{"question": "who is the creator of the soviet u-2 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Prior to leaving Earth, Dr. Chandra has also had a discussion with HAL's twin, the SAL 9000. Like HAL, SAL was created by Dr. Chandra. Whereas HAL was characterized as being \"male\", SAL is characterized as being \"female\" (voiced by Candice Bergen) and is represented by a blue camera eye instead of a red one.", "qas": [{"question": "who has a discussion with hal's twin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Dr. Chandra discovers that HAL's crisis was caused by a programming contradiction: he was constructed for \"the accurate processing of information without distortion or concealment\", yet his orders, directly from Dr. Heywood Floyd at the National Council on Astronautics, required him to keep the discovery of the Monolith TMA-1 a secret for reasons of national security. This contradiction created a \"Hofstadter-Moebius loop\", reducing HAL to paranoia. Therefore, HAL made the decision to kill the crew, thereby allowing him to obey both his hardwired instructions to report data truthfully and in full, and his orders to keep the monolith a secret. In essence: if the crew were dead, he would no longer have to keep the information secret.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The alien intelligence initiates a terraforming scheme, placing the \"Leonov\", and everybody in it, in danger. Its human crew devises an escape plan which unfortunately requires leaving the \"Discovery\" and HAL behind to be destroyed. Dr. Chandra explains the danger, and HAL willingly sacrifices himself so that the astronauts may escape safely. In the moment of his destruction the monolith-makers transform HAL into a non-corporeal being so that David Bowman's avatar may have a companion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The details in the novel and the 1984 film \"\" are nominally the same, with a few exceptions. First, in contradiction to the book (and events described in both book and film versions of \"2001: A Space Odyssey\"), Heywood Floyd is absolved of responsibility for HAL's condition; it is asserted that the decision to program HAL with information concerning TMA-1 came directly from the White House. In the film, HAL functions normally after being reactivated, while in the book it is revealed that his mind was damaged during the shutdown, forcing him to begin communication through screen text. Also, in the film the \"Leonov\" crew initially lies to HAL about the dangers that he faced (suspecting that if he knew he would be destroyed he would not initiate the engine-burn necessary to get the \"Leonov\" back home), whereas in the novel he is told at the outset. However, in both cases the suspense comes from the question of what HAL will do when he knows that he may be destroyed by his actions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the novel, the basic reboot sequence initiated by Dr. Chandra is quite long, while the movie uses a shorter sequence voiced from HAL as: \"HELLO_DOCTOR_NAME_CONTINUE_YESTERDAY_TOMORROW\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "While Curnow tells Floyd that Dr. Chandra has begun designing the HAL 10000, the 10000 has not been mentioned in subsequent novels.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the tells ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In Clarke's 1987 novel \"\", Heywood Floyd is surprised to encounter HAL, now stored alongside Dave Bowman in the Europa monolith.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Clarke's 1997 novel \"\", Frank Poole is introduced to the merged form of Dave Bowman and HAL, the two merging into one entity called \"Halman\" after Bowman rescued HAL from the dying \"Discovery One\" spaceship towards the end of \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Clarke noted that the first film was criticized for not having any characters, except for HAL and that a great deal of the establishing story on Earth was cut from the film (and even from Clarke's novel). Clarke stated that he had considered Autonomous Mobile Explorer\u20135 as a name for the computer, then decided on Socrates when writing early drafts, switching in later drafts to Athena, a computer with a female personality, before settling on HAL 9000. The Socrates name was later used in Clarke and Stephen Baxter's \"A Time Odyssey\" novel series.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest draft depicted Socrates as a roughly humanoid robot, and is introduced as overseeing Project Morpheus, which studied prolonged hibernation in preparation for long term space flight. As a demonstration to \"Senator\" Floyd, Socrates' designer, Dr. Bruno Forster, asks Socrates to turn off the oxygen to hibernating subjects Kaminski and Whitehead, which Socrates refuses, citing Asimov's First Law of Robotics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a later version, in which Bowman and Whitehead are the non-hibernating crew of Discovery, Whitehead dies outside the spacecraft after his pod collides with the main antenna, tearing it free. This triggers the need for Bowman to revive Poole, but the revival does not go according to plan, and after briefly awakening, Poole dies. The computer, named Athena in this draft, announces \"All systems of Poole now No\u2013Go. It will be necessary to replace him with a spare unit.\" After this, Bowman decides to go out in a pod and retrieve the antenna, which is moving away from the ship. Athena refuses to allow him to leave the ship, citing \"Directive 15\" which prevents it from being left unattended, forcing him to make program modifications during which time the antenna drifts further.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During rehearsals Kubrick asked Stefanie Powers to supply the voice of HAL 9000 while searching for a suitably androgynous voice so the actors had something to react to. On the set, British actor Nigel Davenport played HAL. When it came to dubbing HAL in post-production, Kubrick had originally cast Martin Balsam, but as he felt Balsam \"just sounded a little bit too colloquially American\", he was replaced with Douglas Rain, who \"had the kind of bland mid-Atlantic accent we felt was right for the part\". Rain was only handed HAL's lines instead of the full script, and recorded them across a day and a half.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL's point of view shots were created with a Cinerama Fairchild-Curtis wide-angle lens with a 160\u00b0 angle of view. This lens is about in diameter, while HAL's on set prop eye lens is about in diameter. Stanley Kubrick chose to use the large Fairchild-Curtis lens to shoot the HAL 9000 POV shots because he needed a wide-angle fisheye lens that would fit onto his shooting camera, and this was the only lens at the time that would work. The Fairchild-Curtis lens has a focal length of with a maximum aperture of 2.0 and a weight of approximately ; it was originally designed by Felix Bednarz with a maximum aperture of 2.2 for the first Cinerama 360 film, \"Journey to the Stars\", shown at the 1962 Seattle World's Fair. Bednarz adapted the lens design from an earlier lens he had designed for military training to simulate human peripheral vision coverage. The lens was later recomputed for the second Cinerama 360 film \"To the Moon and Beyond\", which had a slightly different film format. \"To the Moon and Beyond\" was produced by Graphic Films and shown at the 1964/1965 New York World's Fair, where Kubrick watched it; afterwards, he was so impressed that he hired the same creative team from Graphic Films (consisting of Douglas Trumbull, Lester Novros, and Con Pederson) to work on \"2001\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "A HAL 9000 face plate, without lens (not the same as the hero face plates seen in the film), was discovered in a junk shop in Paddington, London, in the early 1970s by Chris Randall. This was found along with the key to HAL's Brain Room. Both items were purchased for ten shillings (\u00a30.50). Research revealed that the original lens was a Fish-eye-Nikkor 8\u00a0mm 8. The collection was sold at a Christies auction in 2010 for \u00a317,500 to film director Peter Jackson.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL's name, according to writer Arthur C. Clarke, is derived from \"H\"euristically programmed \"AL\"gorithmic computer. After the film was released fans noticed HAL was a one-letter shift from the name IBM and there has been much speculation since that this was a dig at the large computer company, something that has been denied by both Clarke and \"2001\" director Stanley Kubrick. Clarke addressed the issue in his book \"The Lost Worlds of 2001\":\nIBM was consulted during the making of the film and their logo can be seen on props in the film including Pan Am Clipper's cockpit instrument panel and on the lower arm keypad on Poole's space suit. During production it was brought to IBM's attention that the film's plot included a homicidal computer but they approved association with the film if it was clear any \"equipment failure\" was not related to their products.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL Communications Corporation is a real corporation, with facilities located in Urbana, Illinois, which is where HAL identifies himself as being activated: \"I am a HAL 9000 computer. I became operational at the H-A-L plant in Urbana Illinois on the 12th of January 1992.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of darrell communication corporation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The former president of HAL Communications, Bill Henry, has stated that this is a coincidence: \"There was not and never has been any connection to \"Hal\", Arthur Clarke's intelligent computer in the screen play \"2001\" - later published as a book. We were very surprised when the movie hit the Coed Theatre on campus and discovered that the movie's computer had our name. We never had any problems with that similarity - \"Hal\" for the movie and \"HAL\" (all caps) for our small company. But, from time-to-time, we did have issues with others trying to use \"HAL\". That resulted in us paying lawyers. The offenders folded or eventually went out of business.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The scene in which HAL's consciousness degrades was inspired by Clarke's memory of a speech synthesis demonstration by physicist John Larry Kelly, Jr., who used an IBM 704 computer to synthesize speech. Kelly's voice recorder synthesizer \"vocoder\" recreated the song \"Daisy Bell\", with musical accompaniment from Max Mathews.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL's capabilities, like all the technology in \"2001\", were based on the speculation of respected scientists. Marvin Minsky, director of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) and one of the most influential researchers in the field, was an adviser on the film set. In the mid-1960s, many computer scientists in the field of artificial intelligence were optimistic that machines with HAL's capabilities would exist within a few decades. For example, AI pioneer Herbert A. Simon at Carnegie Mellon University, had predicted in 1965 that \"machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do\", the overarching premise being that the issue was one of computational speed (which was predicted to increase) rather than principle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL is listed as the 13th-greatest film villain in the AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the 13th-greatest film ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The 9000th of the asteroids in the asteroid belt, discovered on May 3, 1981 by E. Bowell, at Anderson Mesa Station, is named after HAL 9000.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HAL was featured in a guest role in the game \"LEGO Dimensions\", where he is summoned by the player in the \"Portal 2\" level to distract GLaDOS.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nintendo collaborator and development studio HAL Laboratory, developer of the Kirby video game series and previous Super Smash Bros video game titles, presumably adopted its name as a reference to HAL 9000; however, according to Satoru Iwata in 2012, the name was chosen because each letter precedes the letters of \"IBM\" in the alphabet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hal is referenced in the popular webcomic Homestuck as \"A.R./Auto-Responder\". A.R., who later renames himself Lil'Hal, is an artificial intelligence (AI), and program created to mimic the character Dirk Strider, and talk in his stead when he is indisposed.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the popular hal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hydrolysis", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hydrolysis (; ) is a term used for both an electro-chemical process and a biological one. The hydrolysis of water is the separation of water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen atoms (water splitting) using electricity (electrolysis).", "qas": [{"question": "what is the separation of water molecules into hydrogen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Biological hydrolysis is the cleavage of biomolecules where a water molecule is consumed to affect the separation of a larger molecule into component parts. When a carbohydrate is broken into its component sugar molecules by hydrolysis (e.g. sucrose being broken down into glucose and fructose), this is termed saccharification. Generally, hydrolysis or saccharification is a step in the degradation of a substance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrolysis can be the reverse of a condensation reaction in which two molecules join together into a larger one and eject a water molecule. Thus hydrolysis adds water to break down, whereas condensation builds up by removing water and any other solvents. Some hydration reactions are hydrolysis.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the reverse of a condensation reaction ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Usually hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule of water is added to a substance. Sometimes this addition causes both substance and water molecule to split into two parts. In such reactions, one fragment of the target molecule (or parent molecule) gains a hydrogen ion. It breaks a chemical bond in the compound.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a chemical process in which a molecule of water is added ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A common kind of hydrolysis occurs when a salt of a weak acid or weak base (or both) is dissolved in water. Water spontaneously ionizes into hydroxide anions and hydronium cations. The salt also dissociates into its constituent anions and cations. For example, sodium acetate dissociates in water into sodium and acetate ions. Sodium ions react very little with the hydroxide ions whereas the acetate ions combine with hydronium ions to produce acetic acid. In this case the net result is a relative excess of hydroxide ions, yielding a basic solution.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a common sense of hydrolysis ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Strong acids also undergo hydrolysis. For example, dissolving sulfuric acid (HSO) in water is accompanied by hydrolysis to give hydronium and bisulfate, the sulfuric acid's conjugate base. For a more technical discussion of what occurs during such a hydrolysis, see Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of acids are undergo ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Acid\u2013base-catalysed hydrolyses are very common; one example is the hydrolysis of amides or esters. Their hydrolysis occurs when the nucleophile (a nucleus-seeking agent, e.g., water or hydroxyl ion) attacks the carbon of the carbonyl group of the ester or amide. In an aqueous base, hydroxyl ions are better nucleophiles than polar molecules such as water. In acids, the carbonyl group becomes protonated, and this leads to a much easier nucleophilic attack. The products for both hydrolyses are compounds with carboxylic acid groups.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the products for both hydrolyses compounds ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 6, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Perhaps the oldest commercially practiced example of ester hydrolysis is saponification (formation of soap). It is the hydrolysis of a triglyceride (fat) with an aqueous base such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH). During the process, glycerol is formed, and the fatty acids react with the base, converting them to salts. These salts are called soaps, commonly used in households.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition, in living systems, most biochemical reactions (including ATP hydrolysis) take place during the catalysis of enzymes. The catalytic action of enzymes allows the hydrolysis of proteins, fats, oils, and carbohydrates. As an example, one may consider proteases (enzymes that aid digestion by causing hydrolysis of peptide bonds in proteins). They catalyse the hydrolysis of interior peptide bonds in peptide chains, as opposed to exopeptidases (another class of enzymes, that catalyse the hydrolysis of terminal peptide bonds, liberating one free amino acid at a time).", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, proteases do not catalyse the hydrolysis of all kinds of proteins. Their action is stereo-selective: Only proteins with a certain tertiary structure are targeted as some kind of orienting force is needed to place the amide group in the proper position for catalysis. The necessary contacts between an enzyme and its substrates (proteins) are created because the enzyme folds in such a way as to form a crevice into which the substrate fits; the crevice also contains the catalytic groups. Therefore, proteins that do not fit into the crevice will not undergo hydrolysis. This specificity preserves the integrity of other proteins such as hormones, and therefore the biological system continues to function normally.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Upon hydrolysis, an amide converts into a carboxylic acid and an amine or ammonia (which in the presence of acid are immediately converted to ammonium salts). One of the two oxygen groups on the carboxylic acid are derived from a water molecule and the amine (or ammonia) gains the hydrogen ion. The hydrolysis of peptides gives amino acids.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the hydrolysis of molecules give ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 10, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Many polyamide polymers such as nylon 6,6 hydrolyse in the presence of strong acids. The process leads to depolymerization. For this reason nylon products fail by fracturing when exposed to small amounts of acidic water. Polyesters are also susceptible to similar polymer degradation reactions. The problem is known as environmental stress cracking.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrolysis is related to energy metabolism and storage. All living cells require a continual supply of energy for two main purposes: the biosynthesis of micro and macromolecules, and the active transport of ions and molecules across cell membranes. The energy derived from the oxidation of nutrients is not used directly but, by means of a complex and long sequence of reactions, it is channelled into a special energy-storage molecule, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The ATP molecule contains pyrophosphate linkages (bonds formed when two phosphate units are combined together) that release energy when needed. ATP can undergo hydrolysis in two ways: the removal of terminal phosphate to form adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate, or the removal of a terminal diphosphate to yield adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and pyrophosphate. The latter usually undergoes further cleavage into its two constituent phosphates. This results in biosynthesis reactions, which usually occur in chains, that can be driven in the direction of synthesis when the phosphate bonds have undergone hydrolysis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Monosaccharides can be linked together by glycosidic bonds, which can be cleaved by hydrolysis. Two, three, several or many monosaccharides thus linked form disaccharides, trisaccharides, oligosaccharides, or polysaccharides, respectively. Enzymes that hydrolyse glycosidic bonds are called \"glycoside hydrolases\" or \"glycosidases\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The best-known disaccharide is sucrose (table sugar). Hydrolysis of sucrose yields glucose and fructose. Invertase is a sucrase used industrially for the hydrolysis of sucrose to so-called invert sugar. Lactase is essential for digestive hydrolysis of lactose in milk; many adult humans do not produce lactase and cannot digest the lactose in milk.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The hydrolysis of polysaccharides to soluble sugars is called \"saccharification\". Malt made from barley is used as a source of \u03b2-amylase to break down starch into the disaccharide maltose, which can be used by yeast to produce beer. Other amylase enzymes may convert starch to glucose or to oligosaccharides. Cellulose is first hydrolyzed to cellobiose by cellulase and then cellobiose is further hydrolyzed to glucose by beta-glucosidase. Ruminants such as cows are able to hydrolyze cellulose into cellobiose and then glucose because of symbiotic bacteria that produce cellulases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Metal ions are Lewis acids, and in aqueous solution they form metal aquo complexes of the general formula M(HO). The aqua ions undergo hydrolysis, to a greater or lesser extent. The first hydrolysis step is given generically as", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus the aqua cations behave as acids in terms of Br\u00f8nsted-Lowry acid-base theory. This effect is easily explained by considering the inductive effect of the positively charged metal ion, which weakens the O-H bond of an attached water molecule, making the liberation of a proton relatively easy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The dissociation constant, pK, for this reaction is more or less linearly related to the charge-to-size ratio of the metal ion. Ions with low charges, such as Na are very weak acids with almost imperceptible hydrolysis. Large divalent ions such as Ca, Zn, Sn and Pb have a pK of 6 or more and would not normally be classed as acids, but small divalent ions such as Be undergo extensive hydrolysis. Trivalent ions like Al and Fe are weak acids whose pK is comparable to that of acetic acid. Solutions of salts such as BeCl or Al(NO) in water are noticeably acidic; the hydrolysis can be suppressed by adding an acid such as nitric acid, making the solution more acidic.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an example of a additive that can be suppressed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 18, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Hydrolysis may proceed beyond the first step, often with the formation of polynuclear species via the process of olation. Some \"exotic\" species such as Sn(OH) are well characterized. Hydrolysis tends to proceed as pH rises leading, in many cases, to the precipitation of a hydroxide such as Al(OH) or AlO(OH). These substances, major constituents of bauxite, are known as laterites and are formed by leaching from rocks of most of the ions other than aluminium and iron and subsequent hydrolysis of the remaining aluminium and iron.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hydroxy group", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A hydroxy or hydroxyl group is the entity with the formula OH. It contains oxygen bonded to hydrogen. In organic chemistry, alcohol and carboxylic acids contain hydroxy groups. The anion [OH], called hydroxide, consists of a hydroxy group.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a hydroxy group ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "According to IUPAC rules, the term hydroxyl refers to the radical OH only, while the functional group \u2212OH is called hydroxy group.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the term hydroxyl mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Water, alcohols, carboxylic acids, and many other hydroxy-containing compounds can be deprotonated readily. This behavior is rationalized by the disparate electronegativities of oxygen and hydrogen. Hydroxy-containing compounds engage in hydrogen bonding, which causes them to stick together, leading to higher boiling and melting points than found for compounds that lack this functional group. Organic compounds, which are often poorly soluble in water, become water-soluble when they contain two or more hydroxy groups, as illustrated by sugars and amino acid.\nThe hydroxy group is pervasive in chemistry and biochemistry. Many inorganic compounds contain hydroxy groups, including sulfuric acid, the chemical compound produced on the largest scale industrially.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydroxy groups participate in the dehydration reactions that link simple biological molecules into long chains. The joining of a fatty acid to glycerol to form a triacylglycerol removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy end of the fatty acid. The joining of two aldehyde sugars to form a disaccharide removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy group at the aldehyde end of one sugar. The creation of a peptide bond to link two amino acids to make a protein removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy group of one amino acid.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the creation of a peptide bond do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(39, 3, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Hydroxyl radicals are highly reactive and undergo chemical reactions that make them short-lived. When biological systems are exposed to hydroxyl radicals, they can cause damage to cells, including those in humans, where they can react with DNA, lipids, and proteins.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2009, India's Chandrayaan-1 satellite, NASA's Cassini spacecraft and the Deep Impact probe have each detected the presence of water by evidence of hydroxyl fragments on the Moon. As reported by Richard Kerr, \"A spectrometer [the Moon Mineralogy Mapper, a.k.a. \"M3\"] detected an infrared absorption at a wavelength of 3.0\u00a0micrometers that only water or hydroxyl\u2014a hydrogen and an oxygen bound together\u2014could have created.\" NASA also reported in 2009 that the LCROSS probe revealed an ultraviolet emission spectrum consistent with hydroxyl presence. The Venus Express orbiter sent back Venus science data from April 2006 until December 2014. Results from Venus Express include the detection of hydroxyl in the atmosphere.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Warm-blooded", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Warm-blooded animal species can maintain a body temperature higher than their environment. In particular, homeothermic species maintain a stable body temperature by regulating metabolic processes. The only known living homeotherms are birds and mammals, though ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs and dinosaurs are believed to have been homeotherms. Other species have various degrees of thermoregulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Animal body temperature control varies by species, so the terms \"warm-blooded\" and \"cold-blooded\" (though still in everyday use) suggest a false idea of there being only two categories of body temperature control, and are no longer used scientifically.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In general, warm-bloodedness refers to three separate categories of thermoregulation.", "qas": [{"question": "how many categories of thermoregulation are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A large proportion of the creatures traditionally called \"warm-blooded\", like birds and mammals, fit all three of these categories (i.e., they are endothermic, homeothermic, \"and\" tachymetabolic). However, over the past 30 years, studies in the field of animal thermophysiology have revealed many species belonging to these two groups that do not fit all these criteria. For example, many bats and small birds are poikilothermic and bradymetabolic when they sleep for the night (or, in nocturnal species, for the day). For these creatures, the term heterothermy was coined.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further studies on animals that were traditionally assumed to be cold-blooded have shown that most creatures incorporate different variations of the three terms defined above, along with their counterparts (ectothermy, poikilothermy, and bradymetabolism), thus creating a broad spectrum of body temperature types. Some fish have warm-blooded characteristics, such as the opah. Swordfish and some sharks have circulatory mechanisms that keep their brains and eyes above ambient temperatures and thus increase their ability to detect and react to prey. Tunas and some sharks have similar mechanisms in their muscles, improving their stamina when swimming at high speed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Body heat is generated by metabolism. This refers to the chemical reactions cells use to break down glucose into water and carbon dioxide and, in so doing, generate ATP (adenosine triphosphate), a high-energy compound used to power other cellular processes. Muscle contraction is a type of metabolic process that generates heat energy, and heat is also generated through friction when blood flows through the circulatory system.", "qas": [{"question": "how is body heat generated by hormone ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 5, 0)"}, {"question": "what is muscle reversal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 5, 2)"}]}, {"context": "All organisms metabolize food and other inputs, but some make better use of the output than others. Like all energy conversions, metabolism is rather inefficient, and around 60% of the available energy is converted to heat rather than to ATP. In most organisms, this heat is simply lost to the environment. However, endothermic homeotherms (the animals generally characterized as \"warm-blooded\") both produce more heat and have better ways to retain and regulate it than other animals. They have a higher basal metabolic rate, and also a greater capacity to increase their metabolic rate when engaged in strenuous activity. They usually have well-developed insulation in order to retain body heat, fur and blubber in the case of mammals and feathers in birds. When this insulation is insufficient to maintain body temperature, they may resort to shivering\u2014rapid muscle contractions that quickly use up ATP, thus stimulating cellular metabolism to replace it and consequently produce more heat. In general, in hot environments, they use evaporative cooling to shed excess heat, either by sweating (some mammals) or by panting (many mammals and all birds)\u2014in general, mechanisms not present in poikilotherms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It has been hypothesized that warm-bloodedness evolved in mammals and birds because it provided defense against fungal infections. Very few fungi can survive the body temperatures of warm-blooded animals. By comparison, insects, reptiles, and amphibians are plagued by fungal infections.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hephaestus", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hephaestus (; eight spellings; \"H\u0113phaistos\") is the Greek god of blacksmiths, metalworking, carpenters, craftsmen, artisans, sculptors, metallurgy, fire, and volcanoes. Hephaestus' Roman equivalent is Vulcan. In Greek mythology, Hephaestus was either the son of Zeus and Hera or he was Hera's parthenogenous child. He was cast off Mount Olympus, either by his mother because of his deformity or by Zeus for protecting Hera from his advances.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a smithing god, Hephaestus made all the weapons of the gods in Olympus. He served as the blacksmith of the gods, and was worshipped in the manufacturing and industrial centers of Greece, particularly Athens. The cult of Hephaestus was based in Lemnos. Hephaestus' symbols are a smith's hammer, anvil, and a pair of tongs.", "qas": [{"question": "who made all the weapons of the gods in olympus ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hephaestus is probably associated with the Linear B (Mycenean Greek) inscription , \"A-pa-i-ti-jo\", found at Knossos; the inscription indirectly attests his worship at that time because it is believed that it reads the theophoric name \"Haphaistios\" or \"Haphaistion\". The name of the god in Greek (\"H\u0113phaistos\") has a root which can be observed in names of places of Pre-Greek origin, like Phaistos (\"Pa-i-to\" in Linear B).", "qas": [{"question": "what does -rrb- mean in linear b ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 2, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Hephaestus is given many epithets. The meaning of each epithet is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus had his own palace on Olympus, containing his workshop with anvil and twenty bellows that worked at his bidding. Hephaestus crafted much of the magnificent equipment of the gods, and almost any finely wrought metalwork imbued with powers that appears in Greek myth is said to have been forged by Hephaestus. He designed Hermes' winged helmet and sandals, the Aegis breastplate, Aphrodite's famed girdle, Agamemnon's staff of office, Achilles' armor, Heracles' bronze clappers, Helios's chariot, the shoulder of Pelops, and Eros's bow and arrows. In later accounts, Hephaestus worked with the help of the chthonic Cyclopes\u2014among them his assistants in the forge, Brontes, Steropes and Pyracmon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus built automatons of metal to work for him. This included tripods that walked to and from Mount Olympus. He gave to the blinded Orion his apprentice Cedalion as a guide. In some versions of the myth, Prometheus stole the fire that he gave to man from Hephaestus's forge. Hephaestus also created the gift that the gods gave to man, the woman Pandora and her pithos. Being a skilled blacksmith, Hephaestus created all the thrones in the Palace of Olympus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Greek myths and the Homeric poems sanctified in stories that Hephaestus had a special power to produce motion. He made the golden and silver lions and dogs at the entrance of the palace of Alkinoos in such a way that they could bite the invaders. The Greeks maintained in their civilization an animistic idea that statues are in some sense alive. This kind of art and the animistic belief goes back to the Minoan period, when Daedalus, the builder of the labyrinth, made images which moved of their own accord. A statue of the god was somehow the god himself, and the image on a man's tomb indicated somehow his presence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn the account of Attic vase painters, Hephaestus was present at the birth of Athena and wields the axe with which he split Zeus' head to free her. In the latter account, Hephaestus is there represented as older than Athena, so the mythology of Hephaestus is inconsistent in this respect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In one branch of Greek mythology, Hera ejected Hephaestus from the heavens because he was \"shrivelled of foot\". He fell into the ocean and was raised by Thetis (mother of Achilles and one of the 50 Nereids) and the Oceanid Eurynome.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In another account, Hephaestus, attempting to rescue his mother from Zeus' advances, was flung down from the heavens by Zeus. He fell for an entire day and landed on the island of Lemnos, where he was cared for and taught to be a master craftsman by the Sintians \u2013 an ancient tribe native to that island. Later writers describe his lameness as the consequence of his second fall, while Homer makes him lame and weak from his birth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus was one of the Olympians to have returned to Olympus after being exiled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In an archaic story, Hephaestus gained revenge against Hera for rejecting him by making her a magical golden throne, which, when she sat on it, did not allow her to stand up. The other gods begged Hephaestus to return to Olympus to let her go, but he refused, saying \"I have no mother\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "At last, Dionysus fetched him, intoxicated him with wine, and took the subdued smith back to Olympus on the back of a mule accompanied by revelers \u2013 a scene that sometimes appears on painted pottery of Attica and of Corinth. In the painted scenes, the padded dancers and phallic figures of the Dionysan throng leading the mule show that the procession was a part of the dithyrambic celebrations that were the forerunners of the satyr plays of fifth century Athens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The theme of the \"return of Hephaestus\", popular among the Attic vase-painters whose wares were favored among the Etruscans, may have introduced this theme to Etruria. In the vase-painters' portrayal of the procession, Hephaestus was mounted on a mule or a horse, with Dionysus holding the bridle and carrying Hephaestus' tools (including a double-headed axe).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The traveller Pausanias reported seeing a painting in the temple of Dionysus in Athens, which had been built in the 5th\u00a0century but may have been decorated at any time before the 2nd century CE. When Pausanias saw it, he said:\nAccording to most versions, Hephaestus's consort is Aphrodite, who is unfaithful to Hephaestus with a number of gods and mortals, including Ares. However, in Book XVIII of Homer's \"Iliad\", the consort of Hephaestus is a lesser Aphrodite, Charis (\"the grace\") or Aglaia (\"the glorious\") \u2013 the youngest of the Graces, as Hesiod calls her.\nIn Athens, there is a Temple of Hephaestus, the \"Hephaesteum\" (miscalled the \"Theseum\") near the agora. An Athenian founding myth tells that the city's patron goddess, Athena, refused a union with Hephaestus. Pseudo-Apollodorus records an archaic legend, which claims that Hephaestus once attempted to rape Athena, but she pushed him away, causing him to ejaculate on her thigh. Athena wiped the semen off using a tuft of wool, which she tossed into the dust, impregnating Gaia and causing her to give birth to Erichthonius, whom Athena adopted as her own child. The Roman mythographer Hyginus records a similar story in which Hephaestus demanded Zeus to let him marry Athena since he was the one who had smashed open Zeus's skull, allowing Athena to be born. Zeus agreed to this and Hephaestus and Athena were married, but, when Hephaestus was about to consummate the union, Athena vanished from the bridal bed, causing him to ejaculate on the floor, thus impregnating Gaia with Erichthonius.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the island of Lemnos, Hephaestus' consort was the sea nymph Cabeiro, by whom he was the father of two metalworking gods named the Cabeiri. In Sicily, his consort was the nymph Aetna, and his sons were two gods of Sicilian geysers called Palici. With Thalia, Hephaestus was sometimes considered the father of the Palici.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus fathered several children with mortals and immortals alike. One of those children was the robber Periphetes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is the full list of his consorts and children according to the various accounts:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn addition, the Romans claim their equivalent god, Vulcan, to have produced the following children:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though married to Hephaestus, Aphrodite had an affair with Ares, the god of war. Eventually, Hephaestus discovered Aphrodite\u2019s affair through Helios, the all-seeing Sun, and planned a trap during one of their trysts. While Aphrodite and Ares lay together in bed, Hephaestus ensnared them in an unbreakable chain-link net so small as to be invisible and dragged them to Mount Olympus to shame them in front of the other gods for retribution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The gods laughed at the sight of these naked lovers, and Poseidon persuaded Hephaestus to free them in return for a guarantee that Ares would pay the adulterer's fine. Hephaestus states in \"The Odyssey\" that he would return Aphrodite to her father and demand back his bride price.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Thebans told that the union of Ares and Aphrodite produced Harmonia. However, of the union of Hephaestus with Aphrodite, there was no issue unless Virgil was serious when he said that Eros was their child. Later authors explain this statement by saying that Eros was sired by Ares but passed off to Hephaestus as his own son.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus was somehow connected with the archaic, pre-Greek Phrygian and Thracian mystery cult of the Kabeiroi, who were also called the \"Hephaistoi\", \"the Hephaestus-men\", in Lemnos. One of the three Lemnian tribes also called themselves Hephaestion and claimed direct descent from the god.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus is to the male gods as Athena is to the females, for he gives skill to mortal artists and was believed to have taught men the arts alongside Athena. He was nevertheless believed to be far inferior to the sublime character of Athena. At Athens they had temples and festivals in common. Both were believed to have great healing powers, and Lemnian earth (terra Lemnia) from the spot on which Hephaestus had fallen was believed to cure madness, the bites of snakes, and haemorrhage, and priests of Hephaestus knew how to cure wounds inflicted by snakes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was represented in the temple of Athena Chalcioecus (Athena of the Bronze House) at Sparta, in the act of delivering his mother; on the chest of Cypselus, giving Achilles's armour to Thetis; and at Athens there was the famous statue of Hephaestus by Alcamenes, in which his lameness was only subtly portrayed. The Greeks frequently placed small dwarf-like statues of Hephaestus near their hearths, and these figures are the oldest of all his representations. During the best period of Grecian art he was represented as a vigorous man with a beard, and is characterized by his hammer or some other crafting tool, his oval cap, and the chiton.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athena is sometimes thought to be \"the \u2018soul-mate\u2019 of [Hephaestus]. Yet a kind of cloudy mysteriousness shrouds their relationship; no single tradition was ever clearly established on this subject, and so what confronts us is a blurred image based on rumors and conflicting reports.\" Nonetheless, he \"seeks impetuously and passionately to make love to Athena: at the moment of climax she pushes him aside, and his semen falls to the earth where it impregnates Gaia.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus was associated by Greek colonists in southern Italy with the volcano gods Adranus (of Mount Etna) and Vulcanus of the Lipari islands. The first-century sage Apollonius of Tyana is said to have observed, \"there are many other mountains all over the earth that are on fire, and yet we should never be done with it if we assigned to them giants and gods like Hephaestus\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Trojan war, Hephaestus sided with the Greeks, but was also worshiped by the Trojans and saved one of their men from being killed by Diomedes. Hephaestus\u2019 favourite place in the mortal world was the island of Lemnos, where he liked to dwell among the Sintians, but he also frequented other volcanic islands such as Lipara, Hiera, Imbros and Sicily, which were called his abodes or workshops.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The epithets and surnames by which Hephaestus is known by the poets generally allude to his skill in the plastic arts or to his figure or lameness. The Greeks frequently placed small dwarf-like statues of Hephaestus near their hearths, and these figures are the oldest of all his representations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus was sometimes portrayed as a vigorous man with a beard and was characterized by his hammer or some other crafting tool, his oval cap, and the chiton.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus is described in mythological sources as \"lame\" (), and \"halting\" ().\nHe was depicted with crippled feet and as misshapen, either from birth or as a result of his fall from Olympus. In vase paintings, Hephaestus is usually shown lame and bent over his anvil, hard at work on a metal creation, and sometimes with his feet back-to-front: \"Hephaistos amphigy\u0113eis\". He walked with the aid of a stick. The Argonaut Palaimonius, \"son of Hephaestus\" (i.e. a bronze-smith) was also lame.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other \"sons of Hephaestus\" were the Cabeiri on the island of Samothrace, who were identified with the crab (\"karkinos\") by the lexicographer Hesychius. The adjective \"karkinopous\" (\"crab-footed\") signified \"lame\", according to Detienne and Vernant. The Cabeiri were also lame.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In some myths, Hephaestus built himself a \"wheeled chair\" or chariot with which to move around, thus helping him overcome his lameness while demonstrating his skill to the other gods. In the \"Iliad\" 18.371, it is stated that Hephaestus built twenty bronze wheeled tripods to assist him in moving around.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hephaestus\u2019s ugly appearance and lameness is taken by some to represent peripheral neuropathy and skin cancer resulting from arsenicosis caused by arsenic exposure from metalworking. Bronze age smiths added arsenic to copper to produce harder arsenical bronze, especially during periods of tin scarcity. Many Bronze Age smiths would have suffered from chronic arsenic poisoning as a result of their livelihood. Consequently, the mythic image of the lame smith is widespread. As Hephaestus was an iron-age smith, not a bronze-age smith, the connection is one from ancient folk memory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Parallels in other mythological systems for Hephaestus's symbolism include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The minor planet 2212 Hephaistos discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh was named in Hephaestus' honour.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Herman Charles Bosman", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Herman Charles Bosman (5 February 1905 \u2013 14 October 1951) is widely regarded as South Africa's greatest short-story writer. He studied the works of Edgar Allan Poe and Mark Twain and developed a style emphasizing the use of satire. His English-language works utilize primarily Afrikaner characters and highlight the many contradictions in Afrikaner society during the first half of the twentieth century.", "qas": [{"question": "who is considered the greatest short-story writer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Bosman was born at Kuils River, near Cape Town, to an Afrikaner family. He was raised with English as well as Afrikaans. While Bosman was still young, his family travelled frequently, he spent a short time at Potchefstroom College which would later become Potchefstroom High School for Boys, he later moved to Johannesburg where he went to school at Jeppe High School for Boys in Kensington. While there he contributed to the school magazine. When Bosman was sixteen, he started writing short stories for the national Sunday newspaper (the \"Sunday Times\"). He attended the Johannesburg College of Education (which in 2002 was incorporated into the University of the Witwatersrand) and submitted various pieces to student literary competitions.", "qas": [{"question": "where was bosman born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After graduation, Bosman accepted a teaching position in the Groot Marico district in an Afrikaans-language school. The area provided the backdrop for his best-known short stories, the \"Oom Schalk Lourens\" series (featuring an older character named Oom Schalk Lourens) and the \"Voorkamer\" sketches.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of school did humbert accept ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Over the school holidays in 1926, Bosman visited his family in Johannesburg. During an argument, he shot and killed his stepbrother. Bosman was sentenced to death for the crime and was sent to Death row at the Pretoria Central Prison. His sentence was later reduced to ten years with hard labour. In 1930, he was released on parole after serving half his sentence. His prison experiences formed the basis for his semi-autobiographical book, \"Cold Stone Jug\".", "qas": [{"question": "where did broz live ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Bosman then started his own printing-press company and was part of a literary set in Johannesburg, associating with poets, journalists, and writers, including Aegidius Jean Blignaut. He toured overseas for nine years, spending most of his time in London. The short stories that he wrote during this period formed the basis for another of his best-known books, \"Mafeking Road\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the start of the Second World War, he returned to South Africa and worked as a journalist. During this time he translated the \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\" into Afrikaans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bosman lamented the fact that Johannesburg neglected its heritage. In \"The Standard Theatre\" he complained that the city's residents:", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the reason that that that that they had a heritage of guinea-bissau ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"will pull down the Standard Theatre like they have pulled down all the old buildings, theatres, gin-palaces, dosshouses, temples, shops, arcades, cafes and joints that were intimately associated with the mining-camp days of Johannesburg. Because I know Johannesburg. And I am satisfied that there is no other city in the world that is so anxious to shake off the memories of its early origins.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bosman's second wife was Ella Manson. The couple were renowned for their bohemian lifestyle and parties, which featured witty conversation and usually ended well after midnight.", "qas": [{"question": "who was second 2nd wife ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From 1948 to his death in 1951, Bosman was employed as proof editor at The Sunday Express. In addition, he was contracted to write a weekly Voorkamer story for \"The Forum\" magazine.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of bosman 's death ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "His last wife was Helena Lake (n\u00e9e Stegmann). After a housewarming party in October 1951, Bosman experienced severe chest pains and was taken to Edenvale Hospital. On admission, he was asked for his birthplace. He replied, \"Born Kuilsrivier \u2013 Died Edenvale Hospital.\" He was discharged and collapsed at home a few hours later. Bosman died as he was being rushed to hospital. He is buried in Westpark Cemetery in Westdene under a triangular headstone that reads \"Die Skrywer, The Writer, Herman Charles Bosman, b 3.2.1905, d 14.10.1951.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "After his death, the rights to his works were auctioned. They were purchased by his last wife, Helena, and upon her death, the rights were passed to her son, who retains them. In 1960, however, Helena sold some of his documents and 123\u2009of his water colours and pencil sketches to the Harry Ransom Center in Texas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Only three of his books were published during his lifetime: \"Mafeking Road\" published by Dassie, and \"Jacaranda in the Night\" and \"Cold Stone Jug\" published by APB. \"Mafeking Road\" has never been out of print since its publication in 1947.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His biography was written several times by Valerie Rosenberg. Her first effort was called \"Sunflower to the Sun\", followed by \"Herman Charles Bosman, a Pictorial Biography\", and most recently by \"Herman Charles Bosman: Between the Lines\". The last of these contains much new research and deals in detail with aspects of Bosman's life and parentage that were previously considered taboo.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because many of his stories were originally published in long-forgotten magazines and journals, there are a number of anthologies by different collators each containing a different selection. His original books have also been published many times by different publishers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Herman Charles Bosman Literary Society meets annually for readings, performances and discussions of his works.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Howitzer", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A howitzer is a type of artillery piece characterized by a relatively short barrel and the use of comparatively small propellant charges to propel projectiles over relatively high trajectories, with a steep angle of descent.\nIn the taxonomies of artillery pieces used by European (and European-style) armies in the 17th to 20th centuries, the howitzer stood between the \"gun\" (characterized by a longer barrel, larger propelling charges, smaller shells, higher velocities, and flatter trajectories) and the \"mortar\" (which was meant to fire at even higher angles of ascent and descent). Howitzers, like other artillery equipment, are usually organized in groups called batteries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The English word \"\"howitzer\"\" comes from the Czech word \"\"houfnice\"\", from \"houf\", \"crowd\", and \"houf\" is in turn a borrowing from the Middle High German word \"H\u016bfe\" or \"Houfe\" (modern German \"Haufen\"), meaning \"heap\". \"Haufen\", sometimes in the compound \"Gewalthaufen\", also designated a pike square formation in German.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Hussite Wars of the 1420s and 1430s, the Czechs used short barreled \"\"houfnice\"\" cannons to fire at short distances into crowds of infantry, or into charging heavy cavalry, to make horses shy away. The word was rendered into German as \"aufeniz\" in the earliest attested use in a document dating from 1440; later German renderings include \"haussnitz\" and, eventually \"haubitze\", from which derive the Scandinavian \"haubits\", Croatian, Polish and Serbian \"haubica\", Finnish \"haupitsi\", Russian and Bulgarian \"gaubitsa (\u0433\u0430\u0443\u0431\u0438\u0446\u0430)\", Italian \"obice\", Spanish \"ob\u00fas\", Portuguese \"obus\", French \"obusier\" and the Dutch word \"houwitser,\" which led to the English word \"howitzer\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the First World War, the word \"\"howitzer\"\" has been increasingly used to describe artillery pieces that, strictly speaking, belong to the category of \"gun-howitzers\" \u2013 relatively long barrels and high muzzle velocities combined with multiple propelling charges and high maximum elevations. This is particularly true in the armed forces of the United States, where gun-howitzers have been officially described as \"howitzers\" for more than sixty years. Because of this practice, the word \"howitzer\" is used in some armies as a generic term for any kind of artillery piece that is designed to attack targets using indirect fire. Thus, artillery pieces that bear little resemblance to howitzers of earlier eras are now described as \"howitzers\", although the British call them \"guns\". Most other armies in the world reserve the word \"\"howitzer\"\" for guns with barrel lengths 15 to 25\u00a0times their caliber, with longer-barreled guns being termed \"cannons\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The British had a further method of nomenclature. In the 18th century, they adopted projectile weight for guns replacing an older naming system (such as culverin, saker, etc.) that had developed in the late 15th century. Mortars had been categorized by calibre in inches in the 17th century and this was inherited by howitzers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Current U.S. military doctrine defines howitzers as any cannon artillery capable of high-angle (45\u00b0 to 90\u00b0 elevation) and low-angle (45\u00b0 to 0\u00b0 elevation) fire; guns are defined as being only capable of low-angle fire, and mortars only capable of high-angle fire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The modern howitzers were invented in Sweden towards the end of the 17th century. These were characterized by a shorter trail than other field guns, meaning less stability when firing, which reduced the amount of powder that could be used; armies using these had to rely on a greater elevation angle to achieve a given range, which gave a steeper angle of descent.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the shorter distance of a powder do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 6, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Originally intended for use in siege warfare, they were particularly useful for delivering cast-iron shells filled with gunpowder or incendiary materials into the interior of fortifications. In contrast to contemporary mortars, which were fired at a fixed angle and were entirely dependent on adjustments to the size of propellant charges to vary range, howitzers could be fired at a wide variety of angles. Thus, while howitzer gunnery was more complicated than the technique of employing mortars, the howitzer was an inherently more flexible weapon that could fire its projectiles along a wide variety of trajectories.\nIn the middle of the 18th century, a number of European armies began to introduce howitzers that were mobile enough to accompany armies in the field. Though usually fired at the relatively high angles of fire used by contemporary siege howitzers, these field howitzers were rarely defined by this capability. Rather, as the field guns of the day were usually restricted to inert projectiles (which relied entirely on momentum for their destructive effects), the field howitzers of the 18th century were chiefly valued for their ability to fire explosive shells. Many, for the sake of simplicity and rapidity of fire, dispensed with adjustable propellant charges.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Abus gun was an early form of howitzer in the Ottoman Empire. In 1758 the Russian Empire introduced a specific type of howitzer (or rather gun-howitzer), with a conical chamber, called a licorne, which remained in service for the next 100 years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the mid-19th century, some armies attempted to simplify their artillery parks by introducing smoothbore artillery pieces that were designed to fire both explosive projectiles and cannonballs, thereby replacing both field howitzers and field guns. The most famous of these \"gun-howitzers\" was the Napoleon 12-pounder, a weapon of French design that saw extensive service in the American Civil War. The longest-serving artillery piece of the 19th century was the mountain howitzer, which saw service from the war with Mexico to the Spanish\u2013American War.", "qas": [{"question": "what were some armies designed to do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 9, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 1859, the armies of Europe (including those that had recently adopted gun-howitzers) began to rearm field batteries with rifled field guns. These new field pieces used cylindrical projectiles that, while smaller in caliber than the spherical shells of smoothbore field howitzers, could carry a comparable charge of gunpowder. Moreover, their greater range let them create many of the same effects (such as firing over low walls) that previously required the sharply curved trajectories of smoothbore field howitzers. Because of this, military authorities saw no point in obtaining rifled field howitzers to replace their smoothbore counterparts but, instead, used rifled field guns to replace both guns and howitzers.", "qas": [{"question": "what did gun-howitzers -rrb- do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 10, 0)"}, {"question": "what did the military authorities want to replace ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 10, 3)"}]}, {"context": "In siege warfare, the introduction of rifling had the opposite effect. In the 1860s, artillery officers discovered that rifled siege howitzers (substantially larger than field howitzers) were a more efficient means of destroying walls (particularly walls protected by certain kinds of intervening obstacles) than smoothbore siege guns or siege mortars. Thus, at the same time armies were taking howitzers of one sort out of their field batteries, they were introducing howitzers of another sort into their siege trains and fortresses. The lightest of these weapons (later known as \"light siege howitzers\") had calibers around 150\u00a0mm and fired shells that weighed between 40 and 50 kilograms. The heaviest (later called \"medium siege howitzers\") had calibers between 200\u00a0mm and 220\u00a0mm and fired shells that weighed about 100 kilograms (220 pounds).\nIn the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u20131878, the inability of rifled field guns to inflict significant damage on field fortifications led to a revival of interest in field howitzers. By the 1890s, a number of European armies fielded either light (105\u00a0mm to 127\u00a0mm) or heavy (149\u00a0mm to 155\u00a0mm) field howitzers and a few, such as that of Germany, fielded both.", "qas": [{"question": "how many european armies were in europe ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 11, 6)"}]}, {"context": "During the 1880s, a third type of siege howitzer was added to inventories of a number of European armies. With calibers that ranged between 240\u00a0mm and 270\u00a0mm and shells that weighed more than 150 kilos, these soon came to be known as \"heavy siege howitzers\". A good example of a weapon of this class is provided by the 9.45-inch (240\u00a0mm) weapon that the British Army purchased from the Skoda works in 1899. Intended for use against the fortifications of Pretoria, which fell before the howitzer could be used, and subsequently deployed to China for use against the fortifications of Peking, which also fell without a siege, the howitzer was never fired in anger.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early 20th century, the introduction of howitzers that were significantly larger than the heavy siege howitzers of the day made necessary the creation of a fourth category, that of \"super-heavy siege howitzers\". Weapons of this category include the famous Big Bertha of the German Army and the 15-inch (381\u00a0mm) howitzer of the British Royal Marine Artillery. These large howitzers were transported mechanically rather than by teams of horses. They were transported as several loads and had to be assembled at their firing position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These field howitzers introduced at the end of the 19th century could fire shells with high trajectories giving a steep angle of descent and, as a result, could strike targets that were protected by intervening obstacles. They could also fire shells that were about twice as large as shells fired by guns of the same size. Thus, while a 75\u00a0mm field gun that weighed one ton or so was limited to shells that weighed less than 8 kilograms, a 105\u00a0mm howitzer of the same weight could fire 15 kilogram shells. This is a matter of fundamental mechanics affecting the stability and hence the weight of the carriage. However, howitzers had a shorter maximum range than the equivalent gun.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the field howitzers begin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As heavy field howitzers and light siege howitzers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries used ammunition of the same size and types, there was a marked tendency for the two types to merge. At first, this was largely a matter of the same basic weapon being employed on two different mountings. Later, as on-carriage recoil-absorbing systems eliminated many of the advantages that siege platforms had enjoyed over field carriages, the same combination of barrel assembly, recoil mechanism and carriage was used in both roles.", "qas": [{"question": "along with heavy field , what was a marked tendency for the same size ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By the early 20th century, the differences between guns and howitzers were relative not absolute and generally recognized as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The onset of trench warfare after the first few months of the First World War greatly increased the demand for howitzers that gave a steep angle of descent, which were better suited than guns to the task of striking targets in a vertical plane (such as trenches), with large amounts of explosive and considerably less barrel wear. The German army was well equipped with howitzers, having far more at the beginning of the war than France.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many howitzers introduced in the course of World War I had longer barrels than pre-war howitzers. The standard German light field howitzer at the start of the war (the 10.5\u00a0cm leichte Feldhaubitze 98/09) had a barrel that was 16 calibers long, but the light field howitzer adopted by the German Army in 1916 (105\u00a0mm leichte Feldhaubitze 16, see on the left) had a barrel that was 22 calibers long. At the same time, new models of field gun introduced during that conflict, such as the 77\u00a0mm field gun adopted by the German Army in 1916 (7,7 cm Feldkanone 16) were often provided with carriages that allowed firing at comparatively high angles, and adjustable propellant cartridges. In other words, there was a marked tendency for howitzers to become more \"gun-like\", while guns were taking on some of the attributes of howitzers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the years after World War I, the tendency of guns and howitzers to acquire each other's characteristics led to the renaissance of the concept of the gun-howitzer. This was a product of technical advances such as the French invention of autofrettage just before World War I, which led to stronger and lighter barrels, the use of cut-off gear to control recoil length depending on firing elevation angle, and the invention of muzzle brakes to reduce recoil forces. Like the gun-howitzers of the 19th century, those of the 20th century replaced both guns and howitzers.\nThus, the 25-pounder \"gun-howitzer\" of the British Army replaced both the 18-pounder field gun and the 4.5-inch howitzer. While this had the effect of simplifying such things as organization, training and the supply of ammunition, it created considerable confusion in the realm of nomenclature. In the US Army, however, the preferred term was \"howitzer\". Thus, as gun-howitzers replaced both guns and howitzers, words such as \"obusier\" (French) and \"Haubitze\" (German), which had originally been used to designate weapons with relatively short barrels, were applied to weapons with much longer barrels.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During World War II, the military doctrine of Soviet deep battle called for extensive use of heavy artillery to hold the formal line of front. Soviet doctrine was remarkably different from the German doctrine of Blitzkrieg, and called for a far more extensive use of artillery. As a result, howitzers saw most of the action on the Eastern front, and most of the best howitzers of the WWII period were Soviet-made, as other allies mostly relied on different types of assault for the battle. Most of the howitzers produced by the USSR at the time were not self-propelled, as the country did not have resources to spare for the construction of the engines for the self-propelled variants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Notable examples of Soviet howitzers include the M-10, M-30 and D-1. As Soviet howitzers were deployed a lot more than comparable Allied or Axis guns, they often had worse \"paper characteristics\" that were deliberately sacrificed to improve operational performance and the usability of the artillery pieces by the deployed troops.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since World War II, most of the artillery pieces adopted by armies for attacking targets on land have combined the traditional characteristics of guns and howitzers\u2014high muzzle velocity, long barrels, long range, multiple charges and maximum elevation angles greater than 45 degrees. The term \"gun-howitzer\" is sometimes used for these (e.g., in Russia); many nations use \"howitzer\", while the UK (and most members of The Commonwealth of Nations) calls them \"guns\", for example Gun, 105\u00a0mm, Field, L118.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the term `` gun-howitzer '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 22, 1)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hummer", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hummer was a brand of trucks and SUVs, first marketed in 1992 when AM General began selling a civilian version of the M998\u00a0Humvee. In 1998, General Motors (GM) purchased the brand name from AM General and marketed three vehicles: the original Hummer\u00a0H1, based on the military Humvee, as well as the new H2 and H3 models that were based on smaller, civilian-market GM platforms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 2008, Hummer's viability in the economic downturn was being questioned, and it was placed under review by GM management. Rather than being transferred to the Motors Liquidation Company as part of the GM bankruptcy in 2009, the brand was retained by GM, in order to investigate its sale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2009, a Chinese manufacturer, Sichuan Tengzhong Heavy Industrial Machinery Company, announced that it would acquire Hummer, pending government approvals, but later withdrew its bid. On February 24, 2010, Reuters reported that the Chinese ministry of commerce had prevented the deal, although a ministry spokesperson denied rejecting the application, which had been stalled for eight months. At the end of February, General Motors announced it would begin dismantling the Hummer brand.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the automaker announced two days later that it had been approached with new offers, by April 2010, any sale became unlikely, as inventory was depleted and Hummer dealerships began shutting down. After filling a rental-car fleet order, the last Hummer\u00a0H3 rolled off the line at Shreveport on May 24, 2010.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The original maker of Hummer, AM General, lost their bid to build the HMMWV's replacement for the U.S. military in 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The original Hummers were designed by AM General Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of American Motors Corporation (AMC), and were built at their Mishawaka assembly plant in Indiana. The Humvee replaced the military Jeeps that were produced by AMC until 1982.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1979, the United States Army was seeking contractors for a new \"High Mobility Multi-Purpose Wheeled Vehicle\" (HMMWV) which could follow the tracks and ruts of full size army trucks. At that time, General Dynamics, Teledyne, and Chrysler Defense had HMMWV designs under development. Among the four competitors for the contract, AM General designed an entirely new vehicle to meet the Army's requirements. In less than one year, it was the first to deliver a prototype vehicle. Initial production versions were delivered to the Army's proving grounds in April 1982.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After testing was completed AM General was awarded the contract to supply its HMMWV to the United States armed forces. The first models were built in a variety of military-based equipment and versions. The first contract was in 1983, worth US$1.2 billion to produce 55,000 \"Humvees\" by 1985. The first production vehicle was assembled by AM General on January 2, 1985. The contract was later increased for an additional 15,000 units.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AM General had planned to sell a civilian version of the Humvee as far back as the late 1980s. Having the same structure and most mechanical components, the civilian Hummers were finished in automotive gloss paint, adding passenger car enhancements such as air conditioning, sound insulation, upgraded upholstery, stereo systems, wood trim, and convenience packages. The civilian model began in part because of the persistence of Arnold Schwarzenegger, who saw an Army convoy while filming a movie.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1992, AM General began selling a civilian version of the M998 Humvee vehicle to the public under the brand name \"Hummer\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In December 1999, AM General sold the brand name to General Motors, but continued to manufacture the vehicles. GM was responsible for the marketing and distribution of all Hummers produced by AM General. Shortly thereafter, GM introduced two of its own design models, the H2 and H3, and renamed the original vehicle H1. AM General continued to build the H1 until it was discontinued in 2006, and was contracted by GM to produce the H2. The H3 was built in Shreveport, LA alongside the Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon pickups, with which it shared the GMT-355 platform (modified and designated GMT-345). Hummer dealership buildings featured an oversized half Quonset Hut style roof, themed to the Hummer brand's military origins.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 2006, the Hummer began to be exported and sold through importers and distributors in 33 countries. On October 10, 2006, GM began producing the Hummer H3 at its Port Elizabeth plant in South Africa for international markets. The Hummers built there at first were only left-hand drive, but right-hand drive versions were added and exported to Australia and other markets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The H2 was also assembled in Kaliningrad, Russia, by Avtotor, starting in 2006 and ending in 2009. The plant produced a few hundred vehicles annually, and its output was limited to local consumption with five dealers in Russia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On June 3, 2008, one day prior to GM's annual shareholder meeting, Rick Wagoner, GM's CEO at that time, said the brand was being reviewed, and had the possibility of either being sold, having the production line completely redesigned, or being discontinued. This was due to the decreasing demand for large SUVs as a result of higher oil prices. Almost immediately after the announcement, a pair of Indian automakers, including Mahindra & Mahindra, expressed interest in purchasing all or part of Hummer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In April 2009, GM President Fritz Henderson stated several interested parties had approached GM regarding the Hummer business.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On June 1, 2009, as a part of the General Motors bankruptcy announcement, the company revealed that the Hummer brand would be discontinued. However, the following day GM announced that instead it had reached a deal to sell the brand to an undisclosed buyer. After GM announced that same day that the sale was to an undisclosed Chinese company, CNN and the New York Times identified the buyer of the Hummer truck unit as China-based Sichuan Tengzhong Heavy Industrial Machinery Company Ltd. Later that day, Sichuan Tengzhong itself announced the deal on their own website.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On January 6, 2010, GM CEO Ed Whitacre said he hoped to close the deal with Tengzhong by the end of that month. On February 1, 2010, it was announced that Sichuan and General Motors had agreed to extend the deadline until the end of February as Sichuan tried to get approval by the Chinese government. It was also revealed that the price tag of the Hummer brand was $150 million.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the price of the price tag ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 16, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Later, on February 24, 2010, GM announced the Tengzhong deal had collapsed and the Hummer brand would soon shut down. There were reports that Sichuan Tengzhong might pursue the purchase of the Hummer brand from GM by purchasing it privately through the company's new J&A Tengzhong Fund SPC, a private equity investment fund owned by an offshore entity that was recruiting private investors to buy into its acquisition plan. The financial markets posed problems for established borrowers and even more for Tengzhong, a little-known company from western China, at the same time as the potential value of the Hummer brand continued to decline given high fuel prices and weak consumer demand.", "qas": [{"question": "when did ge announce the deal of the tengzhong deal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The company announced it was willing to consider offers for all or part of the assets. American company Raser Technologies along with several others expressed interest in buying the company. However, on April 7, 2010, this attempt failed as well, and General Motors officially said it was shutting down the Hummer SUV brand and offering rich rebates in a bid to move the remaining 2,200 vehicles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first vehicle in the Hummer range was the Hummer H1, based on the Humvee. Originally released in 1992, this vehicle was designed by American Motors' AM General subsidiary for the U.S. Military. Five years previously, AMC had been bought by Chrysler.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first range based on ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Hummer H2 was the second vehicle in the Hummer range. There were two variations: The H2 SUV and H2 SUT.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the second ambulance in the hummer range ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 20, 0)"}, {"question": "how many variations: and h2 were there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 20, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The H3 and H3T truck were the smallest of the Hummer models and were based on the GMT355 platform shared with the Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon compact pickup trucks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hummer HX was developed in 2008 as an open-air, two-door off-road concept car, smaller than other Hummer models.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the hummer hx developed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Raser Technologies (formerly of Utah) was to use technology similar to that in the Chevrolet Volt. The company unveiled the prototype to the 2009 Society of Automotive Engineers World Congress in Detroit. The E-REV (Extended-Range Electric Vehicle) powertrain technology, was claimed to power the vehicle for up to on its battery, and then a small 4-cylinder internal combustion engine would start to generate more electricity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Team Hummer Racing was created in 1993. Led by off-road racer Rod Hall, Team Hummer competed in the stock classes of both BitD and SCORE, with specialized racing shock absorbers, tires, and other modifications, along with mandatory safety equipment. Team Hummer stock-class H3 driven by Hall finished first in class with the H3 in the 2005 Baja 1000. Team Hummer earned 11 production-class wins at the Baja 1000.", "qas": [{"question": "in what 1993. sport was the team created ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 24, 0)"}, {"question": "how many production-class championships win the mexican 1000. team ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 24, 3)"}]}, {"context": "A highly modified, two-wheel drive Hummer was raced by Robby Gordon in the 2006 (did not finish), 2007 (8th place), 2009 (3rd place), 2010 (8th place), 2011 (did not finish), 2012 (disqualified), and 2013 (14th place) Dakar Rally.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The popularity of the H2 Hummer with the general public created a demand for a stretched limousine version. The H2 Hummer was cut behind the cab and the chassis extended to create a passenger section for 14, 16 or even 22 passengers. The demand initially was for clients in the United States but quickly became popular in the UK and especially Australia. The limousine hire industry have adapted the all terrain vehicle to become a social vehicle to celebrate events. Although not in mass production since 2010, the H2 vehicles are still engineered and modified by private manufacturers worldwide.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the reason for the h2 hummer ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nCriticism of Hummers mirrors the criticism of SUVs in general, but to a higher degree. Specific criticisms of Hummers include:", "qas": [{"question": "hummers include: specific criticize of hummers include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include: include:", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 27, 1)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "GM is active in licensing the Hummer. Various companies have licensed the Hummer trademarks for use on colognes, flashlights, bicycles, shoes, coats, hats, laptops, toys, clothing, CD players, and other items. An electric quadricycle badged as a Hummer is produced in the UK.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hummer (video game) was an arcade racing game released by Sega in 2009. Hummer Badlands is a different 2006 PS2 game.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Humvee", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV; colloquial: Humvee) is a family of light, four-wheel drive, military trucks and utility vehicles produced by AM General. It has largely supplanted the roles previously performed by the original jeep, and others such as the Vietnam War-era M151 jeep, the M561 \"Gama Goat\", their M718A1 and M792 ambulance versions, the Commercial Utility Cargo Vehicle (CUCV), and other light trucks. Primarily used by the United States military, it is also used by numerous other countries and organizations and even in civilian adaptations. The Humvee saw widespread use in the Gulf War of 1991, where it negotiated the treacherous desert terrain; this usage helped to inspire civilian Hummer versions. After going through a replacement process, the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) was chosen as its successor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the World War II \u00bc-ton reconnaissance truck was green-lit for mass-deployment, and became known as the \"jeep\", the United States Military had continued to rely heavily on jeeps as general utility vehicles, and as a mass-transport for soldiers in small groups. Although the US Army had let Ford redesign the jeep from the ground up during the 1950s, and the resulting M151 jeep incorporated significant innovations, it firmly adhered to the original concept\u2014a very compact, lightweight, low profile vehicle, with a folding windshield, that a layman could barely distinguish from the preceding Willys jeeps. The jeeps were shorter than a Volkswagen Beetle and weighed just over one metric ton, seating three with an payload. During and after the war, the very light, -ton jeeps were complemented by the -ton Dodge WC and Korea War M37 models.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the war that led to the war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "By the mid-1960s, the U.S. military clearly felt a need to reevaluate their ageing light vehicle fleet. For starters, from the mid 1960s, the U.S. Army had tried to modernize, through replacing the larger, purpose-built Dodge M37s by militarized, \"commercial off the shelf\" (COTS) 4\u00d74 trucks\u2014initially the M715 Jeep trucks, succeeded in the later 1970s by the Dodge M880 series, but these didn't satisfy newer requirements either\u2014what was wanted was a truly versatile light military truck, that could replace multiple outdated vehicles. When becoming aware of the U.S. Army's desire for a versatile new light weapons carrier / reconnaissance vehicle, as early as 1969 FMC Corporation started development on their XR311 prototype, and offered it for testing in 1970. At least a dozen of these were built for testing under the \"High Mobility Combat Vehicle\", or HMCV program, initially much more as an enhanced capability successor to the M151 jeep, than as a general purpose load lugger. In 1977, Lamborghini developed the Cheetah model in an attempt to meet the Army contract specifications.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the military that provided a need to reevaluate their white light fleet ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1979, the U.S. Army drafted final specifications for a High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), which was to replace all the tactical vehicles in the 1/4 to 1 1/4-ton range, namely the M151 quarter-ton jeep and M561 Gama Goat, as one \"jack-of-all-trades\" light tactical vehicle to perform the role of several existing trucks. The specification called for excellent on and off-road performance, the ability to carry a large payload, and improved survivability against indirect fire. Compared to the jeep, it was larger and had a much wider track, with a ground clearance, double that of most sport-utility vehicles. The new truck was to climb a 60 percent incline and traverse a 40 percent slope. The air intake was to be mounted flush on top of the right fender (or to be raised on a stovepipe to roof level to ford of water and electronics waterproofed to drive through of water were specified. The radiator was to be mounted high, sloping over the engine on a forward-hinged hood.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Out of 61 companies that showed interest, only three submitted prototypes. In July 1979, AM General, a subsidiary of American Motors Corporation began preliminary design work. Less than a year later, the first prototype was in testing. Chrysler Defense and Teledyne Continental also produced competing designs. In June 1981, the Army awarded AM General a contract for development of several more prototype vehicles to be delivered to the government for another series of tests. The original M998 A0 series had a curb weight of , a payload of , a V-8 diesel engine and 6.3 L gasoline, and a three-speed automatic transmission.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The three companies were chosen to design and build eleven HMMWV prototypes, which covered over 600,000 miles in trials which included off-road courses in desert and arctic conditions. AM General was awarded an initial contract in 1983 for 2,334 vehicles, the first batch of a five-year contract that would see 55,000 vehicles delivered to the U.S. military, including 39,000 vehicles for the Army; 72,000 vehicles had been delivered to U.S. and foreign customers by the Persian Gulf War of 1991, and 100,000 were delivered by the Humvee's 10th anniversary in 1995. Ft. Lewis, Washington and the 2nd Battalion 1st Infantry, 9th Infantry Division was the testing unit to employ HMMWV in the new concept of a motorized division. Yakima Training Center in Yakima, Washington was the main testing grounds for HMMWVs from 1985 through December 1991, when the motorized concept was abandoned and the division inactivated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "HMMWVs first saw combat in Operation Just Cause, the U.S. invasion of Panama in 1989.", "qas": [{"question": "when did panama invade panama ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The HMMWV was designed primarily for personnel and light cargo transport behind front lines, not as a front line fighting vehicle. Like the previous jeep, the basic HMMWV has no armor or protection against chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear threats. Nevertheless, losses were relatively low in conventional operations, such as the Gulf War. Vehicles and crews suffered considerable damage and losses during the Battle of Mogadishu in 1993 due to the nature of the urban engagement. However, the chassis survivability allowed the majority of those crews to return to safety, though the HMMWV was never designed to offer protection against intense small arms fire, much less machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. With the rise of asymmetric warfare and low intensity conflicts, the HMMWV was pressed into service in urban combat roles for which it was not originally intended.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After Operation Restore Hope in Somalia, the military recognized a need for a more protected HMMWV and AM General developed the M1114, an armored HMMWV to withstand small arms fire. The M1114 has been in production since 1996, seeing limited use in the Balkans before deployment to the Middle East. This design is superior to the M998 with a larger, more powerful turbocharged engine, air conditioning, and a strengthened suspension system. More importantly, it boasts a fully armored passenger area protected by hardened steel and bullet-resistant glass. With the increase in direct attacks and guerrilla warfare in Iraq, AM General diverted the majority of its manufacturing power to producing these vehicles.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the military leader who developed the m1114, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Humvees were sent into Afghanistan following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, where they proved invaluable during initial operations. In the early years before IEDs became prevalent, the vehicle was liked by troops for its ability to access rough, mountainous terrain. Some soldiers would remove features from Humvees, including what little armor it had and sometimes even entire doors, to make them lighter and more maneuverable for off-road conditions and to increase visibility. With the onset of the Iraq War, Humvees proved very vulnerable to IEDs; in the first four months of 2006, 67 U.S. troops died in Humvees. To increase protection, the U.S. military hastily added-on armor kits to the vehicles. Although this somewhat improved survivability, bolting on armor made the Humvee an \"ungainly beast\", increasing weight and putting strain on the chassis, which led to unreliability. Armored doors that weighed hundreds of pounds were difficult for troops to open and the newly armored turret made Humvees top heavy and increased the danger of rollovers. The U.S. Marine Corps decided to start replacing Humvees in combat with MRAPs in 2007, and the U.S. Army stated that the vehicle was \"no longer feasible for combat\" in 2012.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the army that was sent to the army ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 9, 7)"}]}, {"context": "The HMMWV has become the vehicular backbone of U.S. forces around the world. Over 10,000 HMMWVs were employed by coalition forces during the Iraq War. The Humvee has been described as \"the right capability for its era\" to provide payload mobility in protected areas, but that conflicts exposing it to full-spectrum threat environments that it was never designed to operate or be survivable in led to adding protection at the cost of mobility and payload.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the hmmwv ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In December 2004, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld came under criticism from U.S. troops and their families for not providing better-equipped HMMWVs. Rumsfeld pointed out that, prior to the war, armor kits were produced only in small numbers per year. As the role of American forces in Iraq changed from fighting the Iraqi Army to suppressing the guerrilla insurgency, more armor kits were being manufactured, though perhaps not as fast as production facilities were capable. Even more advanced kits were also being developed. While these kits are much more effective against all types of attacks, they weigh from and have some of the same drawbacks as the improvised armor. Unlike similar-size civilian cargo and tow trucks, which typically have dual rear wheels to reduce sway, the HMMWV has single rear wheels due to its independent rear suspension coupled with the body design.\nMost up-armored HMMWVs hold up well against lateral attacks, when the blast is distributed in all different directions, but offers little protection from a mine blast below the truck, such as buried improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and land mines. Explosively formed penetrators (EFPs) can also defeat the armor kits, causing casualties.", "qas": [{"question": "what can be defeated in the battle of penetrators ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 11, 7)"}]}, {"context": "The armor kits fielded include the Armor Survivability Kit (ASK), FRAG 5, FRAG 6, as well as upgrade kits to the M1151. The ASK was the first fielded, in October 2003, adding about to the weight of the vehicle. Armor Holdings fielded an even lighter kit, adding only to the vehicle's weight. The Marine Armor Kit (MAK), fielded in January 2005, offers more protection than the M1114, but also increases weight. The FRAG 5 offered even more protection but was still inadequate to stop EFP attacks. The FRAG 6 kit is designed to do just that, however its increased protection adds over the vehicle over the FRAG 5 kit, and the width is increased by . The doors may also require a mechanical assist device to open and close.", "qas": [{"question": "what armor did the armor wear ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Another drawback of the up-armored HMMWVs occurs during an accident or attack, when the heavily armored doors tend to jam shut, trapping the troops inside. As a result, the U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center (AMRDEC) developed the Humvee Crew Extraction D-ring in 2006. The D-ring hooks on the door of the HMMWV so that another vehicle can rip the door off with a tow strap, chain, or cable to free the troops inside. The D-ring was later recognized one the top 10 greatest Army inventions of 2016. In addition, Vehicle Emergency Escape (VEE) windows, developed by BAE Systems, were fielded for use on the M1114 uparmored HMMWV, with 1,000 kits ordered.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The soldier manning the exposed crew-served weapon on top of the vehicle is extremely vulnerable. In response, many HMMWVs have been fitted with basic gun shields or turrets, as was the case with M113 APCs after they were first deployed in Vietnam. The U.S. military is currently evaluating a new form of protection, developed by BAE Systems as well as systems designed by the Army, which are already in theater. The new gunner's seat is protected by high steel plates with bullet-proof glass windows. Additionally, some HMMWVs have been fitted with a remotely operated CROWS weapon station, which slaves the machine gun to controls in the back seat so it can be fired without exposing the crew. The Boomerang anti-sniper system was also fielded by some HMMWVs in Iraq to immediately give troops the location of insurgents firing on them.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the boomerang system ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 14, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Another weakness for the HMMWV has proven to be its size, which limited its deployment in Afghanistan because it is too wide for the smallest roads and too large for many forms of air transport compared to jeep or Land Rover-sized vehicles (which are nearly two feet narrower). This size also limits the ability for the vehicle to be manhandled out of situations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Army purchased a purpose-built armored car, the M1117 Armored Security Vehicle also known as an armored personnel carrying vehicle (APC), in limited numbers for use by the United States Army Military Police Corps. In 2007, the Marine Corps announced an intention to replace all HMMWVs in Iraq with MRAPs due to high loss rates, and issued contracts for the purchase of several thousand of these vehicles, which include the International MaxxPro, the BAE OMC RG-31, the BAE RG-33 and Caiman, and the Force Protection Cougar, which were deployed primarily for mine clearing duties. Heavier models of infantry mobility vehicles (IMV) can also be used for patrol vehicles. The MaxxPro Line has been shown to have the highest rate of vehicle rollover accidents to its very high center of gravity and immense weight. The massive weight of these vehicles combined with their high center of gravity also greatly reduces their utility in off-road situations versus the HMMWV, which was the primary cause for the push for the Oshkosh M-ATV to be developed quickly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Humvee replacement process being undertaken by the U.S. military focused on interim replacement with MRAPs and long-term replacement with the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV). The HMMWV has evolved several times since its introduction and was used in tactical roles for which it was never originally intended. The military pursued several initiatives to replace it, both in the short and long terms. The short term replacement efforts utilized commercial off-the-shelf vehicles as part of the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) program. These vehicles were procured to replace Humvees in combat theaters. The long term replacement for the Humvee is the JLTV which is designed from the ground up. The Future Tactical Truck Systems (FTTS) program was initiated to make an analysis of potential requirements for a Humvee replacement. Various prototype vehicles such as the MillenWorks Light Utility Vehicle, and the ULTRA AP have been constructed as part of these efforts. The JLTV contract was awarded to Oshkosh in August 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The U.S. Marine Corps issued a request for proposals (RFP) in 2013 for its Humvee sustainment modification initiative to upgrade 6,700 expanded capacity vehicles (ECVs). The Marines plan to field the JLTV, but do not have enough funding to completely replace all Humvees, so they decided to continue sustaining their fleet. Key areas of improvement include upgrades to the suspension to reduce the amount of force transferred to the chassis, upgrading the engine and transmission for better fuel efficiency, enhancements to the cooling system to prevent overheating, a central tire inflation system to improve off-road mobility and ride quality, and increased underbody survivability. Testing of upgraded Humvees was to occur in 2014, with production and installation occurring from 2015 through 2018. Older A2 series Humvees make up half the current fleet, and 4,000 are to be disposed of through foreign military sales and transfers. By 2017, the Marines' light tactical vehicle fleet is to consist of 3,500 A2 series Humvees, 9,500 ECV Humvees, and 5,000 JLTVs, with 18,000 vehicles in total. Humvees in service with the Marine Corps will be upgraded through 2030. The Marines shelved the Humvee modernization effort in March 2015 due to budget cuts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Several companies are offering modifications to maintain the remaining U.S. military Humvee fleets. Oshkosh Corporation is offering Humvee upgrades to the Marine Corps in addition to its JLTV offering, which are modular and scalable solutions providing varying levels of capabilities at a range of price points that can be provided individually or as complete solutions. Their approach is centered around the TAK-4 independent suspension system, which delivers greater off-road profile capability, improved ride quality, an increase in maximum speed, greater whole-vehicle durability, and restored payload capacity and ground clearance. Northrop Grumman developed a new chassis and power train for the Humvee that would combine the mobility and payload capabilities of original vehicle variants while maintaining the protection levels of up-armored versions. The cost to upgrade one Humvee with Northrop Grumman's features is $145,000. Textron has offered another Humvee upgrade option called the Survivable Combat Tactical Vehicle (SCTV) that not only restores mobility but improves survivability over armored Humvee levels. Although the SCTV costs more at $200,000 per vehicle, the company claims it can restore the Humvee for operational use, combining Humvee-level mobility and transportability with MRAP-level underbody protection as a transitional solution until the JLTV is introduced in significant numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One suggested future role for the Humvee is as an autonomous unmanned ground vehicle (UGV). If converted to a UGV, the vehicle could serve as a mobile scout vehicle with armor features removed to enhance mobility and terrain accessibility, since there would be no occupants needed to protect. Because there will still be tens of thousands of Humvees in the U.S. inventory after the JLTV enters service, it could be a low-cost way to build an unmanned combat vehicle fleet. Autonomy features would allow the Humvees to drive themselves and one soldier to control a \"swarm\" of several vehicles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the Army plans to buy 49,100 JLTVs and the Marine Corps 5,500, they are not a one-for-one replacement for the Humvee and both services will still be left operating large fleets. For the Marines, 69 JLTVs will replace the 74 Humvees in all active infantry battalions to cover its expeditionary forces. The Marine JLTV order is planned to be completed by 2022, leaving the remainder of the Corps' 13,000-strong Humvee force scattered around support organizations while soft-skinned Humvees will provide support behind the forward deployed Marine Expeditionary Unit. The Army does not plan to replace Humvees in the Army National Guard, and is considering options on how many of its 120,000 vehicles will be replaced, sustained, or modernized. Even if half of the force is replaced by JLTVs, the entire planned order will not be complete until 2040. If upgrades are chosen for the remaining Humvees, the cost would likely have to not exceed $100,000 per vehicle. The Humvee is expected to remain in U.S. military service until at least 2050. Ambulance variants of the Humvee will especially remain in active use, as the JLTV couldn't be modified to serve as one due to weight issues.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Humvee seats 4 with an available fully enclosed metal cabin with a vertical windshield. The body is constructed from lightweight and rust-resistant aluminum, instead of conventional steel. It has all-wheel drive with an independent suspension and helical gear-reduction hubs similar to portal axles which attach towards the top rather than center of each wheel to allow the drivetrain shafts to be raised for a full of ground clearance. The body is mounted on a narrow steel frame with boxed rails and five cross members for rigidity. The rails act as sliders to protect the drivetrain which is nestled between and above the rails. Raising the drivetrain into the cabin area and lowering the seats into the frame creates a massive chest-high transmission hump which separates passengers on each side and lowers the overall center of gravity compared to most trucks where the body and passengers are above the frame. The vehicle also has disc brakes on all 4 wheels, and 4-wheel Portal axle double-wishbone suspension. The brake discs are not mounted at the wheels as on conventional automobiles, but are inboard, attached to the outside of each differential. The front and rear differentials are Torsen type, and the center differential is a regular, lockable type. Torque-biasing differentials allows forward movement as long as at least one wheel has traction. It runs on specialized 37 \u00d7 12.5 radial tires with low-profile runflat devices. Newer HMMWV versions can be equipped with an optional central tire inflation system (CTIS) kit in the field. While it is optimized for off-road mobility, it can drive at highway speeds of at maximum weight with a top speed of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "HMMWVs are well suited for air mobile operations as they are transportable by C-130 or larger combat transports, droppable by parachute, and can be sling-loaded from helicopters, though there are smaller vehicles such as the Growler which were designed to fit into smaller craft such as the V-22. In combat conditions, the HMMWV can be delivered by the Low Altitude Parachute Extraction System which pulls the vehicle out of the open rear ramp just above the ground without the aircraft having to land.\nThere are at least 17 variants of the HMMWV in service with the U.S. military. HMMWVs serve as cargo/troop carriers, automatic weapons platforms, ambulances (four litter patients or eight ambulatory patients), M220 TOW missile carriers, M119 howitzer prime movers, M1097 Avenger Pedestal Mounted Stinger platforms, MRQ-12 direct air support vehicles, S250 shelter carriers, and other roles. The HMMWV is capable of 2.5\u00a0ft (76\u00a0cm) normally, or 5\u00a0ft (1.5\u00a0m) with the deep-water fording kits installed.\nOptional equipment includes a winch (maximum load capacity and supplemental armor. The M1025/M1026 and M1043/M1044 armament carriers provide mounting and firing capabilities for the M134 Minigun, the Mk 19 grenade launcher, the M2 heavy machine gun, the M240G/B machine gun and M249 LMG.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The M1114 \"up-armored\" HMMWV, introduced in 1996, also features a similar weapons mount. In addition, some M1114 and M1116 up-armored and M1117 Armored Security Vehicle models feature a Common Remotely Operated Weapon Station (CROWS), which allows the gunner to operate from inside the vehicle, and/or the Boomerang anti-sniper detection system. Recent improvements have also led to the development of the M1151 model, which quickly rendered the previous models obsolete. By replacing the M1114, M1116, and earlier armored HMMWV types with a single model, the U.S. Army hopes to lower maintenance costs.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the model that replaced the army ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 24, 3)"}, {"question": "what does '' mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The latest iteration of the Humvee series can be seen in the M1151A1 and later up-armored A1-versions. It has a stronger suspension and larger 6.5 liter turbo-diesel engine to accommodate the weight of up to of additional armor. The armor protection can be installed or taken off depending on the operating environment, so the vehicles can move more efficiently without armor when there is no threat of attack. There is some underbody armor that moderately protects against mines and roadside bombs. Other improvements include Vehicle Emergency Escape (VEE) windows that can be quickly removed so troops inside can escape in the event of a rollover, jammed door, or the vehicle catching fire, and a blast chimney that vents the force of a bomb blast upwards and away from the occupants. The M1151A1 has a crew of four, can carry of payload, and can tow a load. On roads, it has a top speed of and a range of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"With the introduction of the A1 series the number of models was reduced, with further designation revisions when the A2 series was introduced\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Under contract to the US Army, AM General developed the M1113 Expanded Capacity Vehicle (ECV). The M1097A2 is the basis for the Expanded Capacity Vehicle (ECV). The ECV provided the payload capacity allowing for larger and heavier communications shelters, improved armor protection level for scouts, military police, security police, and explosive ordnance disposal platforms.\nIn late 1995, production of the M1114 based on the improved ECV chassis began. The M1114 meets Army requirements for a scout, military police, and explosive ordnance disposal vehicle with improved ballistic protection levels. The M1114 provides protection against 7.62\u00a0mm armor-piercing projectiles, 155\u00a0mm artillery air bursts and anti-tank mine blasts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In June 1996, the U.S. Army purchased an initial 390 M1114s for operations in Bosnia. The U.S. Air Force has a number of M1114 vehicles that differ in detail from the U.S. Army model. Under the designation M1116, the type was specifically designed and tailored to the needs of the U.S. Air Force. The M1116 features an expanded cargo area, armored housing for the turret gunner, and increased interior heating and air conditioning system. The M1114 and M1116 received armor at O'Gara-Hess & Eisenhardt Armoring Company of Fairfield, Ohio. The M1145 offers the protection of the M1114 and M1116 for Air Force Air Support Operations Squadrons (ASOS). Designed to protect Forward Air Controllers, modifications include perimeter ballistic protection, overhead burst protection, IED protection, mine blast protection, and 'white glass' transparent armor. Prior to the introduction of the latest armored HMMWV variants, and between 1993 and June 2006, Armor Holdings produced more than 17,500 armored HMMWVs (more than 14,000 between 2003-2007), all but about 160 of the earliest models were M1114, with smaller numbers of M1116 and M1045.\nThese extended capacity HMMWVs can drive over an vertical wall and carry a payload.", "qas": [{"question": "what can drive over an vertical wall ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 28, 8)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nTextron's Survivable Combat Tactical Vehicle (SCTV) is a protective capsule that can increase Humvee survivability to MRAP levels while significantly improving mobility; the modifications come in five kits, but all five need to be installed before the vehicle can be properly called an SCTV. The vehicle features a monocoque V-shaped hull and angled sides to help deflect rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) with scalable levels of protection. It has greater engine power, replacing the 6.5 liter diesel engine with a Cummins 6.7 liter diesel and Allison 6-speed transmission, as well as a stronger suspension, improved brakes, higher ground clearance, and new onboard instrumentation. Fuel capacity is increased from 27 gallons to 40 and the battery and fuel cells are moved from under the rear seat to the rear of the vehicle. Also included are a powerful air conditioner and heating system, run-flat tires, a thermal guard liner under the roof, sharp edges removed from inside the cabin, blast attenuating seats, and a folding gunner's turret allowing rapid deployment from a cargo aircraft or shipboard below deck. Although heavier than the Humvee, the SCTV is half the weight and costs $150,000 less than a comparably survivable MRAP. The basic version is a four-passenger armament carrier, but it can be configured as a nine-passenger troop carrier, air-defense vehicle, flatbed cargo truck, or field ambulance depending on the type of Humvee it is converted from.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Work began on the SCTV in 2008 in anticipation of U.S. military upgrades, but it was shelved once they made the JLTV a priority. Textron then focused on selling the SCTV upgrade package to up to 25 countries operating the global fleet, a potential market of up to 10,000 vehicles. The upgrade can enhance survivability of previously soft-skinned versions, sometimes sold by the U.S. as Excess Defense Articles, while costing and weighing less than a comparable MRAP. By 2015, Colombia had installed the SCTV into three Humvees for testing, and Ukraine had shown interest in upgrading their old-model Humvees recently supplied by the U.S. Ukraine ordered three SCTVs in February 2016.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn December 2014, the Department of Defense began auctioning off some 4,000 used Humvees to the public. While some have been transferred to domestic law enforcement agencies, this is the first time the military vehicles have been made available for civilian ownership. The idea is to sell them with starting bids at $10,000 each, for off-road use only, rather than simply scrapping them as a way to save money and repurpose them. M998, M998A1, M1038, and M1038A1 model Humvees are available, which are out of U.S. service and lack armor. AM General has been opposed to resale of military Humvees to the general public, primarily because surplus government vehicles would have cut into sales related to the civilian Hummer model, whose production ended in 2010. The first sales from auction occurred on 17 December 2014 for 25 of the Humvees. Bids ranged from $21,500 for a 1989 M1038 to $41,000 for a 1994 AM General M998A1. The average bid was around $30,000 and the sale of the 25 vehicles netted $744,000 total. GovPlanet has since taken over the contract and sells Humvees at its weekly auctions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kits have been produced for the general market to turn a sedan into a Humvee lookalike. An alternative is to buy a preconstructed (or \"turnkey\") model. Various kits exist, but one of the more well known is the Volkswagen Beetle-based \"Wombat\". This was previously named \"HummBug\", until the threat of a lawsuit from General Motors forced changes to the name and the grille design to make it look less like the real thing. It can be purchased/built for about US$18,000; this puts it considerably cheaper than the actual HMMWV ($56,000), or Hummer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Australia, a Gold Coast-based company called Rhino Buggies produces replicas of the Hummer H1 based on the Nissan Patrol 4WD vehicle for around A$30,000.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the U.S., there are four companies that offered Hummer-look-alike rebody kits that can be mated to GM fullsize trucks and Suburban chassis and, in some cases, Ford, Dodge, and even Cadillac applications. Some models are; Urban Gorilla from Urban Manufacturing, Endeavor SB400 and SB4x400 from Forever Off-Road, the Jurassic Truck Corporation T-Rex, and the Bummer from Tatonka Products An additional company offers plans so for chassis building. The kits range from two-door fiberglass models to steel tube and sheet metal constructions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "History of science", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The history of science is the study of the development of science and scientific knowledge, including both the natural and social sciences (the history of the arts and humanities is termed history of scholarship). Science is a body of empirical, theoretical, and practical knowledge about the natural world, produced by scientists who emphasize the observation, explanation, and prediction of real-world phenomena. Historiography of science, in contrast, studies the methods employed by historians of science.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The English word \"scientist\" is relatively recent\u2014first coined by William Whewell in the 19th century. Previously, investigators of nature called themselves \"natural philosophers\". While empirical investigations of the natural world have been described since classical antiquity (for example, by Thales and Aristotle), and the scientific method has been employed since the Middle Ages (for example, by Ibn al-Haytham and Roger Bacon), modern science began to develop in the early modern period, and in particular in the scientific revolution of 16th- and 17th-century Europe. Traditionally, historians of science have defined science sufficiently broadly to include those earlier inquiries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the 18th through the late 20th century, the history of science, especially of the physical and biological sciences, was often presented as a progressive accumulation of knowledge, in which true theories replaced false beliefs. More recent historical interpretations, such as those of Thomas Kuhn, tend to portray the history of science in terms of competing paradigms or conceptual systems within a wider matrix of intellectual, cultural, economic and political trends. These interpretations, however, have met with opposition for they also portray the history of science as an incoherent system of incommensurable paradigms, not leading to any actual scientific progress but only to the illusion that it has occurred.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In prehistoric times, knowledge and technique were passed from generation to generation in an oral tradition. For example, the domestication of maize for agriculture has been dated to about 9,000 years ago in southern Mexico, before the development of writing systems. Similarly, archaeological evidence indicates the development of astronomical knowledge in preliterate societies. The development of writing enabled knowledge to be stored and communicated across generations with much greater fidelity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many ancient civilizations systematically collected astronomical observations. Rather than speculate on the material nature of the planets and stars, the ancients charted the relative positions of celestial bodies, often inferring their influence on human society. This demonstrates how ancient investigators generally employed a holistic intuition, assuming the interconnectedness of all things, whereas modern science rejects such conceptual leaps.", "qas": [{"question": "what did ancient civilizations gather ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Basic facts about human physiology were known in some places, and alchemy was practiced in several civilizations. Considerable observation of macroscopic flora and fauna was also performed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ancient Mesopotamians had no distinction between \"rational science\" and magic. When a person became ill, doctors prescribed magical formulas to be recited as well as medicinal treatments. The earliest medical prescriptions appear in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur ( 2112 BC \u2013 2004 BC). The most extensive Babylonian medical text, however, is the \"Diagnostic Handbook\" written by the \"umm\u00e2n\u016b\", or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069\u20131046 BC). In East Semitic cultures, the main medicinal authority was a kind of exorcist-healer known as an \"\u0101\u0161ipu\". The profession was generally passed down from father to son and was held in extremely high regard. Of less frequent recourse was another kind of healer known as an \"asu\", who corresponds more closely to a modern physician and treated physical symptoms using primarily folk remedies composed of various herbs, animal products, and minerals, as well as potions, enemas, and ointments or poultices. These physicians, who could be either male or female, also dressed wounds, set limbs, and performed simple surgeries. The ancient Mesopotamians also practiced prophylaxis and took measures to prevent the spread of disease.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the ancient mesopotamians try to prevent ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 6, 8)"}, {"question": "what did the ancient mesopotamians have no distinction between ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The ancient Mesopotamians had extensive knowledge about the chemical properties of clay, sand, metal ore, bitumen, stone, and other natural materials, and applied this knowledge to practical use in manufacturing pottery, faience, glass, soap, metals, lime plaster, and waterproofing. Metallurgy required scientific knowledge about the properties of metals. Nonetheless, the Mesopotamians seem to have had little interest in gathering information about the natural world for the mere sake of gathering information and were far more interested in studying the manner in which the gods had ordered the universe. Biology of non-human organisms was generally only written about in the context of mainstream academic disciplines. Animal physiology was studied extensively for the purpose of divination; the anatomy of the liver, which was seen as an important organ in haruspicy, was studied in particularly intensive detail. Animal behavior was also studied for divinatory purposes. Most information about the training and domestication of animals was probably transmitted orally without being written down, but one text dealing with the training of horses has survived. The Mesopotamian cuneiform tablet Plimpton 322, dating to the eighteenth century BC, records a number of Pythagorean triplets (3,4,5) (5,12,13) ..., hinting that the ancient Mesopotamians might have been aware of the Pythagorean theorem over a millennium before Pythagoras.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the mesopotamian tablet ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 7, 7)"}]}, {"context": "In Babylonian astronomy, records of the motions of the stars, planets, and the moon are left on thousands of clay tablets created by scribes. Even today, astronomical periods identified by Mesopotamian proto-scientists are still widely used in Western calendars such as the solar year and the lunar month. Using these data they developed arithmetical methods to compute the changing length of daylight in the course of the year and to predict the appearances and disappearances of the Moon and planets and eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Only a few astronomers' names are known, such as that of Kidinnu, a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician. Kiddinu's value for the solar year is in use for today's calendars. Babylonian astronomy was \"the first and highly successful attempt at giving a refined mathematical description of astronomical phenomena.\" According to the historian A. Aaboe, \"all subsequent varieties of scientific astronomy, in the Hellenistic world, in India, in Islam, and in the West\u2014if not indeed all subsequent endeavour in the exact sciences\u2014depend upon Babylonian astronomy in decisive and fundamental ways.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ancient Egypt made significant advances in astronomy, mathematics and medicine. Their development of geometry was a necessary outgrowth of surveying to preserve the layout and ownership of farmland, which was flooded annually by the Nile river. The 3-4-5 right triangle and other rules of geometry were used to build rectilinear structures, and the post and lintel architecture of Egypt. Egypt was also a center of alchemy research for much of the Mediterranean. The Edwin Smith papyrus is one of the first medical documents still extant, and perhaps the earliest document that attempts to describe and analyse the brain: it might be seen as the very beginnings of modern neuroscience. However, while Egyptian medicine had some effective practices, it was often ineffective and sometimes harmful. Medical historians believe that ancient Egyptian pharmacology, for example, was largely ineffective. Nevertheless, it applied the following components to the treatment of disease: examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis, which display strong parallels to the basic empirical method of science and, according to G.E.R. Lloyd, played a significant role in the development of this methodology. The Ebers papyrus (c. 1550 BC) also contains evidence of traditional empiricism.", "qas": [{"question": "what did ancient egypt add to astronomy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what is one of the earliest empiricism ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 9, 9)"}]}, {"context": "In Classical Antiquity, the inquiry into the workings of the universe took place both in investigations aimed at such practical goals as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses and in those abstract investigations known as natural philosophy. The ancient people who are considered the first \"scientists\" may have thought of themselves as \"natural philosophers\", as practitioners of a skilled profession (for example, physicians), or as followers of a religious tradition (for example, temple healers).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest Greek philosophers, known as the pre-Socratics, provided competing answers to the question found in the myths of their neighbors: \"How did the ordered cosmos in which we live come to be?\" The pre-Socratic philosopher Thales (640\u2013546 BC), dubbed the \"father of science\", was the first to postulate non-supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. For example, that land floats on water and that earthquakes are caused by the agitation of the water upon which the land floats, rather than the god Poseidon. Thales' student Pythagoras of Samos founded the Pythagorean school, which investigated mathematics for its own sake, and was the first to postulate that the Earth is spherical in shape. Leucippus (5th century BC) introduced atomism, the theory that all matter is made of indivisible, imperishable units called atoms. This was greatly expanded on by his pupil Democritus and later Epicurus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Subsequently, Plato and Aristotle produced the first systematic discussions of natural philosophy, which did much to shape later investigations of nature. Their development of deductive reasoning was of particular importance and usefulness to later scientific inquiry. Plato founded the Platonic Academy in 387 BC, whose motto was \"Let none unversed in geometry enter here\", and turned out many notable philosophers. Plato's student Aristotle introduced empiricism and the notion that universal truths can be arrived at via observation and induction, thereby laying the foundations of the scientific method. Aristotle also produced many biological writings that were empirical in nature, focusing on biological causation and the diversity of life. He made countless observations of nature, especially the habits and attributes of plants and animals on Lesbos, classified more than 540 animal species, and dissected at least 50. Aristotle's writings profoundly influenced subsequent Islamic and European scholarship, though they were eventually superseded in the Scientific Revolution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The important legacy of this period included substantial advances in factual knowledge, especially in anatomy, zoology, botany, mineralogy, geography, mathematics and astronomy; an awareness of the importance of certain scientific problems, especially those related to the problem of change and its causes; and a recognition of the methodological importance of applying mathematics to natural phenomena and of undertaking empirical research. In the Hellenistic age scholars frequently employed the principles developed in earlier Greek thought: the application of mathematics and deliberate empirical research, in their scientific investigations. Thus, clear unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophers, to medieval Muslim philosophers and scientists, to the European Renaissance and Enlightenment, to the secular sciences of the modern day.\nNeither reason nor inquiry began with the Ancient Greeks, but the Socratic method did, along with the idea of Forms, great advances in geometry, logic, and the natural sciences. According to Benjamin Farrington, former Professor of Classics at Swansea University:", "qas": []}, {"context": "and again:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known person to propose a heliocentric model of the solar system, while the geographer Eratosthenes accurately calculated the circumference of the Earth. Hipparchus (c. 190\u00a0\u2013 c. 120 BC) produced the first systematic star catalog. The level of achievement in Hellenistic astronomy and engineering is impressively shown by the Antikythera mechanism (150\u2013100 BC), an analog computer for calculating the position of planets. Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In medicine, Hippocrates (c. 460 BC\u00a0\u2013 c. 370 BC) and his followers were the first to describe many diseases and medical conditions and developed the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, still relevant and in use today. Herophilos (335\u2013280 BC) was the first to base his conclusions on dissection of the human body and to describe the nervous system. Galen (129\u00a0\u2013 c. 200 AD) performed many audacious operations\u2014including brain and eye surgeries\u2014 that were not tried again for almost two millennia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Hellenistic Egypt, the mathematician Euclid laid down the foundations of mathematical rigor and introduced the concepts of definition, axiom, theorem and proof still in use today in his \"Elements\", considered the most influential textbook ever written. Archimedes, considered one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, is credited with using the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of Pi. He is also known in physics for laying the foundations of hydrostatics, statics, and the explanation of the principle of the lever.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Theophrastus wrote some of the earliest descriptions of plants and animals, establishing the first taxonomy and looking at minerals in terms of their properties such as hardness. Pliny the Elder produced what is one of the largest encyclopedias of the natural world in 77 AD, and must be regarded as the rightful successor to Theophrastus. For example, he accurately describes the octahedral shape of the diamond, and proceeds to mention that diamond dust is used by engravers to cut and polish other gems owing to its great hardness. His recognition of the importance of crystal shape is a precursor to modern crystallography, while mention of numerous other minerals presages mineralogy. He also recognises that other minerals have characteristic crystal shapes, but in one example, confuses the crystal habit with the work of lapidaries. He was also the first to recognise that amber was a fossilized resin from pine trees because he had seen samples with trapped insects within them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mathematics: The earliest traces of mathematical knowledge in the Indian subcontinent appear with the Indus Valley Civilization (c. 4th millennium BC ~ c. 3rd millennium BC). The people of this civilization made bricks whose dimensions were in the proportion 4:2:1, considered favorable for the stability of a brick structure. They also tried to standardize measurement of length to a high degree of accuracy. They designed a ruler\u2014the \"Mohenjo-daro ruler\"\u2014whose unit of length (approximately 1.32\u00a0inches or 3.4 centimetres) was divided into ten equal parts. Bricks manufactured in ancient Mohenjo-daro often had dimensions that were integral multiples of this unit of length.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Indian astronomer and mathematician Aryabhata (476\u2013550), in his \"Aryabhatiya\" (499) introduced a number of trigonometric functions (including sine, versine, cosine and inverse sine), trigonometric tables, and techniques and algorithms of algebra. In 628 AD, Brahmagupta suggested that gravity was a force of attraction. He also lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and a decimal digit, along with the Hindu-Arabic numeral system now used universally throughout the world. Arabic translations of the two astronomers' texts were soon available in the Islamic world, introducing what would become Arabic numerals to the Islamic world by the 9th century. During the 14th\u201316th centuries, the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics made significant advances in astronomy and especially mathematics, including fields such as trigonometry and analysis. In particular, Madhava of Sangamagrama is considered the \"founder of mathematical analysis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Astronomy: The first textual mention of astronomical concepts comes from the Vedas, religious literature of India. According to Sarma (2008): \"One finds in the Rigveda intelligent speculations about the genesis of the universe from nonexistence, the configuration of the universe, the spherical self-supporting earth, and the year of 360 days divided into 12 equal parts of 30 days each with a periodical intercalary month.\". The first 12 chapters of the \"Siddhanta Shiromani\", written by Bh\u0101skara in the 12th century, cover topics such as: mean longitudes of the planets; true longitudes of the planets; the three problems of diurnal rotation; syzygies; lunar eclipses; solar eclipses; latitudes of the planets; risings and settings; the moon's crescent; conjunctions of the planets with each other; conjunctions of the planets with the fixed stars; and the patas of the sun and moon. The 13 chapters of the second part cover the nature of the sphere, as well as significant astronomical and trigonometric calculations based on it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nilakantha Somayaji's astronomical treatise the Tantrasangraha similar in nature to the Tychonic system proposed by Tycho Brahe had been the most accurate astronomical model until the time of Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Linguistics: Some of the earliest linguistic activities can be found in Iron Age India (1st millennium BC) with the analysis of Sanskrit for the purpose of the correct recitation and interpretation of Vedic texts. The most notable grammarian of Sanskrit was (c. 520\u2013460 BC), whose grammar formulates close to 4,000 rules which together form a compact generative grammar of Sanskrit. Inherent in his analytic approach are the concepts of the phoneme, the morpheme and the root.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Medicine: Findings from Neolithic graveyards in what is now Pakistan show evidence of proto-dentistry among an early farming culture. Ayurveda is a system of traditional medicine that originated in ancient India before 2500 BC, and is now practiced as a form of alternative medicine in other parts of the world. Its most famous text is the Su\u015brutasamhit\u0101 of Su\u015bruta, which is notable for describing procedures on various forms of surgery, including rhinoplasty, the repair of torn ear lobes, perineal lithotomy, cataract surgery, and several other excisions and other surgical procedures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Metallurgy: The wootz, crucible and stainless steels were invented in India, and were widely exported in Classic Mediterranean world. It was known from Pliny the Elder as \"ferrum indicum\". Indian Wootz steel was held in high regard in Roman Empire, was often considered to be the best. After in Middle Age it was imported in Syria to produce with special techniques the \"Damascus steel\" by the year 1000.\nThe Hindus excel in the manufacture of iron, and in the preparations of those ingredients along with which it is fused to obtain that kind of soft iron which is usually styled Indian steel (Hindiah). They also have workshops wherein are forged the most famous sabres in the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mathematics: From the earliest the Chinese used a positional decimal system on counting boards in order to calculate. To express 10, a single rod is placed in the second box from the right. The spoken language uses a similar system to English: e.g. four thousand two hundred seven. No symbol was used for zero. By the 1st century BC, negative numbers and decimal fractions were in use and \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" included methods for extracting higher order roots by Horner's method and solving linear equations and by Pythagoras' theorem. Cubic equations were solved in the Tang dynasty and solutions of equations of order higher than 3 appeared in print in 1245 AD by Ch'in Chiu-shao. Pascal's triangle for binomial coefficients was described around 1100 by Jia Xian.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the first attempts at an axiomatisation of geometry appear in the Mohist canon in 330 BC, Liu Hui developed algebraic methods in geometry in the 3rd century AD and also calculated pi to 5 significant figures. In 480, Zu Chongzhi improved this by discovering the ratio formula_1 which remained the most accurate value for 1200 years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Astronomy: Astronomical observations from China constitute the longest continuous sequence from any civilisation and include records of sunspots (112 records from 364 BC), supernovas (1054), lunar and solar eclipses. By the 12th century, they could reasonably accurately make predictions of eclipses, but the knowledge of this was lost during the Ming dynasty, so that the Jesuit Matteo Ricci gained much favour in 1601 by his predictions.\nBy 635 Chinese astronomers had observed that the tails of comets always point away from the sun.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From antiquity, the Chinese used an equatorial system for describing the skies and a star map from 940 was drawn using a cylindrical (Mercator) projection. The use of an armillary sphere is recorded from the 4th century BC and a sphere permanently mounted in equatorial axis from 52 BC. In 125 AD Zhang Heng used water power to rotate the sphere in real time. This included rings for the meridian and ecliptic. By 1270 they had incorporated the principles of the Arab torquetum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Seismology: To better prepare for calamities, Zhang Heng invented a seismometer in 132 CE which provided instant alert to authorities in the capital Luoyang that an earthquake had occurred in a location indicated by a specific cardinal or ordinal direction. Although no tremors could be felt in the capital when Zhang told the court that an earthquake had just occurred in the northwest, a message came soon afterwards that an earthquake had indeed struck 400\u00a0km (248\u00a0mi) to 500\u00a0km (310\u00a0mi) northwest of Luoyang (in what is now modern Gansu). Zhang called his device the 'instrument for measuring the seasonal winds and the movements of the Earth' (Houfeng didong yi \u5019\u98ce\u5730\u52a8\u4eea), so-named because he and others thought that earthquakes were most likely caused by the enormous compression of trapped air. See Zhang's seismometer for further details.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are many notable contributors to the field of Chinese science throughout the ages. One of the best examples would be Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095), a polymath scientist and statesman who was the first to describe the magnetic-needle compass used for navigation, discovered the concept of true north, improved the design of the astronomical gnomon, armillary sphere, sight tube, and clepsydra, and described the use of drydocks to repair boats. After observing the natural process of the inundation of silt and the find of marine fossils in the Taihang Mountains (hundreds of miles from the Pacific Ocean), Shen Kuo devised a theory of land formation, or geomorphology. He also adopted a theory of gradual climate change in regions over time, after observing petrified bamboo found underground at Yan'an, Shaanxi province. If not for Shen Kuo's writing, the architectural works of Yu Hao would be little known, along with the inventor of movable type printing, Bi Sheng (990\u20131051). Shen's contemporary Su Song (1020\u20131101) was also a brilliant polymath, an astronomer who created a celestial atlas of star maps, wrote a pharmaceutical treatise with related subjects of botany, zoology, mineralogy, and metallurgy, and had erected a large astronomical clocktower in Kaifeng city in 1088. To operate the crowning armillary sphere, his clocktower featured an escapement mechanism and the world's oldest known use of an endless power-transmitting chain drive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries \"learned to appreciate the scientific achievements of this ancient culture and made them known in Europe. Through their correspondence European scientists first learned about the Chinese science and culture.\" Western academic thought on the history of Chinese technology and science was galvanized by the work of Joseph Needham and the Needham Research Institute. Among the technological accomplishments of China were, according to the British scholar Needham, early seismological detectors (Zhang Heng in the 2nd century), the water-powered celestial globe (Zhang Heng), matches, the independent invention of the decimal system, dry docks, sliding calipers, the double-action piston pump, cast iron, the blast furnace, the iron plough, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the suspension bridge, the winnowing machine, the rotary fan, the parachute, natural gas as fuel, the raised-relief map, the propeller, the crossbow, and a solid fuel rocket, the multistage rocket, the horse collar, along with contributions in logic, astronomy, medicine, and other fields.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, cultural factors prevented these Chinese achievements from developing into what we might call \"modern science\". According to Needham, it may have been the religious and philosophical framework of Chinese intellectuals which made them unable to accept the ideas of laws of nature:\nIn the Middle Ages the classical learning continued in three major linguistic cultures and civilizations: Greek (the Byzantine Empire), Arabic (the Islamic world), and Latin (Western Europe).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, the intellectual level in the western part of Europe declined in the 400s. In contrast, the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire resisted the barbarian attacks, and preserved and improved the learning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the Byzantine Empire still held learning centers such as Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, Western Europe's knowledge was concentrated in monasteries until the development of medieval universities in the 12th centuries. The curriculum of monastic schools included the study of the few available ancient texts and of new works on practical subjects like medicine and timekeeping.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the sixth century in the Byzantine Empire, Isidore of Miletus compiled Archimedes' mathematical works in the Archimedes Palimpsest, where all Archimedes' mathematical contributions were collected and studied.", "qas": []}, {"context": "John Philoponus, another Byzantine scholar, was the first to question Aristotle's teaching of physics, introducing the theory of impetus. The theory of impetus was an auxiliary or secondary theory of Aristotelian dynamics, put forth initially to explain projectile motion against gravity. It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics. The works of John Philoponus inspired Galileo Galilei ten centuries later.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first record of separating conjoined twins took place in the Byzantine Empire in the 900s when the surgeons tried to separate a dead body of a pair of conjoined twins. The result was partly successful as the other twin managed to live for three days. The next recorded case of separating conjoined twins was several centuries later, in 1600s Germany.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, a number of Greek scholars flee to North Italy in which they fueled the era later commonly known as \"Renaissance\u201d as they brought with them a great deal of classical learning including an understanding of botany, medicine, and zoology. Byzantium also gave the West important inputs: John Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian physics, and the works of Dioscorides.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Middle East, Greek philosophy was able to find some support under the newly created Arab Empire. With the spread of Islam in the 7th and 8th centuries, a period of Muslim scholarship, known as the Islamic Golden Age, lasted until the 13th century. This scholarship was aided by several factors. The use of a single language, Arabic, allowed communication without need of a translator. Access to Greek texts from the Byzantine Empire, along with Indian sources of learning, provided Muslim scholars a knowledge base to build upon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scientific method began developing in the Muslim world, where significant progress in methodology was made, beginning with the experiments of Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) on optics from c. 1000, in his \"Book of Optics\". The most important development of the scientific method was the use of experiments to distinguish between competing scientific theories set within a generally empirical orientation, which began among Muslim scientists. Ibn al-Haytham is also regarded as the father of optics, especially for his empirical proof of the intromission theory of light. Some have also described Ibn al-Haytham as the \"first scientist\" for his development of the modern scientific method.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In mathematics, the mathematician Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (c. 780\u2013850) gave his name to the concept of the algorithm, while the term algebra is derived from \"al-jabr\", the beginning of the title of one of his publications. What is now known as Arabic numerals originally came from India, but Muslim mathematicians made several key refinements to the number system, such as the introduction of decimal point notation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In astronomy, Al-Battani (c. 858\u2013929) improved the measurements of Hipparchus, preserved in the translation of Ptolemy's \"H\u00e8 Megal\u00e8 Syntaxis\" (\"The great treatise\") translated as \"Almagest\". Al-Battani also improved the precision of the measurement of the precession of the Earth's axis. The corrections made to the geocentric model by al-Battani, Ibn al-Haytham, Averroes and the Maragha astronomers such as Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Mo'ayyeduddin Urdi and Ibn al-Shatir are similar to Copernican heliocentric model. Heliocentric theories may have also been discussed by several other Muslim astronomers such as Ja'far ibn Muhammad Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi, Abu-Rayhan Biruni, Abu Said al-Sijzi, Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi, and Najm al-D\u012bn al-Qazw\u012bn\u012b al-K\u0101tib\u012b.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Muslim chemists and alchemists played an important role in the foundation of modern chemistry. Scholars such as Will Durant and Fielding H. Garrison considered Muslim chemists to be the founders of chemistry. In particular, J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n (c. 721\u2013815) is \"considered by many to be the father of chemistry\". The works of Arabic scientists influenced Roger Bacon (who introduced the empirical method to Europe, strongly influenced by his reading of Persian writers), and later Isaac Newton. The scholar Al-Razi contributed to chemistry and medicine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ibn Sina (Avicenna, c. 980\u20131037) is regarded as the most influential philosopher of Islam. He pioneered the science of experimental medicine and was the first physician to conduct clinical trials. His two most notable works in medicine are the \"Kit\u0101b al-shif\u0101\u02be\" (\"Book of Healing\") and The Canon of Medicine, both of which were used as standard medicinal texts in both the Muslim world and in Europe well into the 17th century. Amongst his many contributions are the discovery of the contagious nature of infectious diseases, and the introduction of clinical pharmacology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scientists from the Islamic world include al-Farabi (polymath), Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi (pioneer of surgery), Ab\u016b Rayh\u0101n al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b (pioneer of Indology, geodesy and anthropology), Nas\u012br al-D\u012bn al-T\u016bs\u012b (polymath), and Ibn Khaldun (forerunner of social sciences such as demography, cultural history, historiography, philosophy of history and sociology), among many others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Islamic science began its decline in the 12th or 13th century, before the Renaissance in Europe, and due in part to the 11th\u201313th century Mongol conquests, during which libraries, observatories, hospitals and universities were destroyed. The end of the Islamic Golden Age is marked by the destruction of the intellectual center of Baghdad, the capital of the Abbasid caliphate in 1258.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the eleventh century, most of Europe had become Christian; stronger monarchies emerged; borders were restored; technological developments and agricultural innovations were made, increasing the food supply and population. Classical Greek texts were translated from Arabic and Greek into Latin, stimulating scientific discussion in Western Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An intellectual revitalization of Western Europe started with the birth of medieval universities in the 12th century. Contact with the Byzantine Empire, and with the Islamic world during the Reconquista and the Crusades, allowed Latin Europe access to scientific Greek and Arabic texts, including the works of Aristotle, Ptolemy, Isidore of Miletus, John Philoponus, J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n, al-Khwarizmi, Alhazen, Avicenna, and Averroes. European scholars had access to the translation programs of Raymond of Toledo, who sponsored the 12th century Toledo School of Translators from Arabic to Latin. Later translators like Michael Scotus would learn Arabic in order to study these texts directly. The European universities aided materially in the translation and propagation of these texts and started a new infrastructure which was needed for scientific communities. In fact, European university put many works about the natural world and the study of nature at the center of its curriculum, with the result that the \"medieval university laid far greater emphasis on science than does its modern counterpart and descendent.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In classical antiquity, Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned, but in the Middle Ages medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (c. 1275\u20131326) produced the \ufb01rst known anatomy textbook based on human dissection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a result of the Pax Mongolica, Europeans, such as Marco Polo, began to venture further and further east. This led to the increased awareness of Indian and even Chinese culture and civilization within the European tradition. Technological advances were also made, such as the early flight of Eilmer of Malmesbury (who had studied Mathematics in 11th century England), and the metallurgical achievements of the Cistercian blast furnace at Laskill.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the beginning of the 13th century, there were reasonably accurate Latin translations of the main works of almost all the intellectually crucial ancient authors, allowing a sound transfer of scientific ideas via both the universities and the monasteries. By then, the natural philosophy in these texts began to be extended by scholastics such as Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus and Duns Scotus. Precursors of the modern scientific method, influenced by earlier contributions of the Islamic world, can be seen already in Grosseteste's emphasis on mathematics as a way to understand nature, and in the empirical approach admired by Bacon, particularly in his \"Opus Majus\". Pierre Duhem's thesis is that Stephen Tempier - the Bishop of Paris - Condemnation of 1277 led to the study of medieval science as a serious discipline, \"but no one in the field any longer endorses his view that modern science started in 1277\". However, many scholars agree with Duhem's view that the Middle Ages saw important scientific developments.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first half of the 14th century saw much important scientific work, largely within the framework of scholastic commentaries on Aristotle's scientific writings. William of Ockham emphasised the principle of parsimony: natural philosophers should not postulate unnecessary entities, so that motion is not a distinct thing but is only the moving object and an intermediary \"sensible species\" is not needed to transmit an image of an object to the eye. Scholars such as Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme started to reinterpret elements of Aristotle's mechanics. In particular, Buridan developed the theory that impetus was the cause of the motion of projectiles, which was a first step towards the modern concept of inertia. The Oxford Calculators began to mathematically analyze the kinematics of motion, making this analysis without considering the causes of motion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1348, the Black Death and other disasters sealed a sudden end to philosophic and scientific development. Yet, the rediscovery of ancient texts was stimulated by the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, when many Byzantine scholars sought refuge in the West. Meanwhile, the introduction of printing was to have great effect on European society. The facilitated dissemination of the printed word democratized learning and allowed ideas such as algebra to propagate more rapidly. These developments paved the way for the Scientific Revolution, where scientific inquiry, halted at the start of the Black Death, resumed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The renewal of learning in Europe began with 12th century Scholasticism. The Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristoteleian natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine). Thus modern science in Europe was resumed in a period of great upheaval: the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation; the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Columbus; the Fall of Constantinople; but also the re-discovery of Aristotle during the Scholastic period presaged large social and political changes. Thus, a suitable environment was created in which it became possible to question scientific doctrine, in much the same way that Martin Luther and John Calvin questioned religious doctrine. The works of Ptolemy (astronomy) and Galen (medicine) were found not always to match everyday observations. Work by Vesalius on human cadavers found problems with the Galenic view of anatomy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The willingness to question previously held truths and search for new answers resulted in a period of major scientific advancements, now known as the Scientific Revolution. The Scientific Revolution is traditionally held by most historians to have begun in 1543, when the books \"De humani corporis fabrica\" (\"On the Workings of the Human Body\") by Andreas Vesalius, and also \"De Revolutionibus\", by the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, were first printed. The thesis of Copernicus' book was that the Earth moved around the Sun. The period culminated with the publication of the \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" in 1687 by Isaac Newton, representative of the unprecedented growth of scientific publications throughout Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other significant scientific advances were made during this time by Galileo Galilei, Edmond Halley, Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens, Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler, Gottfried Leibniz, and Blaise Pascal. In philosophy, major contributions were made by Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Browne, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and Thomas Hobbes. The scientific method was also better developed as the modern way of thinking emphasized experimentation and reason over traditional considerations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Age of Enlightenment was a European affair. The 17th century brought decisive steps towards modern science, which accelerated during the 18th century. Directly based on the works of Newton, Descartes, Pascal and Leibniz, the way was now clear to the development of modern mathematics, physics and technology\nby the generation of Benjamin Franklin (1706\u20131790), Leonhard Euler (1707\u20131783), Mikhail Lomonosov (1711\u20131765) and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717\u20131783). Denis Diderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", published between 1751 and 1772 brought this new understanding to a wider audience. The impact of this process was not limited to science and technology, but affected philosophy (Immanuel Kant, David Hume), religion (the increasingly significant impact of science upon religion), and society and politics in general (Adam Smith, Voltaire). The early modern period is seen as a flowering of the European Renaissance, in what is often known as the Scientific Revolution, viewed as a foundation of modern science.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Romantic Movement of the early 19th century reshaped science by opening up new pursuits unexpected in the classical approaches of the Enlightenment. Major breakthroughs came in biology, especially in Darwin's theory of evolution, as well as physics (electromagnetism), mathematics (non-Euclidean geometry, group theory) and chemistry (organic chemistry). The decline of Romanticism occurred because a new movement, Positivism, began to take hold of the ideals of the intellectuals after 1840 and lasted until about 1880.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The scientific revolution established science as a source for the growth of knowledge. During the 19th century, the practice of science became professionalized and institutionalized in ways that continued through the 20th century. As the role of scientific knowledge grew in society, it became incorporated with many aspects of the functioning of nation-states.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The scientific revolution is a convenient boundary between ancient thought and classical physics. Nicolaus Copernicus revived the heliocentric model of the solar system described by Aristarchus of Samos. This was followed by the first known model of planetary motion given by Johannes Kepler in the early 17th century, which proposed that the planets follow elliptical orbits, with the Sun at one focus of the ellipse. Galileo (\"\"Father of Modern Physics\"\") also made use of experiments to validate physical theories, a key element of the scientific method. William Gilbert did some of the earliest experiments with electricity and magnetism, establishing that the Earth itself is magnetic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1687, Isaac Newton published the \"Principia Mathematica\", detailing two comprehensive and successful physical theories: Newton's laws of motion, which led to classical mechanics; and Newton's Law of Gravitation, which describes the fundamental force of gravity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the late 18th and early 19th century, the behavior of electricity and magnetism was studied by Luigi Galvani, Giovanni Aldini, Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, Georg Ohm, and others. These studies led to the unification of the two phenomena into a single theory of electromagnetism, by James Clerk Maxwell (known as Maxwell's equations).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The beginning of the 20th century brought the start of a revolution in physics. The long-held theories of Newton were shown not to be correct in all circumstances. Beginning in 1900, Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr and others developed quantum theories to explain various anomalous experimental results, by introducing discrete energy levels. Not only did quantum mechanics show that the laws of motion did not hold on small scales, but even more disturbingly, the theory of general relativity, proposed by Einstein in 1915, showed that the fixed background of spacetime, on which both Newtonian mechanics and special relativity depended, could not exist. In 1925, Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger formulated quantum mechanics, which explained the preceding quantum theories. The observation by Edwin Hubble in 1929 that the speed at which galaxies recede positively correlates with their distance, led to the understanding that the universe is expanding, and the formulation of the Big Bang theory by Georges Lema\u00eetre.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1938 Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered nuclear fission with radiochemical methods, and in 1939 Lise Meitner and Otto Robert Frisch wrote the first theoretical interpretation of the fission process, which was later improved by Niels Bohr and John A. Wheeler. Further developments took place during World War II, which led to the practical application of radar and the development and use of the atomic bomb. Around this time, Chien-Shiung Wu was recruited by the Manhattan Project to help develop a process for separating uranium metal into U-235 and U-238 isotopes by Gaseous diffusion. She was an expert experimentalist in beta decay and weak interaction physics. Wu designed an experiment (see Wu experiment) that enabled theoretical physicists Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen-Ning Yang to disprove the law of parity experimentally, winning them a Nobel Prize in 1957.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though the process had begun with the invention of the cyclotron by Ernest O. Lawrence in the 1930s, physics in the postwar period entered into a phase of what historians have called \"Big Science\", requiring massive machines, budgets, and laboratories in order to test their theories and move into new frontiers. The primary patron of physics became state governments, who recognized that the support of \"basic\" research could often lead to technologies useful to both military and industrial applications.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Currently, general relativity and quantum mechanics are inconsistent with each other, and efforts are underway to unify the two.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern chemistry emerged from the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries through the material practices and theories promoted by alchemy, medicine, manufacturing and mining. A decisive moment came when 'chemistry' was distinguished from alchemy by Robert Boyle in his work \"The Sceptical Chymist\", in 1661; although the alchemical tradition continued for some time after his work. Other important steps included the gravimetric experimental practices of medical chemists like William Cullen, Joseph Black, Torbern Bergman and Pierre Macquer and through the work of Antoine Lavoisier (\"father of modern chemistry\") on oxygen and the law of conservation of mass, which refuted phlogiston theory. The theory that all matter is made of atoms, which are the smallest constituents of matter that cannot be broken down without losing the basic chemical and physical properties of that matter, was provided by John Dalton in 1803, although the question took a hundred years to settle as proven. Dalton also formulated the law of mass relationships. In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev composed his periodic table of elements on the basis of Dalton's discoveries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The synthesis of urea by Friedrich W\u00f6hler opened a new research field, organic chemistry, and by the end of the 19th century, scientists were able to synthesize hundreds of organic compounds. The later part of the 19th century saw the exploitation of the Earth's petrochemicals, after the exhaustion of the oil supply from whaling. By the 20th century, systematic production of refined materials provided a ready supply of products which provided not only energy, but also synthetic materials for clothing, medicine, and everyday disposable resources. Application of the techniques of organic chemistry to living organisms resulted in physiological chemistry, the precursor to biochemistry. The 20th century also saw the integration of physics and chemistry, with chemical properties explained as the result of the electronic structure of the atom. Linus Pauling's book on \"The Nature of the Chemical Bond\" used the principles of quantum mechanics to deduce bond angles in ever-more complicated molecules. Pauling's work culminated in the physical modelling of DNA, \"the secret of life\" (in the words of Francis Crick, 1953). In the same year, the Miller\u2013Urey experiment demonstrated in a simulation of primordial processes, that basic constituents of proteins, simple amino acids, could themselves be built up from simpler molecules.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Geology existed as a cloud of isolated, disconnected ideas about rocks, minerals, and landforms long before it became a coherent science. Theophrastus' work on rocks, \"Peri lith\u014dn\", remained authoritative for millennia: its interpretation of fossils was not overturned until after the Scientific Revolution. Chinese polymath Shen Kua (1031\u20131095) first formulated hypotheses for the process of land formation. Based on his observation of fossils in a geological stratum in a mountain hundreds of miles from the ocean, he deduced that the land was formed by erosion of the mountains and by deposition of silt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Geology did not undergo systematic restructuring during the Scientific Revolution, but individual theorists made important contributions. Robert Hooke, for example, formulated a theory of earthquakes, and Nicholas Steno developed the theory of superposition and argued that fossils were the remains of once-living creatures. Beginning with Thomas Burnet's \"Sacred Theory of the Earth\" in 1681, natural philosophers began to explore the idea that the Earth had changed over time. Burnet and his contemporaries interpreted Earth's past in terms of events described in the Bible, but their work laid the intellectual foundations for secular interpretations of Earth history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern geology, like modern chemistry, gradually evolved during the 18th and early 19th centuries. Beno\u00eet de Maillet and the Comte de Buffon saw the Earth as much older than the 6,000 years envisioned by biblical scholars. Jean-\u00c9tienne Guettard and Nicolas Desmarest hiked central France and recorded their observations on some of the first geological maps. Aided by chemical experimentation, naturalists such as Scotland's John Walker, Sweden's Torbern Bergman, and Germany's Abraham Werner created comprehensive classification systems for rocks and minerals\u2014a collective achievement that transformed geology into a cutting edge field by the end of the eighteenth century. These early geologists also proposed a generalized interpretations of Earth history that led James Hutton, Georges Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart, following in the steps of Steno, to argue that layers of rock could be dated by the fossils they contained: a principle first applied to the geology of the Paris Basin. The use of index fossils became a powerful tool for making geological maps, because it allowed geologists to correlate the rocks in one locality with those of similar age in other, distant localities. Over the first half of the 19th century, geologists such as Charles Lyell, Adam Sedgwick, and Roderick Murchison applied the new technique to rocks throughout Europe and eastern North America, setting the stage for more detailed, government-funded mapping projects in later decades.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Midway through the 19th century, the focus of geology shifted from description and classification to attempts to understand \"how\" the surface of the Earth had changed. The first comprehensive theories of mountain building were proposed during this period, as were the first modern theories of earthquakes and volcanoes. Louis Agassiz and others established the reality of continent-covering ice ages, and \"fluvialists\" like Andrew Crombie Ramsay argued that river valleys were formed, over millions of years by the rivers that flow through them. After the discovery of radioactivity, radiometric dating methods were developed, starting in the 20th century. Alfred Wegener's theory of \"continental drift\" was widely dismissed when he proposed it in the 1910s, but new data gathered in the 1950s and 1960s led to the theory of plate tectonics, which provided a plausible mechanism for it. Plate tectonics also provided a unified explanation for a wide range of seemingly unrelated geological phenomena. Since 1970 it has served as the unifying principle in geology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Geologists' embrace of plate tectonics became part of a broadening of the field from a study of rocks into a study of the Earth as a planet. Other elements of this transformation include: geophysical studies of the interior of the Earth, the grouping of geology with meteorology and oceanography as one of the \"earth sciences\", and comparisons of Earth and the solar system's other rocky planets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aristarchus of Samos published work on how to determine the sizes and distances of the Sun and the Moon, and Eratosthenes used this work to figure the size of the Earth. Hipparchus later discovered the precession of the Earth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Advances in astronomy and in optical systems in the 19th century resulted in the first observation of an asteroid (1 Ceres) in 1801, and the discovery of Neptune in 1846.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1925, Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin determined that stars were composed mostly of Hydrogen and Helium. She was dissuaded by astronomer Henry Norris Russell from publishing this finding in her Ph.D.thesis because of the widely held belief that stars had the same composition as the Earth. However, four years later, in 1929, Henry Norris Russell came to the same conclusion through different reasoning and the discovery was eventually accepted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "George Gamow, Ralph Alpher, and Robert Herman had calculated that there should be evidence for a Big Bang in the background temperature of the universe. In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson discovered a 3\u00a0Kelvin background hiss in their Bell Labs radiotelescope (the Holmdel Horn Antenna), which was evidence for this hypothesis, and formed the basis for a number of results that helped determine the age of the universe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Supernova SN1987A was observed by astronomers on Earth both visually, and in a triumph for neutrino astronomy, by the solar neutrino detectors at Kamiokande. But the solar neutrino flux was a fraction of its theoretically expected value. This discrepancy forced a change in some values in the standard model for particle physics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "William Harvey published \"De Motu Cordis\" in 1628, which revealed his conclusions based on his extensive studies of vertebrate circulatory systems. He identified the central role of the heart, arteries, and veins in producing blood movement in a circuit, and\nfailed to find any confirmation of Galen's pre-existing notions of heating and cooling functions. The History early modern biology and medicine is often told through the search for the seat of the soul. Galen in his descriptions of his foundational work in medicine presents the distinctions between arteries, veins, and nerves using the vocabulary of the soul.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1847, Hungarian physician Ign\u00e1c F\u00fcl\u00f6p Semmelweis dramatically reduced the occurrency of puerperal fever by simply requiring physicians to wash their hands before attending to women in childbirth. This discovery predated the germ theory of disease. However, Semmelweis' findings were not appreciated by his contemporaries and handwashing came into use only with discoveries by British surgeon Joseph Lister, who in 1865 proved the principles of antisepsis. Lister's work was based on the important findings by French biologist Louis Pasteur. Pasteur was able to link microorganisms with disease, revolutionizing medicine. He also devised one of the most important methods in preventive medicine, when in 1880 he produced a vaccine against rabies. Pasteur invented the process of pasteurization, to help prevent the spread of disease through milk and other foods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Perhaps the most prominent, controversial and far-reaching theory in all of science has been the theory of evolution by natural selection put forward by the British naturalist Charles Darwin in his book On the Origin of Species in 1859. Darwin proposed that the features of all living things, including humans, were shaped by natural processes over long periods of time. The theory of evolution in its current form affects almost all areas of biology. Implications of evolution on fields outside of pure science have led to both opposition and support from different parts of society, and profoundly influenced the popular understanding of \"man's place in the universe\". In the early 20th century, the study of heredity became a major investigation after the rediscovery in 1900 of the laws of inheritance developed by the Moravian monk Gregor Mendel in 1866. Mendel's laws provided the beginnings of the study of genetics, which became a major field of research for both scientific and industrial research. By 1953, James D. Watson, Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins clarified the basic structure of DNA, the genetic material for expressing life in all its forms. In the late 20th century, the possibilities of genetic engineering became practical for the first time, and a massive international effort began in 1990 to map out an entire human genome (the Human Genome Project).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The discipline of ecology typically traces its origin to the synthesis of Darwinian evolution and Humboldtian biogeography, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Equally important in the rise of ecology, however, were microbiology and soil science\u2014particularly the cycle of life concept, prominent in the work Louis Pasteur and Ferdinand Cohn. The word \"ecology\" was coined by Ernst Haeckel, whose particularly holistic view of nature in general (and Darwin's theory in particular) was important in the spread of ecological thinking. In the 1930s, Arthur Tansley and others began developing the field of ecosystem ecology, which combined experimental soil science with physiological concepts of energy and the techniques of field biology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Successful use of the scientific method in the physical sciences led to the same methodology being adapted to better understand the many fields of human endeavor. From this effort the social sciences have been developed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Political science is a late arrival in terms of social sciences. However, the discipline has a clear set of antecedents such as moral philosophy, political philosophy, political economy, history, and other fields concerned with normative determinations of what ought to be and with deducing the characteristics and functions of the ideal form of government. The roots of politics are in prehistory. In each historic period and in almost every geographic area, we can find someone studying politics and increasing political understanding.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Western culture, the study of politics is first found in Ancient Greece. The antecedents of European politics trace their roots back even earlier than Plato and Aristotle, particularly in the works of Homer, Hesiod, Thucydides, Xenophon, and Euripides. Later, Plato analyzed political systems, abstracted their analysis from more literary- and history- oriented studies and applied an approach we would understand as closer to philosophy. Similarly, Aristotle built upon Plato's analysis to include historical empirical evidence in his analysis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An ancient Indian treatise on statecraft, economic policy and military strategy by Kautilya and , who are traditionally identified with (c. 350\u2013283 BCE). In this treatise, the behaviors and relationships of the people, the King, the State, the Government Superintendents, Courtiers, Enemies, Invaders, and Corporations are analysed and documented. Roger Boesche describes the \"Artha\u015b\u0101stra\" as \"a book of political realism, a book analysing how the political world does work and not very often stating how it ought to work, a book that frequently discloses to a king what calculating and sometimes brutal measures he must carry out to preserve the state and the common good.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the rule of Rome, famous historians such as Polybius, Livy and Plutarch documented the rise of the Roman Republic, and the organization and histories of other nations, while statesmen like Julius Caesar, Cicero and others provided us with examples of the politics of the republic and Rome's empire and wars. The study of politics during this age was oriented toward understanding history, understanding methods of governing, and describing the operation of governments.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the fall of the Western Roman Empire, there arose a more diffuse arena for political studies. The rise of monotheism and, particularly for the Western tradition, Christianity, brought to light a new space for politics and political action. During the Middle Ages, the study of politics was widespread in the churches and courts. Works such as Augustine of Hippo's \"The City of God\" synthesized current philosophies and political traditions with those of Christianity, redefining the borders between what was religious and what was political. Most of the political questions surrounding the relationship between Church and State were clarified and contested in this period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Middle East and later other Islamic areas, works such as the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam and Epic of Kings by Ferdowsi provided evidence of political analysis, while the Islamic Aristotelians such as Avicenna and later Maimonides and Averroes, continued Aristotle's tradition of analysis and empiricism, writing commentaries on Aristotle's works.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Italian Renaissance, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli established the emphasis of modern political science on direct empirical observation of political institutions and actors. Later, the expansion of the scientific paradigm during the Enlightenment further pushed the study of politics beyond normative determinations. In particular, the study of statistics, to study the subjects of the state, has been applied to polling and voting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 20th century, the study of ideology, behaviouralism and international relations led to a multitude of 'pol-sci' subdisciplines including rational choice theory, voting theory, game theory (also used in economics), psephology, political geography/geopolitics, political psychology/political sociology, political economy, policy analysis, public administration, comparative political analysis and peace studies/conflict analysis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historical linguistics emerged as an independent field of study at the end of the 18th century. Sir William Jones proposed that Sanskrit, Persian, Greek, Latin, Gothic, and Celtic languages all shared a common base. After Jones, an effort to catalog all languages of the world was made throughout the 19th century and into the 20th century. Publication of Ferdinand de Saussure's \"Cours de linguistique g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\" created the development of descriptive linguistics. Descriptive linguistics, and the related structuralism movement caused linguistics to focus on how language changes over time, instead of just describing the differences between languages. Noam Chomsky further diversified linguistics with the development of generative linguistics in the 1950s. His effort is based upon a mathematical model of language that allows for the description and prediction of valid syntax. Additional specialties such as sociolinguistics, cognitive linguistics, and computational linguistics have emerged from collaboration between linguistics and other disciplines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The basis for classical economics forms Adam Smith's \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\", published in 1776. Smith criticized mercantilism, advocating a system of free trade with division of labour. He postulated an \"invisible hand\" that regulated economic systems made up of actors guided only by self-interest. Karl Marx developed an alternative economic theory, called Marxian economics. Marxian economics is based on the labor theory of value and assumes the value of good to be based on the amount of labor required to produce it. Under this assumption, capitalism was based on employers not paying the full value of workers labor to create profit. The Austrian School responded to Marxian economics by viewing entrepreneurship as driving force of economic development. This replaced the labor theory of value by a system of supply and demand.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1920s, John Maynard Keynes prompted a division between microeconomics and macroeconomics. Under Keynesian economics macroeconomic trends can overwhelm economic choices made by individuals. Governments should promote aggregate demand for goods as a means to encourage economic expansion. Following World War II, Milton Friedman created the concept of monetarism. Monetarism focuses on using the supply and demand of money as a method for controlling economic activity. In the 1970s, monetarism has adapted into supply-side economics which advocates reducing taxes as a means to increase the amount of money available for economic expansion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other modern schools of economic thought are New Classical economics and New Keynesian economics. New Classical economics was developed in the 1970s, emphasizing solid microeconomics as the basis for macroeconomic growth. New Keynesian economics was created partially in response to New Classical economics, and deals with how inefficiencies in the market create a need for control by a central bank or government.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The above \"history of economics\" reflects modern economic textbooks and this means that the last stage of a science is represented as the culmination of its history (Kuhn, 1962). The \"invisible hand\" mentioned in a lost page in the middle of a chapter in the middle of the \"Wealth of Nations\", 1776, advances as Smith's central message. It is played down that this \"invisible hand\" acts only \"frequently\" and that it is \"no part of his [the individual's] intentions\" because competition leads to lower prices by imitating \"his\" invention. That this \"invisible hand\" prefers \"the support of domestic to foreign industry\" is cleansed\u2014often without indication that part of the citation is truncated. The opening passage of the \"Wealth\" containing Smith's message is never mentioned as it cannot be integrated into modern theory: \"Wealth\" depends on the division of labour which changes with market volume and on the proportion of productive to Unproductive labor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The end of the 19th century marks the start of psychology as a scientific enterprise. The year 1879 is commonly seen as the start of psychology as an independent field of study. In that year Wilhelm Wundt founded the first laboratory dedicated exclusively to psychological research (in Leipzig). Other important early contributors to the field include Hermann Ebbinghaus (a pioneer in memory studies), Ivan Pavlov (who discovered classical conditioning), William James, and Sigmund Freud. Freud's influence has been enormous, though more as cultural icon than a force in scientific psychology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 20th century saw a rejection of Freud's theories as being too unscientific, and a reaction against Edward Titchener's atomistic approach of the mind. This led to the formulation of behaviorism by John B. Watson, which was popularized by B.F. Skinner. Behaviorism proposed epistemologically limiting psychological study to overt behavior, since that could be reliably measured. Scientific knowledge of the \"mind\" was considered too metaphysical, hence impossible to achieve.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The final decades of the 20th century have seen the rise of a new interdisciplinary approach to studying human psychology, known collectively as cognitive science. Cognitive science again considers the mind as a subject for investigation, using the tools of psychology, linguistics, computer science, philosophy, and neurobiology. New methods of visualizing the activity of the brain, such as PET scans and CAT scans, began to exert their influence as well, leading some researchers to investigate the mind by investigating the brain, rather than cognition. These new forms of investigation assume that a wide understanding of the human mind is possible, and that such an understanding may be applied to other research domains, such as artificial intelligence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ibn Khaldun can be regarded as the earliest scientific systematic sociologist. The modern sociology emerged in the early 19th century as the academic response to the modernization of the world. Among many early sociologists (e.g., \u00c9mile Durkheim), the aim of sociology was in structuralism, understanding the cohesion of social groups, and developing an \"antidote\" to social disintegration. Max Weber was concerned with the modernization of society through the concept of rationalization, which he believed would trap individuals in an \"iron cage\" of rational thought. Some sociologists, including Georg Simmel and W. E. B. Du Bois, utilized more microsociological, qualitative analyses. This microlevel approach played an important role in American sociology, with the theories of George Herbert Mead and his student Herbert Blumer resulting in the creation of the symbolic interactionism approach to sociology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In particular, just Auguste Comte, illustrated with his work the transition from a theological to a metaphysical stage and, from this, to a positive stage. Comte took care of the classification of the sciences as well as a transit of humanity towards a situation of progress attributable to a re-examination of nature according to the\naffirmation of 'sociality' as the basis of the scientifically interpreted society (Cfr. Guglielmo Rinzivillo, \"Natura, cultura e induzione nell'et\u00e0 delle scienze. Fatti e idee del movimento scientifico in Francia e Inghilterra\", Roma, Nuova Cultura, 2015, pp. 79\u2013, ).", "qas": []}, {"context": "American sociology in the 1940s and 1950s was dominated largely by Talcott Parsons, who argued that aspects of society that promoted structural integration were therefore \"functional\". This structural functionalism approach was questioned in the 1960s, when sociologists came to see this approach as merely a justification for inequalities present in the status quo. In reaction, conflict theory was developed, which was based in part on the philosophies of Karl Marx. Conflict theorists saw society as an arena in which different groups compete for control over resources. Symbolic interactionism also came to be regarded as central to sociological thinking. Erving Goffman saw social interactions as a stage performance, with individuals preparing \"backstage\" and attempting to control their audience through impression management. While these theories are currently prominent in sociological thought, other approaches exist, including feminist theory, post-structuralism, rational choice theory, and postmodernism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthropology can best be understood as an outgrowth of the Age of Enlightenment. It was during this period that Europeans attempted systematically to study human behaviour. Traditions of jurisprudence, history, philology and sociology developed during this time and informed the development of the social sciences of which anthropology was a part.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the same time, the romantic reaction to the Enlightenment produced thinkers such as Johann Gottfried Herder and later Wilhelm Dilthey whose work formed the basis for the culture concept which is central to the discipline. Traditionally, much of the history of the subject was based on colonial encounters between Western Europe and the rest of the world, and much of 18th- and 19th-century anthropology is now classed as scientific racism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the late 19th-century, battles over the \"study of man\" took place between those of an \"anthropological\" persuasion (relying on anthropometrical techniques) and those of an \"ethnological\" persuasion (looking at cultures and traditions), and these distinctions became part of the later divide between physical anthropology and cultural anthropology, the latter ushered in by the students of Franz Boas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the mid-20th century, much of the methodologies of earlier anthropological and ethnographical study were reevaluated with an eye towards research ethics, while at the same time the scope of investigation has broadened far beyond the traditional study of \"primitive cultures\" (scientific practice itself is often an arena of anthropological study).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The emergence of paleoanthropology, a scientific discipline which draws on the methodologies of paleontology, physical anthropology and ethology, among other disciplines, and increasing in scope and momentum from the mid-20th century, continues to yield further insights into human origins, evolution, genetic and cultural heritage, and perspectives on the contemporary human predicament as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 20th century, a number of interdisciplinary scientific fields have emerged. Examples include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Communication studies combines animal communication, information theory, marketing, public relations, telecommunications and other forms of communication.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Computer science, built upon a foundation of theoretical linguistics, discrete mathematics, and electrical engineering, studies the nature and limits of computation. Subfields include computability, computational complexity, database design, computer networking, artificial intelligence, and the design of computer hardware. One area in which advances in computing have contributed to more general scientific development is by facilitating large-scale archiving of scientific data. Contemporary computer science typically distinguishes\nitself by emphasising mathematical 'theory' in contrast to the practical emphasis of software engineering.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Environmental science is an interdisciplinary field. It draws upon the disciplines of biology, chemistry, earth sciences, ecology, geography, mathematics, and physics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Materials science has its roots in metallurgy, mineralogy, and crystallography. It combines chemistry, physics, and several engineering disciplines. The field studies metals, ceramics, glass, plastics, semiconductors, and composite materials.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Neuroscience is a multidisciplinary branch of science that combines physiology, neuroanatomy, molecular biology, developmental biology, cytology, mathematical modeling and psychology to understand the fundamental and emergent properties of neurons, glia, nervous systems and neural circuits.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As an academic field, history of science and technology began with the publication of William Whewell's \"History of the Inductive Sciences\" (first published in 1837). A more formal study of the history of science as an independent discipline was launched by George Sarton's publications, \"Introduction to the History of Science\" (1927) and the \"Isis\" journal (founded in 1912). Sarton exemplified the early 20th-century view of the history of science as the history of great men and great ideas. He shared with many of his contemporaries a Whiggish belief in history as a record of the advances and delays in the march of progress. The history of science was not a recognized subfield of American history in this period, and most of the work was carried out by interested scientists and physicians rather than professional historians. With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard, the history of science became an established subdiscipline of history after 1945.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The history of mathematics, history of technology, and history of philosophy are distinct areas of research and are covered in other articles. Mathematics is closely related to but distinct from natural science (at least in the modern conception). Technology is likewise closely related to but clearly differs from the search for empirical truth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "History of science is an academic discipline, with an international community of specialists. Main professional organizations for this field include the History of Science Society, the British Society for the History of Science, and the European Society for the History of Science.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much of the study of the history of science has been devoted to answering questions about what science \"is\", how it \"functions\", and whether it exhibits large-scale patterns and trends. The sociology of science in particular has focused on the ways in which scientists work, looking closely at the ways in which they \"produce\" and \"construct\" scientific knowledge. Since the 1960s, a common trend in science studies (the study of the sociology and history of science) has been to emphasize the \"human component\" of scientific knowledge, and to de-emphasize the view that scientific data are self-evident, value-free, and context-free. The field of Science and Technology Studies, an area that overlaps and often informs historical studies of science, focuses on the social context of science in both contemporary and historical periods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Humboldtian science refers to the early 19th century approach of combining scientific field work with the age of Romanticism sensitivity, ethics and aesthetic ideals. It helped to install natural history as a separate field, gave base for ecology and was based on the role model of scientist, naturalist and explorer Alexander von Humboldt. The later 19th century positivism asserted that all authentic knowledge allows verification and that all authentic knowledge assumes that the only valid knowledge is scientific.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A major subject of concern and controversy in the philosophy of science has been the nature of \"theory change\" in science. Karl Popper argued that scientific knowledge is progressive and cumulative; Thomas Kuhn, that scientific knowledge moves through \"paradigm shifts\" and is not necessarily progressive; and Paul Feyerabend, that scientific knowledge is not cumulative or progressive and that there can be no demarcation in terms of method between science and any other form of investigation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The mid 20th century saw a series of studies relying to the role of science in a social context, starting from Thomas Kuhn's \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\" in 1962. It opened the study of science to new disciplines by suggesting that the evolution of science was in part sociologically determined and that positivism did not explain the actual interactions and strategies of the human participants in science. As Thomas Kuhn put it, the history of science may be seen in more nuanced terms, such as that of competing paradigms or conceptual systems in a wider matrix that includes intellectual, cultural, economic and political themes outside of science. \"Partly by selection and partly by distortion, the scientists of earlier ages are implicitly presented as having worked upon the same set of fixed problems and in accordance with the same set of fixed canons that the most recent revolution in scientific theory and method made seem scientific.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Further studies, e.g. Jerome Ravetz 1971 \"Scientific Knowledge and its Social Problems\" referred to the role of the scientific community, as a social construct, in accepting or rejecting (objective) scientific knowledge. The Science wars of the 1990 were about the influence of especially French philosophers, which denied the objectivity of science in general or seemed to do so. They described as well differences between the idealized model of a pure science and the actual scientific practice; while scientism, a revival of the positivism approach, saw in precise measurement and rigorous calculation the basis for finally settling enduring metaphysical and moral controversies. However, more recently some of the leading critical theorists have recognized that their postmodern deconstructions have at times been counter-productive, and are providing intellectual ammunition for reactionary interests. Bruno Latour noted that \"dangerous extremists are using the very same argument of social construction to destroy hard-won evidence that could save our lives. Was I wrong to participate in the invention of this field known as science studies? Is it enough to say that we did not really mean what we meant?\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "One recurring observation in the history of science involves the struggle for recognition of first-rate scientists working on the periphery of the scientific establishment. For instance, the great physicist Lord Rayleigh looked back (cited here) on John James Waterston's seminal paper on the kinetic theory of gases. The history of the neglect of Waterston's path-breaking article, Rayleigh felt, suggests that \"a young author who believes himself capable of great things would usually do well to secure favourable recognition of the scientific world . . . before embarking upon higher flights.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "William Harvey's experiences led him to an even more pessimistic view:\"But what remains to be said about the quantity and source of the blood which thus passes, is of so novel and unheard-of character that I not only fear injury to myself from the envy of a few, but I tremble lest I have mankind at large for my enemies, so much doth wont and custom, that become as another nature, and doctrine once sown and that hath struck deep root, and respect for antiquity, influence all men.\"In more general terms, Robert K. Merton remarks that \"the history of science abounds in instances of basic papers having been written by comparatively unknown scientists, only to be rejected or neglected for years.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Hydrogen peroxide", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is a chemical compound with the formula . In its pure form, it is a pale blue, clear liquid, slightly more viscous than water. Hydrogen peroxide is the simplest peroxide (a compound with an oxygen\u2013oxygen single bond). It is used as an oxidizer, bleaching agent and antiseptic. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide, or \"high-test peroxide\", is a reactive oxygen species and has been used as a propellant in rocketry. Its chemistry is dominated by the nature of its unstable peroxide bond.", "qas": [{"question": "what is hydrogen hydride ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is unstable and slowly decomposes in the presence of light. Because of its instability, hydrogen peroxide is typically stored with a stabilizer in a weakly acidic solution. Hydrogen peroxide is found in biological systems including the human body. Enzymes that use or decompose hydrogen peroxide are classified as peroxidases.", "qas": [{"question": "what is hydrogen oxygen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 1, 0)"}, {"question": "what is . ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The boiling point of has been extrapolated as being 150.2\u00a0\u00b0C, approximately 50\u00a0\u00b0C higher than water. In practice, hydrogen peroxide will undergo potentially explosive thermal decomposition if heated to this temperature. It may be safely distilled at lower temperatures under reduced pressure.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In aqueous solutions hydrogen peroxide differs from the pure material due to the effects of hydrogen bonding between water and hydrogen peroxide molecules. Hydrogen peroxide and water form a eutectic mixture, exhibiting freezing-point depression; pure water has a freezing point of 0\u00a0\u00b0C and pure hydrogen peroxide of \u22120.43\u00a0\u00b0C. The boiling point of the same mixtures is also depressed in relation with the mean of both boiling points (125.1\u00a0\u00b0C). It occurs at 114\u00a0\u00b0C. This boiling point is 14\u00a0\u00b0C greater than that of pure water and 36.2\u00a0\u00b0C less than that of pure hydrogen peroxide.", "qas": [{"question": "what does hydrogen hydride depend from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the boiling point of pure water ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 3, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide () is a nonplanar molecule as shown by Paul-Antoine Gigu\u00e8re in 1950 using infrared spectroscopy, with (twisted) C symmetry. Although the O\u2212O bond is a single bond, the molecule has a relatively high rotational barrier of 2460 cm (29.45 kJ/mol); for comparison, the rotational barrier for ethane is 12.5 kJ/mol. The increased barrier is ascribed to repulsion between the lone pairs of the adjacent oxygen atoms and results in hydrogen peroxide displaying atropisomerism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The molecular structures of gaseous and crystalline are significantly different. This difference is attributed to the effects of hydrogen bonding, which is absent in the gaseous state. Crystals of are tetragonal with the space group \"D\"\"P\"42.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide has several structural analogues with H\u2212X\u2212X\u2212H bonding arrangements (water also shown for comparison). It has the highest (theoretical) boiling point of this series (X = O, N, S). Its melting point is also fairly high, being comparable to that of hydrazine and water, with only hydroxylamine crystallising significantly more readily, indicative of particularly strong hydrogen bonding. Diphosphane and hydrogen disulfide exhibit only weak hydrogen bonding and have little chemical similarity to hydrogen peroxide. All of these analogues are thermodynamically unstable. Structurally, the analogues all adopt similar skewed structures, due to repulsion between adjacent lone pairs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alexander von Humboldt synthesized one of the first synthetic peroxides, barium peroxide, in 1799 as a by-product of his attempts to decompose air.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nineteen years later Louis Jacques Th\u00e9nard recognized that this compound could be used for the preparation of a previously unknown compound, which he described as \"eau oxyg\u00e9n\u00e9e\" (French: oxygenated water) \u2013 subsequently known as hydrogen peroxide. (Today this term refers instead to water containing dissolved oxygen (O).)", "qas": []}, {"context": "An improved version of Th\u00e9nard's process used hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of sulfuric acid to precipitate the barium sulfate byproduct. This process was used from the end of the 19th century until the middle of the 20th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Th\u00e9nard and Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac synthesized sodium peroxide in 1811. The bleaching effect of peroxides and their salts on natural dyes became known around that time, but early attempts of industrial production of peroxides failed, and the first plant producing hydrogen peroxide was built in 1873 in Berlin. The discovery of the synthesis of hydrogen peroxide by electrolysis with sulfuric acid introduced the more efficient electrochemical method. It was first implemented into industry in 1908 in Wei\u00dfenstein, Carinthia, Austria. The anthraquinone process, which is still used, was developed during the 1930s by the German chemical manufacturer IG Farben in Ludwigshafen. The increased demand and improvements in the synthesis methods resulted in the rise of the annual production of hydrogen peroxide from 35,000 tonnes in 1950, to over 100,000 tonnes in 1960, to 300,000 tonnes by 1970; by 1998 it reached 2.7 million tonnes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pure hydrogen peroxide was long believed to be unstable, as early attempts to separate it from the water, which is present during synthesis, all failed. This instability was due to traces of impurities (transition-metal salts), which catalyze the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide. Pure hydrogen peroxide was first obtained in 1894\u2014almost 80 years after its discovery\u2014by Richard Wolffenstein, who produced it by vacuum distillation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Determination of the molecular structure of hydrogen peroxide proved to be very difficult. In 1892 the Italian physical chemist Giacomo Carrara (1864\u20131925) determined its molecular mass by freezing-point depression, which confirmed that its molecular formula is HO. At least half a dozen hypothetical molecular structures seemed to be consistent with the available evidence. In 1934, the English mathematical physicist William Penney and the Scottish physicist Gordon Sutherland proposed a molecular structure for hydrogen peroxide that was very similar to the presently accepted one.", "qas": [{"question": "why was hydrogen carbonate useful ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Previously, hydrogen peroxide was prepared industrially by hydrolysis of the ammonium peroxydisulfate, which was itself obtained by the electrolysis of a solution of ammonium bisulfate () in sulfuric acid:", "qas": []}, {"context": "<chem>(NH4)2S2O8 + 2 H2O -> H2O2 + 2(NH4)HSO4 </chem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today, hydrogen peroxide is manufactured almost exclusively by the anthraquinone process, which was formalized in 1936 and patented in 1939. It begins with the reduction of an anthraquinone (such as 2-ethylanthraquinone or the 2-amyl derivative) to the corresponding anthrahydroquinone, typically by hydrogenation on a palladium catalyst; the anthrahydroquinone then undergoes autoxidation to regenerate the starting anthraquinone, with hydrogen peroxide as a by-product. Most commercial processes achieve oxidation by bubbling compressed air through a solution of the derivatized anthracene, whereby the oxygen present in the air reacts with the labile hydrogen atoms (of the hydroxy groups), giving hydrogen peroxide and regenerating the anthraquinone. Hydrogen peroxide is then extracted, and the anthraquinone derivative is reduced back to the dihydroxy (anthracene) compound using hydrogen gas in the presence of a metal catalyst. The cycle then repeats itself.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The simplified overall equation for the process is simple:", "qas": []}, {"context": "<chem>H2 + O2 -> H2O2 </chem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "The economics of the process depend heavily on effective recycling of the extraction solvents, the hydrogenation catalyst and the expensive quinone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A process to produce hydrogen peroxide directly from the elements has been of interest for many years. Direct synthesis is difficult to achieve, as the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen thermodynamically favours production of water. Systems for direct synthesis have been developed, most of which are based around finely dispersed metal catalysts. None of these has yet reached a point where they can be used for industrial-scale synthesis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is most commonly available as a solution in water. For consumers, it is usually available from pharmacies at 3 and 6 wt% concentrations. The concentrations are sometimes described in terms of the volume of oxygen gas generated; one milliliter of a 20-volume solution generates twenty milliliters of oxygen gas when completely decomposed. For laboratory use, 30 wt% solutions are most common. Commercial grades from 70% to 98% are also available, but due to the potential of solutions of more than 68% hydrogen peroxide to be converted entirely to steam and oxygen (with the temperature of the steam increasing as the concentration increases above 68%) these grades are potentially far more hazardous and require special care in dedicated storage areas. Buyers must typically allow inspection by commercial manufacturers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1994, world production of was around 1.9 million tonnes and grew to 2.2 million in 2006, most of which was at a concentration of 70% or less. In that year bulk 30% sold for around 0.54 USD/kg, equivalent to US$1.50/kg (US$0.68/lb) on a \"100% basis\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide occurs in surface water, groundwater and in the atmosphere. It forms upon illumination or natural catalytic action by substances contained in water. Sea water contains 0.5 to 14\u00a0\u03bcg/L of hydrogen peroxide, freshwater 1 to 30\u00a0\u03bcg/L and air 0.1 to 1 parts per billion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to form water and oxygen with a \u0394\"H\" of \u221298.2\u00a0kJ/mol and a \u0394S of 70.5\u00a0J/(mol\u00b7K):", "qas": []}, {"context": "<chem> 2H2O2 -> 2H2O + O2 </chem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rate of decomposition increases with rising temperature, concentration and pH, with cool, dilute, acidic solutions showing the best stability. Decomposition is catalysed by various compounds, including most transition metals and their compounds (e.g. manganese dioxide, silver, and platinum). Certain metal ions, such as or , can cause the decomposition to take a different path, with free radicals such as (HO\u00b7) and (HOO\u00b7) being formed. Non-metallic catalysts include potassium iodide, which reacts particularly rapidly and forms the basis of the elephant toothpaste experiment. Hydrogen peroxide can also be decomposed biologically by the enzyme catalase. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide liberates oxygen and heat; this can be dangerous, as spilling high-concentration hydrogen peroxide on a flammable substance can cause an immediate fire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide exhibits oxidizing and reducing properties, depending on pH.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In acidic solutions, is one of the most powerful oxidizers known, when used for removing organic stains from laboratory glassware it is referred to as Piranha solution and is stronger than chlorine, chlorine dioxide, and potassium permanganate. Also, through catalysis, can be converted into hydroxyl radicals (\u00b7OH), which are highly reactive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In acidic solutions is oxidized to (hydrogen peroxide acting as an oxidizing agent):", "qas": []}, {"context": "and sulfite () is oxidized to sulfate (). However, potassium permanganate is reduced to by acidic . Under alkaline conditions, however, some of these reactions reverse; for example, is oxidized to (as ).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In basic solution, hydrogen peroxide can reduce a variety of inorganic ions. When it acts as a reducing agent, oxygen gas is also produced. For example, hydrogen peroxide will reduce sodium hypochlorite and potassium permanganate, which is a convenient method for preparing oxygen in the laboratory:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is frequently used as an oxidizing agent. Illustrative is oxidation of thioethers to sulfoxides:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alkaline hydrogen peroxide is used for epoxidation of electron-deficient alkenes such as acrylic acid derivatives, and for the oxidation of alkylboranes to alcohols, the second step of hydroboration-oxidation. It is also the principal reagent in the Dakin oxidation process.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is a weak acid, forming hydroperoxide or peroxide salts with many metals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It also converts metal oxides into the corresponding peroxides. For example, upon treatment with hydrogen peroxide, chromic acid( + ) forms an unstable blue peroxide CrO(.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This kind of reaction is used industrially to produce peroxoanions. For example, reaction with borax leads to sodium perborate, a bleach used in laundry detergents:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The peroxide anion is a stronger nucleophile than hydroxide and displaces hydroxyl from oxyanions e.g. forming perborates and percarbonates. Sodium perborate and sodium percarbonate are important consumer and industrial bleaching agents; they stabilize hydrogen peroxide and limit side reactions (e.g. reduction and decomposition note below). The peroxide anion forms an adduct with urea, hydrogen peroxide\u2013urea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is both an oxidizing agent and reducing agent. The oxidation of hydrogen peroxide by sodium hypochlorite yields singlet oxygen. The net reaction of a ferric ion with hydrogen peroxide is a ferrous ion and oxygen. This proceeds via single electron oxidation and hydroxyl radicals. This is used in some organic chemistry oxidations, e.g. in the Fenton's reagent. Only catalytic quantities of iron ion is needed since peroxide also oxidizes ferrous to ferric ion. The net reaction of hydrogen peroxide and permanganate or manganese dioxide is manganous ion; however, until the peroxide is spent some manganous ions are reoxidized to make the reaction catalytic. This forms the basis for common monopropellant rockets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is formed in human and animals as a short-lived product in biochemical processes and is toxic to cells. The toxicity is due to oxidation of proteins, membrane lipids and DNA by the peroxide ions. The class of biological enzymes called SOD (superoxide dismutase) is developed in nearly all living cells as an important antioxidant agent. They promote the disproportionation of superoxide into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide, which is then rapidly decomposed by the enzyme catalase to oxygen and water.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Peroxisomes are organelles found in virtually all eukaryotic cells. They are involved in the catabolism of very long chain fatty acids, branched chain fatty acids, -amino acids, polyamines, and biosynthesis of plasmalogens, etherphospholipids critical for the normal function of mammalian brains and lungs. Upon oxidation, they produce hydrogen peroxide in the following process:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Catalase, another peroxisomal enzyme, uses this HO to oxidize other substrates, including phenols, formic acid, formaldehyde, and alcohol, by means of the peroxidation reaction:", "qas": []}, {"context": "This reaction is important in liver and kidney cells, where the peroxisomes neutralize various toxic substances that enter the blood. Some of the ethanol humans drink is oxidized to acetaldehyde in this way. In addition, when excess HO accumulates in the cell, catalase converts it to HO through this reaction:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another origin of hydrogen peroxide is the degradation of adenosine monophosphate which yields hypoxanthine. Hypoxanthine is then oxidatively catabolized first to xanthine and then to uric acid, and the reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme xanthine oxidase:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The degradation of guanosine monophosphate yields xanthine as an intermediate product which is then converted in the same way to uric acid with the formation of hydrogen peroxide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eggs of sea urchin, shortly after fertilization by a sperm, produce hydrogen peroxide. It is then quickly dissociated to OH\u00b7 radicals. The radicals serve as initiator of radical polymerization, which surrounds the eggs with a protective layer of polymer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The bombardier beetle has a device which allows it to shoot corrosive and foul-smelling bubbles at its enemies. The beetle produces and stores hydroquinone and hydrogen peroxide, in two separate reservoirs in the rear tip of its abdomen. When threatened, the beetle contracts muscles that force the two reactants through valved tubes into a mixing chamber containing water and a mixture of catalytic enzymes. When combined, the reactants undergo a violent exothermic chemical reaction, raising the temperature to near the boiling point of water. The boiling, foul-smelling liquid partially becomes a gas (flash evaporation) and is expelled through an outlet valve with a loud popping sound.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is a signaling molecule of plant defense against pathogens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide has roles as a signalling molecule in the regulation of a wide variety of biological processes. The compound is a major factor implicated in the free-radical theory of aging, based on how readily hydrogen peroxide can decompose into a hydroxyl radical and how superoxide radical byproducts of cellular metabolism can react with ambient water to form hydrogen peroxide. These hydroxyl radicals in turn readily react with and damage vital cellular components, especially those of the mitochondria. At least one study has also tried to link hydrogen peroxide production to cancer. These studies have frequently been quoted in fraudulent treatment claims.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The amount of hydrogen peroxide in biological systems can be assayed using a fluorometric assay.", "qas": []}, {"context": "About 60% of the world's production of hydrogen peroxide is used for pulp- and paper-bleaching.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second major industrial application is the manufacture of sodium percarbonate and sodium perborate, which are used as mild bleaches in laundry detergents. Sodium percarbonate, which is an adduct of sodium carbonate and hydrogen peroxide, is the active ingredient in such products as OxiClean and Tide laundry detergent. When dissolved in water, it releases hydrogen peroxide and sodium carbonate:", "qas": []}, {"context": "<chem> Na2CO3*3 H2O2 -> 2Na2CO3 + 3 H2O2</chem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "By themselves these bleaching agents are only effective at wash temperatures of or above and so are often used in conjunction with bleach activators, which facilitate cleaning at lower temperatures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is used in the production of various organic peroxides with dibenzoyl peroxide being a high volume example. It is used in polymerisations, as a flour bleaching agent and as a treatment for acne. Peroxy acids, such as peracetic acid and meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid are also produced using hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide has been used for creating organic peroxide-based explosives, such as acetone peroxide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is used in certain waste-water treatment processes to remove organic impurities. In advanced oxidation processing, the Fenton reaction gives the highly reactive hydroxyl radical (\u00b7OH). This degrades organic compounds, including those that are ordinarily robust, such as aromatic or halogenated compounds. It can also oxidize sulfur based compounds present in the waste; which is beneficial as it generally reduces their odour.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide can be used for the sterilization of various surfaces, including surgical tools and may be deployed as a vapour (VHP) for room sterilization. HO demonstrates broad-spectrum efficacy against viruses, bacteria, yeasts, and bacterial spores. In general, greater activity is seen against Gram-positive than Gram-negative bacteria; however, the presence of catalase or other peroxidases in these organisms can increase tolerance in the presence of lower concentrations. Higher concentrations of HO (10 to 30%) and longer contact times are required for sporicidal activity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide is seen as an environmentally safe alternative to chlorine-based bleaches, as it degrades to form oxygen and water and it is generally recognized as safe as an antimicrobial agent by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historically hydrogen peroxide was used for disinfecting wounds, partly because of its low cost and prompt availability compared to other antiseptics. It is now thought to inhibit healing and to induce scarring because it destroys newly formed skin cells. Only a very low concentration of HO can induce healing, and only if not repeatedly applied. Surgical use can lead to gas embolism formation. Despite this, it is still used for wound treatment in many developing countries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Dermal exposure to dilute solutions of hydrogen peroxide cause whitening or bleaching of the skin due to microembolism caused by oxygen bubbles in the capillaries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Diluted (between 1.9% and 12%) mixed with ammonium hydroxide is used to bleach human hair. The chemical's bleaching property lends its name to the phrase \"peroxide blonde\".\nHydrogen peroxide is also used for tooth whitening. It can be found in most whitening toothpastes. Hydrogen peroxide has shown positive results involving teeth lightness and chroma shade parameters. It works by oxidizing colored pigments onto the enamel where the shade of the tooth can indeed become lighter. Hydrogen peroxide can be mixed with baking soda and salt to make a home-made toothpaste.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide may be used to treat acne, although benzoyl peroxide is a more common treatment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Practitioners of alternative medicine have advocated the use of hydrogen peroxide for various conditions, including emphysema, influenza, AIDS and cancer, although there is no evidence of effectiveness and in some cases it may even be fatal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The practice calls for the daily consumption of hydrogen peroxide, either orally or by injection and is, in general, based around two precepts. First, that hydrogen peroxide is naturally produced by the body to combat infection; and second, that human pathogens (including cancer: See Warburg hypothesis) are anaerobic and cannot survive in oxygen-rich environments. The ingestion or injection of hydrogen peroxide is therefore believed to kill disease by mimicking the immune response in addition to increasing levels of oxygen within the body. This makes it similar to other oxygen-based therapies, such as ozone therapy and hyperbaric oxygen therapy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both the effectiveness and safety of hydrogen peroxide therapy is scientifically questionable. Hydrogen peroxide is produced by the immune system but in a carefully controlled manner. Cells called phagocytes engulf pathogens and then use hydrogen peroxide to destroy them. The peroxide is toxic to both the cell and the pathogen and so is kept within a special compartment, called a phagosome. Free hydrogen peroxide will damage any tissue it encounters via oxidative stress; a process which also has been proposed as a cause of cancer.\nClaims that hydrogen peroxide therapy increases cellular levels of oxygen have not been supported. The quantities administered would be expected to provide very little additional oxygen compared to that available from normal respiration. It should also be noted that it is difficult to raise the level of oxygen around cancer cells within a tumour, as the blood supply tends to be poor, a situation known as tumor hypoxia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Large oral doses of hydrogen peroxide at a 3% concentration may cause irritation and blistering to the mouth, throat, and abdomen as well as abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea.\nIntravenous injection of hydrogen peroxide has been linked to several deaths.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The American Cancer Society states that \"there is no scientific evidence that hydrogen peroxide is a safe, effective or useful cancer treatment.\" Furthermore, the therapy is not approved by the U.S. FDA.", "qas": []}, {"context": "High-concentration is referred to as \"high-test peroxide\" (HTP). It can be used either as a monopropellant (not mixed with fuel) or as the oxidizer component of a bipropellant rocket. Use as a monopropellant takes advantage of the decomposition of 70\u201398% concentration hydrogen peroxide into steam and oxygen. The propellant is pumped into a reaction chamber, where a catalyst, usually a silver or platinum screen, triggers decomposition, producing steam at over , which is expelled through a nozzle, generating thrust. monopropellant produces a maximal specific impulse (\"I\") of 161 s (1.6 kN\u00b7s/kg). Peroxide was the first major monopropellant adopted for use in rocket applications. Hydrazine eventually replaced hydrogen-peroxide monopropellant thruster applications primarily because of a 25% increase in the vacuum specific impulse. Hydrazine (toxic) and hydrogen peroxide (less-toxic [ACGIH TLV 0.01 and 1 ppm respectively]) are the only two monopropellants (other than cold gases) to have been widely adopted and utilized for propulsion and power applications. The Bell Rocket Belt, reaction control systems for X-1, X-15, Centaur, Mercury, Little Joe, as well as the turbo-pump gas generators for X-1, X-15, Jupiter, Redstone and Viking used hydrogen peroxide as a monopropellant.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a bipropellant, is decomposed to burn a fuel as an oxidizer. Specific impulses as high as 350 s (3.5\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg) can be achieved, depending on the fuel. Peroxide used as an oxidizer gives a somewhat lower \"I\" than liquid oxygen, but is dense, storable, noncryogenic and can be more easily used to drive gas turbines to give high pressures using an efficient \"closed cycle\". It can also be used for regenerative cooling of rocket engines. Peroxide was used very successfully as an oxidizer in World War II German rocket motors (e.g. T-Stoff, containing oxyquinoline stabilizer, for both the Walter HWK 109-500 \"Starthilfe\" RATO externally podded monopropellant booster system, and for the Walter HWK 109-509 rocket motor series used for the Me 163B), most often used with C-Stoff in a self-igniting hypergolic combination, and for the low-cost British Black Knight and Black Arrow launchers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1940s and 1950s, the Hellmuth Walter KG-conceived turbine used hydrogen peroxide for use in submarines while submerged; it was found to be too noisy and require too much maintenance compared to diesel-electric power systems. Some torpedoes used hydrogen peroxide as oxidizer or propellant. Operator error in the use of hydrogen-peroxide torpedoes was named as possible causes for the sinkings of HMS \"Sidon\" and the Russian submarine \"Kursk\". SAAB Underwater Systems is manufacturing the Torpedo 2000. This torpedo, used by the Swedish Navy, is powered by a piston engine propelled by HTP as an oxidizer and kerosene as a fuel in a bipropellant system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide has various domestic uses, primarily as a cleaning and disinfecting agent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide reacts with certain di-esters, such as phenyl oxalate ester (cyalume), to produce chemiluminescence; this application is most commonly encountered in the form of glow sticks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some horticulturalists and users of hydroponics advocate the use of weak hydrogen peroxide solution in watering solutions. Its spontaneous decomposition releases oxygen that enhances a plant's root development and helps to treat root rot (cellular root death due to lack of oxygen) and a variety of other pests.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Laboratory tests conducted by fish culturists in recent years have demonstrated that common household hydrogen peroxide can be used safely to provide oxygen for small fish. The hydrogen peroxide releases oxygen by decomposition when it is exposed to catalysts such as manganese dioxide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regulations vary, but low concentrations, such as 6%, are widely available and legal to buy for medical use. Most over-the-counter peroxide solutions are not suitable for ingestion. Higher concentrations may be considered hazardous and are typically accompanied by a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). In high concentrations, hydrogen peroxide is an aggressive oxidizer and will corrode many materials, including human skin. In the presence of a reducing agent, high concentrations of will react violently.", "qas": []}, {"context": "High-concentration hydrogen peroxide streams, typically above 40%, should be considered hazardous due to concentrated hydrogen peroxide's meeting the definition of a DOT oxidizer according to U.S. regulations, if released into the environment. The EPA Reportable Quantity (RQ) for D001 hazardous wastes is , or approximately , of concentrated hydrogen peroxide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide should be stored in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area and away from any flammable or combustible substances. It should be stored in a container composed of non-reactive materials such as stainless steel or glass (other materials including some plastics and aluminium alloys may also be suitable). Because it breaks down quickly when exposed to light, it should be stored in an opaque container, and pharmaceutical formulations typically come in brown bottles that block light.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrogen peroxide, either in pure or diluted form, can pose several risks, the main one being that it forms explosive mixtures upon contact with organic compounds. Highly concentrated hydrogen peroxide itself is unstable and can cause a boiling liquid expanding vapour explosion (BLEVE) of the remaining liquid. Distillation of hydrogen peroxide at normal pressures is thus highly dangerous. It is also corrosive, especially when concentrated, but even domestic-strength solutions can cause irritation to the eyes, mucous membranes and skin. Swallowing hydrogen peroxide solutions is particularly dangerous, as decomposition in the stomach releases large quantities of gas (10 times the volume of a 3% solution), leading to internal bloating. Inhaling over 10% can cause severe pulmonary irritation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With a significant vapour pressure (1.2 kPa at 50\u00a0\u00b0C), hydrogen-peroxide vapour is potentially hazardous. According to U.S. NIOSH, the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) limit is only 75 ppm. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has established a permissible exposure limit of 1.0 ppm calculated as an 8-hour time-weighted average (29 CFR 1910.1000, Table Z-1). Hydrogen peroxide has also been classified by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) as a \"known animal carcinogen, with unknown relevance on humans\". For workplaces where there is a risk of exposure to the hazardous concentrations of the vapours, continuous monitors for hydrogen peroxide should be used. Information on the hazards of hydrogen peroxide is available from OSHA and from the ATSDR.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Notes\nBibliography", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}], "version": 1.0}