{"data": [{"title": "Atlanta", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Atlanta () is the capital of, and the most populous city in, the U.S. state of Georgia. With an estimated 2017 population of 486,290, it is also the 38th most-populous city in the United States. The city serves as the cultural and economic center of the Atlanta metropolitan area, home to 5.8 million people and the ninth-largest metropolitan area in the nation. Atlanta is the seat of Fulton County, the most populous county in Georgia. A small portion of the city extends eastward into neighboring DeKalb County.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the capital of georgia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta was originally founded as the terminating stop of a major state-sponsored railroad. With rapid expansion, however, it soon became the convergence point between multiple railroads, spurring its rapid growth. The city's name derives from that of the Western and Atlantic Railroad's local depot, signifying the town's growing reputation as a transportation hub. During the American Civil War, the city was almost entirely burned to the ground in General William T. Sherman's famous March to the Sea. However, the city rose from its ashes and quickly became a national center of commerce and the unofficial capital of the \"New South\". During the 1950s and 1960s, Atlanta became a major organizing center of the civil rights movement, with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, and many other locals playing major roles in the movement's leadership. During the modern era, Atlanta has attained international prominence as a major air transportation hub, with Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport being the world's busiest airport by passenger traffic since 1998.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta is rated as a \"beta(+)\" world city that exerts a moderate impact on global commerce, finance, research, technology, education, media, art, and entertainment. It ranks in the top twenty among world cities and 10th in the nation with a gross domestic product (GDP) of $385\u00a0billion. Atlanta's economy is considered diverse, with dominant sectors that include transportation, logistics, professional and business services, media operations, medical services, and information technology. Atlanta has topographic features that include rolling hills and dense tree coverage, earning it the nickname of \"the city in a forest.\" Revitalization of Atlanta's neighborhoods, initially spurred by the 1996 Summer Olympics, has intensified in the 21st century, altering the city's demographics, politics, aesthetics, and culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Prior to the arrival of European settlers in north Georgia, Creek Indians inhabited the area. Standing Peachtree, a Creek village where Peachtree Creek flows into the Chattahoochee River, was the closest Indian settlement to what is now Atlanta. As part of the systematic removal of Native Americans from northern Georgia from 1802 to 1825, the Creek were forced to leave the area in 1821, and white settlers arrived the following year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1836, the Georgia General Assembly voted to build the Western and Atlantic Railroad in order to provide a link between the port of Savannah and the Midwest. The initial route was to run southward from Chattanooga to a terminus east of the Chattahoochee River, which would then be linked to Savannah. After engineers surveyed various possible locations for the terminus, the \"zero milepost\" was driven into the ground in what is now Five Points. A year later, the area around the milepost had developed into a settlement, first known as \"Terminus\", and later as \"Thrasherville\" after a local merchant who built homes and a general store in the area. By 1842, the town had six buildings and 30 residents and was renamed \"Marthasville\" to honor the Governor's daughter. Later, J. Edgar Thomson, Chief Engineer of the Georgia Railroad, suggested the town be renamed Atlanta. The residents approved, and the town was incorporated as Atlanta on December 29, 1847.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the city incorporated ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 4, 6)"}]}, {"context": "By 1860, Atlanta's population had grown to 9,554. During the American Civil War, the nexus of multiple railroads in Atlanta made the city a hub for the distribution of military supplies. In 1864, the Union Army moved southward following the capture of Chattanooga and began its invasion of north Georgia. The region surrounding Atlanta was the location of several major army battles, culminating with the Battle of Atlanta and a four-month-long siege of the city by the Union Army under the command of General William Tecumseh Sherman. On September 1, 1864, Confederate General John Bell Hood made the decision to retreat from Atlanta, and he ordered the destruction of all public buildings and possible assets that could be of use to the Union Army. On the next day, Mayor James Calhoun surrendered Atlanta to the Union Army, and on September 7, Sherman ordered the city's civilian population to evacuate. On November 11, 1864, Sherman prepared for the Union Army's March to the Sea by ordering the destruction of Atlanta's remaining military assets.", "qas": [{"question": "how much of the population had grown to 9,554. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After the Civil War ended in 1865, Atlanta was gradually rebuilt. Due to the city's superior rail transportation network, the state capital was moved from Milledgeville to Atlanta in 1868. In the 1880 Census, Atlanta surpassed Savannah as Georgia's largest city.\nBeginning in the 1880s, Henry W. Grady, the editor of the \"Atlanta Constitution\" newspaper, promoted Atlanta to potential investors as a city of the \"New South\" that would be based upon a modern economy and less reliant on agriculture. By 1885, the founding of the Georgia School of Technology (now Georgia Tech) and the Atlanta University Center had established Atlanta as a center for higher education. In 1895, Atlanta hosted the Cotton States and International Exposition, which attracted nearly 800,000 attendees and successfully promoted the New South's development to the world.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the civil war end ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the first decades of the 20th century, Atlanta experienced a period of unprecedented growth. In three decades' time, Atlanta's population tripled as the city limits expanded to include nearby streetcar suburbs. The city's skyline emerged with the construction of the Equitable, Flatiron, Empire, and Candler buildings; and Sweet Auburn emerged as a center of black commerce. The period was also marked by strife and tragedy. Increased racial tensions led to the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906, which left at least 27 people dead and over 70 injured. In 1913, Leo Frank, a Jewish-American factory superintendent, was convicted of the murder of a 13-year-old girl in a highly publicized trial. He was hanged in Marietta by a lynch mob in 1915 after having his death sentence commuted, an event which deeply impacted the Jewish community in Atlanta and across the country. On May 21, 1917, the Great Atlanta Fire destroyed 1,938 buildings in what is now the Old Fourth Ward, resulting in one fatality and the displacement of 10,000 people.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On December 15, 1939, Atlanta hosted the premiere of \"Gone with the Wind\", the epic film based on the best-selling novel by Atlanta's Margaret Mitchell. The gala event at Loew's Grand Theatre was attended by the film's legendary producer, David O. Selznick, and the film's stars Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, and Olivia de Havilland, but Oscar winner Hattie McDaniel, an African American actress, was barred from the event due to racial segregation laws and policies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta played a vital role in the Allied effort during World War II due to the city's war-related manufacturing companies, railroad network and military bases, leading to rapid population and economic growth. In the 1950s, the city's newly constructed highway system allowed middle class Atlantans the ability to relocate to the suburbs. As a result, the city began to make up an ever-smaller proportion of the metropolitan area's population.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 1960s, Atlanta was a major organizing center of the civil rights movement, with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, and students from Atlanta's historically black colleges and universities playing major roles in the movement's leadership. While minimal compared to other cities, Atlanta was not free of racial strife. In 1961, the city attempted to thwart blockbusting by erecting road barriers in Cascade Heights, countering the efforts of civic and business leaders to foster Atlanta as the \"city too busy to hate\". Desegregation of the public sphere came in stages, with public transportation desegregated by 1959, the restaurant at Rich's department store by 1961, movie theaters by 1963, and public schools by 1973.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1960, whites comprised 61.7% of the city's population. During the 1950s\u201370s, white flight from urban areas led to a significant demographic shift. By 1970, African Americans were a majority of the city's population and exercised new-found political influence by electing Atlanta's first black mayor, Maynard Jackson, in 1973. Under Mayor Jackson's tenure, Atlanta's airport was modernized, solidifying the city's role as a transportation center. The opening of the Georgia World Congress Center in 1976 heralded Atlanta's rise as a convention city. Construction of the city's subway system began in 1975, with rail service commencing in 1979. Despite these improvements, Atlanta lost over 100,000 residents between 1970 and 1990, over 20% of its population.", "qas": [{"question": "how many people died between 1970 and 1970 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 11, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games. Following the announcement, the city government undertook several major construction projects to improve Atlanta's parks, sporting venues, and transportation infrastructure. While the games themselves were marred by numerous organizational inefficiencies as well as the Centennial Olympic Park bombing, the spectacle was a watershed event in Atlanta's history that initiated a fundamental transformation of the city in the following decade.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the site for the summer olympic games ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During the 2000s, Atlanta underwent a profound physical, cultural, and demographic transformation. Suburbanization, a booming economy, and new migrants decreased the city's black percentage from a high of 67% in 1990 to 54% in 2010. From 2000 to 2010, Atlanta gained 22,763 white residents, 5,142 Asian residents, and 3,095 Hispanic residents, while the city's black population decreased by 31,678. Much of the city's demographic change during the decade was driven by young, college-educated professionals: from 2000 to 2009, the three-mile radius surrounding Downtown Atlanta gained 9,722 residents aged 25 to 34 holding at least a four-year degree, an increase of 61%. Between the mid-1990s and 2010, stimulated by funding from the HOPE VI program, Atlanta demolished nearly all of its public housing, a total of 17,000 units and about 10% of all housing units in the city. In 2005, the $2.8 billion BeltLine project was adopted, with the stated goals of converting a disused 22-mile freight railroad loop that surrounds the central city into an art-filled multi-use trail and increasing the city's park space by 40%. Atlanta's cultural offerings expanded during the 2000s: the High Museum of Art doubled in size; the Alliance Theatre won a Tony Award; and art galleries were established on the once-industrial Westside.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta encompasses , of which is land and is water. The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. At above mean sea level, Atlanta has one of the highest elevations among major cities east of the Mississippi River. Atlanta straddles the Eastern Continental Divide, such that rainwater that falls on the south and east side of the divide flows into the Atlantic Ocean, while rainwater on the north and west side of the divide flows into the Gulf of Mexico. Atlanta sits atop a ridge south of the Chattahoochee River, which is part of the ACF River Basin. Located at the far northwestern edge of the city, much of the river's natural habitat is preserved, in part by the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the area in miami ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most of Atlanta was burned during the Civil War, depleting the city of a large stock of its historic architecture. Yet architecturally, the city had never been traditionally \"southern\" because Atlanta originated as a railroad town, rather than a patrician southern seaport like Savannah or Charleston. Many of the city's landmarks share architectural characteristics with buildings in the Northeast or Midwest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Cold War era, Atlanta embraced global modernist trends, especially regarding commercial and institutional architecture. Examples of modernist architecture include the Westin Peachtree Plaza (1976), Georgia-Pacific Tower (1982), the State of Georgia Building (1966), and the Atlanta Marriott Marquis (1985). In the latter half of the 1980s, Atlanta became one of the early adopters of postmodern designs that reintroduced classical elements to the cityscape. Many of Atlanta's tallest skyscrapers were built in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with most displaying tapering spires or otherwise ornamented crowns, such as the One Atlantic Center (1987), 191 Peachtree Tower (1991), and the Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta (1992). Also completed during the era is Atlanta's tallest skyscraper, the Bank of America Plaza (1992), which, at , is the 61st-tallest building in the world and the 14th-tallest building in the United States. The Bank of America Plaza is the tallest building outside of New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and San Francisco, and was the last building built in the United States to be in the top 10 tallest buildings in the world until One World Trade Center was completed externally in May 2013. The city's embrace of modern architecture translated into an ambivalent approach toward historic preservation, leading to the destruction of notable architectural landmarks, including the Equitable Building (1892\u20131971), Terminal Station (1905\u20131972), and the Carnegie Library (1902\u20131977). The Fox Theatre (1929)\u2014Atlanta's cultural icon\u2014would have met the same fate had it not been for a grassroots effort to save it in the mid-1970s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta is divided into 242 officially defined neighborhoods. The city contains three major high-rise districts, which form a north-south axis along Peachtree: Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead. Surrounding these high-density districts are leafy, low-density neighborhoods, most of which are dominated by single-family homes.", "qas": [{"question": "how many registered neighborhoods are in seattle ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Downtown Atlanta contains the most office space in the metro area, much of it occupied by government entities. Downtown is home to the city's sporting venues and many of its tourist attractions. Midtown Atlanta is the city's second-largest business district, containing the offices of many of the region's law firms. Midtown is known for its art institutions, cultural attractions, institutions of higher education, and dense form. Buckhead, the city's uptown district, is north of Downtown and the city's third-largest business district. The district is marked by an urbanized core along Peachtree Road, surrounded by suburban single-family neighborhoods situated among dense forests and rolling hills.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Surrounding Atlanta's three high-rise districts are the city's low- and medium-density neighborhoods, where the craftsman bungalow single-family home is dominant. The eastside is marked by historic streetcar suburbs built from the 1890s-1930s as havens for the upper middle class. These neighborhoods, many of which contain their own villages encircled by shaded, architecturally-distinct residential streets, include the Victorian Inman Park, Bohemian East Atlanta, and eclectic Old Fourth Ward. On the westside and along the BeltLine on the eastside, former warehouses and factories have been converted into housing, retail space, and art galleries, transforming the once-industrial areas such as West Midtown into model neighborhoods for smart growth, historic rehabilitation, and infill construction. In southwest Atlanta, neighborhoods closer to downtown originated as streetcar suburbs, including the historic West End, while those farther from downtown retain a postwar suburban layout, including Collier Heights and Cascade Heights, home to much of the city's affluent African American population. Northwest Atlanta contains the areas of the city to west of Marietta Boulevard and to the north of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, including those neighborhoods remote to downtown, such as Riverside, Bolton and Whittier Mill, which is one of Atlanta's designated Landmark Historical Neighborhoods. Vine City, though technically Northwest, adjoins the city's Downtown area and has recently been the target of community outreach programs and economic development initiatives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gentrification of the city's neighborhoods is one of the more controversial and transformative forces shaping contemporary Atlanta. The gentrification of Atlanta has its origins in the 1970s, after many of Atlanta's neighborhoods had undergone the urban decay that affected other major American cities in the mid-20th century. When neighborhood opposition successfully prevented two freeways from being built through city's the east side in 1975, the area became the starting point for Atlanta's gentrification. After Atlanta was awarded the Olympic games in 1990, gentrification expanded into other parts of the city, stimulated by infrastructure improvements undertaken in preparation for the games. Gentrification post-2000 has been aided by the Atlanta Housing Authority's eradication of the city's public housing and, more recently, the construction of the Beltline.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") according to the K\u00f6ppen classification, with the seasons more or less defined, although the winter has a shorter duration, with hot and humid summers and mild winters (in some cases the outbreaks are cold), but susceptible to snowstorms even if in small quantities on several occasions unlike the rest of the southeastern United States. Winters are cool but variable, with an average of 48 freezing days per year and temperatures dropping to on rare occasions. Warm air from the Gulf of Mexico can bring spring-like highs while strong Arctic air masses can push lows into the teens \u00b0F (\u22127 to -12\u00a0\u00b0C).", "qas": []}, {"context": "July averages , with high temperatures reaching on an average 44 days per year, though readings are not seen most years. January averages , with temperatures in the suburbs slightly cooler due largely to the urban heat island effect. Lows at or below freezing can be expected 40 nights annually, but extended stretches with daily high temperatures below are very rare, with a recent exception in January 2014. Extremes range from on February 13, 1899 to on June 30, 2012. Average dewpoints in the summer range from in June to in July.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Typical of the southeastern U.S., Atlanta receives abundant rainfall that is evenly distributed throughout the year, though spring and early fall are markedly drier. The average annual rainfall is , while snowfall is typically light at around 2.9 to 5 inches per year. The heaviest single snowfall occurred on January 23, 1940, with around of snow. However, ice storms usually cause more problems than snowfall does, the most severe occurring on January 7, 1973. Tornadoes are rare in the city itself, but the March 14, 2008 EF2 tornado damaged prominent structures in downtown Atlanta.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 2010 United States Census reported that Atlanta had a population of 420,003. The population density was 3,154 per square mile (1232/km). The racial makeup and population of Atlanta was 54.0% Black or African American, 38.4% White, 3.1% Asian and 0.2% Native American. Those from some other race made up 2.2% of the city's population, while those from two or more races made up 2.0%. Hispanics of any race made up 5.2% of the city's population. The median income for a household in the city was $45,171. The per capita income for the city was $35,453. 22.6% percent of the population was living below the poverty line. Atlanta has one of the highest LGBT populations per capita, ranking third among major American cities, behind San Francisco and slightly behind Seattle, with 12.8% of the city's total population identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. 7.3% of Atlantans were born abroad (86th in the US).\nIn the 2010 Census, Atlanta was recorded as the nation's fourth-largest majority-black city. It has long been known as a center of African-American political power, education, and culture, often called a black mecca. African-American residents of Atlanta have followed whites to newer housing in the suburbs in the early 21st century. From 2000 to 2010, the city's black population decreased by 31,678 people, shrinking from 61.4% of the city's population in 2000 to 54.0% in 2010.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the population of seattle in 2010 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At the same time, the white population of Atlanta has increased. Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of whites in the city's population grew faster than any other U.S. city. In that decade, Atlanta's white population grew from 31% to 38% of the city's population, an absolute increase of 22,753 people, more than triple the increase that occurred between 1990 and 2000.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the population of the united states ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Out of the total population five years and older, 83.3% spoke only English at home, while 8.8% spoke Spanish, 3.9% another Indo-European language, and 2.8% an Asian language. Atlanta's dialect has traditionally been a variation of Southern American English. The Chattahoochee River long formed a border between the Coastal Southern and Southern Appalachian dialects. Because of the development of corporate headquarters in the region, attracting migrants from other areas of the country, by 2003, \"Atlanta\" magazine concluded Atlanta had become significantly \"de-Southernized.\" A Southern accent was considered a handicap in some circumstances. In general, Southern accents are less prevalent among residents of the city and inner suburbs and among younger people; they are more common in the outer suburbs and among older people. At the same time, some residents of the city express Southern variations of African-American English.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Religion in Atlanta, while historically centered on Protestant Christianity, now involves many faiths as a result of the city and metro area's increasingly international population. Protestant Christianity still maintains a strong presence in the city (63%), but in recent decades the Catholic Church has increased in numbers and influence because of new migrants in the region. Metro Atlanta also has numerous ethnic or national Christian congregations, including Korean and Indian churches. The larger non-Christian faiths are Judaism, Islam and Hinduism. Overall, there are over 1,000 places of worship within Atlanta.", "qas": [{"question": "how many places of worship are there within the city ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 27, 4)"}]}, {"context": "With a GDP of $385\u00a0billion, the Atlanta metropolitan area's economy is the tenth-largest in the country and among the top 20-largest in the world. Corporate operations play a major role in Atlanta's economy, as the city claims the nation's third-largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies. It also hosts the global headquarters of corporations like The Coca-Cola Company, The Home Depot, Delta Air Lines, AT&T Mobility, Chick-fil-A, and UPS. Over 75% of Fortune 1000 companies conduct business operations in the city's metro area, and the region hosts offices of over 1,250 multinational corporations. Many corporations are drawn to the city by its educated workforce; , 45% of adults aged 25 or older residing in the city have at least 4-year college degrees, compared to the national average of 28%.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta started as a railroad town, and logistics has been a major component of the city's economy to this day. Atlanta serves as an important rail junction and contains major classification yards for Norfolk Southern and CSX. Since its construction in the 1950s, Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport has served as a key engine of the city's economic growth. Delta Air Lines, the city's largest employer and the metro area's third-largest, operates the world's largest airline hub at Hartsfield-Jackson, and it has helped make it the world's busiest airport, in terms of both passenger traffic and aircraft operations. Partly due to the airport, Atlanta has been also a hub for diplomatic missions; , the city contains 26 consulates general, the seventh-highest concentration of diplomatic missions in the US.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Media is also an important aspect of Atlanta's economy. In fact, the city is even a major cable television programming center. Ted Turner established the headquarters of both the Cable News Network (CNN) and the Turner Broadcasting System (TBS) in the city. Cox Enterprises, the nation's third-largest cable television service and the publisher of over a dozen American newspapers, is headquartered in the city. The Weather Channel is headquartered just outside of Atlanta in suburban Cobb County.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an important aspect of atlanta's economy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Information technology\u2014a business sector that includes publishing, software development, entertainment and data processing\u2014has garnered a larger percentage of Atlanta's economic output. Atlanta has, indeed, been nicknamed the \"Silicon peach\" thanks to its burgeoning technology sector. , Atlanta contains the fourth-largest concentration of information technology jobs in the US, numbering 85,000+. The city also is ranked as the sixth fastest-growing community for information technology jobs, with an employment growth of 4.8% in 2012 and a three-year growth near 9%, or 16,000 jobs. Information technology companies are drawn to Atlanta's lower costs and educated workforce.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Recently, Atlanta has been a center for film and television production, largely because of the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act, which awards qualified productions a transferable income tax credit of 20% of all in-state costs for film and television investments of $500,000 or more. Film and television production facilities based in Atlanta include Turner Studios, Pinewood Studios (Pinewood Atlanta), Tyler Perry Studios, Williams Street Productions, and the EUE/Screen Gems soundstages. Film and television production injected $9.5 billion into Georgia's economy in 2017, with Atlanta garnering most of the projects. As a result, by the following year, Atlanta emerged as one of the all-time most popular destinations for film production globally.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Compared to other American cities, Atlanta's economy in the past had been disproportionately affected by the 2008 financial crisis and the subsequent recession, with the city's economy earning a ranking of 68 among 100 American cities in a September 2014 report due to an elevated unemployment rate, declining real income levels, and a depressed housing market. From 2010 to 2011, Atlanta saw a 0.9% contraction in employment and plateauing income growth at 0.4%. Although unemployment had decreased to 7% by late 2014, this was still higher than the national unemployment rate of 5.8% Atlanta's housing market has also struggled, with home prices dropping by 2.1% in January 2012, reaching levels not seen since 1996. Compared with a year earlier, the average home price in Atlanta plummeted to 17.3% in February 2012, thus becoming the largest annual drop in the history of the index for any American or global city. The decline in home prices prompted some economists to deem Atlanta the worst housing market in the nation at the height of the depression. Nevertheless, the city's real estate market has resurged since 2012, so much median home value and rent growth significantly outpaced the national average by 2018, thanks to a rapidly-growing regional economy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta has a dynamic, distinctly Southern, culture. This is due to a large population of migrants from other parts of the U.S., in addition to many recent immigrants to the U.S. who have made the metropolitan area their home, establishing Atlanta as the cultural and economic hub of an increasingly multi-cultural metropolitan area. Thus, although traditional Southern culture is part of Atlanta's cultural fabric, it is mostly the backdrop to one of the nation's most cosmopolitan cities. This unique cultural combination reveals itself in the arts district of Midtown, the quirky neighborhoods on the city's eastside, and the multi-ethnic enclaves found along Buford Highway.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of geography does the city have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, and resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Atlanta Opera), ballet (Atlanta Ballet), orchestral music (Atlanta Symphony Orchestra), and theater (the Alliance Theatre). Atlanta attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions catering to a variety of interests. Atlanta's performing arts district is concentrated in Midtown Atlanta at the Woodruff Arts Center, which is home to the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and the Alliance Theatre. The city frequently hosts touring Broadway acts, especially at The Fox Theatre, a historic landmark among the highest-grossing theatres of its size.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the theater in miami ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As a national center for the arts, Atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions. The renowned High Museum of Art is arguably the South's leading art museum and among the most-visited art museums in the world. The Museum of Design Atlanta (MODA) and the SCAD FASH Museum of Fashion + Film are the only such museums in the Southeast. Contemporary art museums include the Atlanta Contemporary Art Center and the Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia. Institutions of higher education contribute to Atlanta's art scene, with the Savannah College of Art and Design's Atlanta campus providing the city's arts community with a steady stream of curators, and Emory University's Michael C. Carlos Museum containing the largest collection of ancient art in the Southeast.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the national center for the arts ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta has become one of the USA's best cities for street art in recent years. It is home to Living Walls, an annual street art conference and the Outerspace Project, an annual event series that merges public art, live music, design, action sports, and culture. Examples of street art in Atlanta can be found on the Atlanta Street Art Map.", "qas": [{"question": "where can you find art in jackson ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 37, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta has played a major or contributing role in the development of various genres of American music at different points in the city's history. Beginning as early as the 1920s, Atlanta emerged as a center for country music, which was brought to the city by migrants from Appalachia. During the countercultural 1960s, Atlanta hosted the Atlanta International Pop Festival, with the 1969 festival taking place more than a month before Woodstock and featuring many of the same bands. The city was also a center for Southern rock during its 1970s heyday: the Allman Brothers Band's hit instrumental \"Hot 'Lanta\" is an ode to the city, while Lynyrd Skynyrd's famous live rendition of \"Free Bird\" was recorded at the Fox Theatre in 1976, with lead singer Ronnie Van Zant directing the band to \"play it pretty for Atlanta\". During the 1980s, Atlanta had an active Punk rock scene centered on two of the city's music venues, 688 Club and the Metroplex, and Atlanta famously played host to the Sex Pistols first U.S. show, which was performed at the Great Southeastern Music Hall. The 1990s saw the city produce major mainstream acts across many different musical genres. Country music artist Travis Tritt, and R&B sensations TLC, Usher and Toni Braxton, were just some of the musicians proud to call Atlanta home. The city also gave birth to Atlanta hip hop, a subgenre that gained relevance and success with the introduction of the home-grown ATLiens known as Outkast, along with other Dungeon Family artists such as Organized Noize and Goodie Mob; however, it was not until the 2000s that Atlanta moved \"from the margins to becoming hip-hop's center of gravity with another sub-genre called Crunk, part of a larger shift in hip-hop innovation to the South\". Also in the 2000s, Atlanta was recognized by the Brooklyn-based \"Vice\" magazine for its indie rock scene, which revolves around the various live music venues found on the city's alternative eastside. To facilitate further local development, the state government provides qualified businesses and productions a 15% transferable income tax credit for in-state costs of music investments.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a national center for cinema and television production, Atlanta plays a significant role in the entertainment industry. It doubles for other parts of the world and fictional settlements in blockbuster productions, among them the newer titles from \"The Fast and the Furious\" franchise and Marvel features such as \"Ant-Man\" (2015), \"\" (2016), \"Black Panther\" and \"\" (both 2018). On the other hand, \"Gone With the Wind\" (1939), \"Smokey and the Bandit\" (1977), \"Sharkey's Machine\" (1981), \"The Slugger's Wife\" (1985), \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989), \"ATL\" (2006), \"End of a Gun\" (2016), Contract to Kill\" (2016), \"What Happened to Monday\" (2017), and \"Baby Driver\" (2017) are among several notable examples of films actually set in Atlanta. The city also provides the backdrop for shows such as \"The Walking Dead\", \"Stranger Things\", and \"Atlanta\", in addition to a myriad of animated and reality television programming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Main festivals in Atlanta include Shaky Knees Music Festival, Dragon Con, the Peachtree Road Race, Music Midtown, the Atlanta Film Festival, National Black Arts Festival, Festival Peachtree Latino, Atlanta Pride, the neighborhood festivals in Inman Park and Virginia-Highland (Summerfest), and the Little Five Points Halloween festival.", "qas": []}, {"context": ", Atlanta is the seventh-most visited city in the United States, with over 35 million visitors per year. Although the most popular attraction among visitors to Atlanta is the Georgia Aquarium, the world's largest indoor aquarium, Atlanta's tourism industry is mostly driven by the city's history museums and outdoor attractions. Atlanta contains a notable amount of historical museums and sites, including the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, which includes the preserved childhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., as well as his final resting place; the Atlanta Cyclorama & Civil War Museum, which houses a massive painting and diorama in-the-round, with a rotating central audience platform, depicting the Battle of Atlanta in the Civil War; the World of Coca-Cola, featuring the history of the world-famous soft drink brand and its well-known advertising; the College Football Hall of Fame which honors college football and its athletes; the National Center for Civil and Human Rights, which explores the civil rights movement and its connection to contemporary human rights movements throughout the world; the Carter Center and Presidential Library, housing U.S. President Jimmy Carter's papers and other material relating to the Carter administration and the Carter family's life; and the Margaret Mitchell House and Museum, where Mitchell wrote the best-selling novel \"Gone with the Wind\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta contains several outdoor attractions. The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, is home to the Kendeda Canopy Walk, a skywalk that allows visitors to tour one of the city's last remaining urban forests from . The Canopy Walk is considered the only canopy-level pathway of its kind in the United States. Zoo Atlanta, in Grant Park, accommodates over 1,300 animals representing more than 220 species. Home to the nation's largest collections of gorillas and orangutans, the Zoo is one of only four zoos in the U.S. to house giant pandas. Festivals showcasing arts and crafts, film, and music, including the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, the Atlanta Film Festival, and Music Midtown, respectively, are also popular with tourists.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the festival that contains a major tourist in texas ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 42, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Tourists are drawn to the city's culinary scene, which comprises a mix of urban establishments garnering national attention, ethnic restaurants serving cuisine from every corner of the world, and traditional eateries specializing in Southern dining. Since the turn of the 21st century, Atlanta has emerged as a sophisticated restaurant town. Many restaurants opened in the city's gentrifying neighborhoods have received praise at the national level, including Bocado, Bacchanalia, and Miller Union in West Midtown, Empire State South in Midtown, and Two Urban Licks and Rathbun's on the east side. In 2011, the \"New York Times\" characterized Empire State South and Miller Union as reflecting \"a new kind of sophisticated Southern sensibility centered on the farm but experienced in the city.\" Visitors seeking to sample international Atlanta are directed to Buford Highway, the city's international corridor, and suburban Gwinnett County. There, the nearly-million immigrants that make Atlanta home have established various authentic ethnic restaurants representing virtually every nationality on the globe. For traditional Southern fare, one of the city's most famous establishments is The Varsity, a long-lived fast food chain and the world's largest drive-in restaurant. Mary Mac's Tea Room and Paschal's are more formal destinations for Southern food.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta is home to professional franchises for four major team sports: the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball, the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association, the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League, and Atlanta United FC of Major League Soccer. The Braves, who moved to Atlanta in 1966, were established as the Boston Red Stockings in 1871 and are the oldest continually operating professional sports franchise in the United States. The Braves won the World Series in 1995, and had an unprecedented run of 14 straight divisional championships from 1991 to 2005. The Braves have a new home as of 2017, having moved from Turner Field to Suntrust Park, which is in the Atlanta Metropolitan area northwest of downtown Atlanta in Cumberland/Galleria, Georgia.", "qas": [{"question": "what team is home to chicago ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 44, 0)"}, {"question": "where is the atlanta located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 44, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Atlanta Falcons have played in Atlanta since their inception in 1966. The Falcons have won the division title six times (1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012, 2016) and the NFC championship twice in 1998 and 2016. However, they have been unsuccessful in both of their Super Bowl trips so far, losing to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999 and to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI in 2017. The Atlanta Hawks began in 1946 as the Tri-Cities Blackhawks, playing in Moline, Illinois. The team moved to Atlanta in 1968, and they currently play their games in State Farm Arena. The Atlanta Dream is the city's Women's National Basketball Association franchise.", "qas": [{"question": "in what city have the tampa lions played ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 45, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Professional soccer has been played in some form in Atlanta since 1967. Atlanta's first professional soccer team was the Atlanta Chiefs of the original North American Soccer League which won the 1968 NASL Championship and defeated English first division club Manchester City F.C. twice in international friendlies. In 1998 another professional soccer team was formed, the Atlanta Silverbacks of the new North American Soccer League, which now plays as an amateur club in the National Premier Soccer League. In 2014, Atlanta Falcons owner Arthur Blank founded Atlanta United FC as Atlanta's first premier-division professional soccer club since the Chiefs. Atlanta United has broken the MLS single-game attendance record in both the regular season and the playoffs, the single-game attendance record of the U.S. Open Cup, the all-time record for highest season average attendance of any first division club in the United States, and the highest attendance record for an MLS Cup game. Atlanta United won MLS Cup 2018 on December 8, 2018, defeating the Portland Timbers 2\u20130. The club is estimated by Forbes to be the most valuable club in Major League Soccer.", "qas": [{"question": "in what form of sport has professional sport been played ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 46, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta has had its own professional ice hockey franchises, both of which relocated after playing in Atlanta less than 15 years. The National Hockey League (NHL) has had two Atlanta franchises: the Atlanta Flames began play in 1972 before moving to Calgary in 1980, while the Atlanta Thrashers began play in 1999 before moving to Winnipeg in 2011. Atlanta also has an Alliance of American Football team, the Atlanta Legends, which will play in 2019. On August 2, 2018, it was announced that Atlanta would have its own Overwatch League team, Atlanta Reign.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the afl league team ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 47, 3)"}, {"question": "how many years did the ice hockey team last ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 47, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta has been the host city for various international, professional and collegiate sporting events, most famously the Centennial 1996 Summer Olympics. Atlanta hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000. It will host again in 2019. In professional golf, The Tour Championship, the final PGA Tour event of the season, is played annually at East Lake Golf Club. In 2001 and 2011, Atlanta hosted the PGA Championship, one of the four major championships in men's professional golf, at the Atlanta Athletic Club. In professional ice hockey, the city hosted the 56th NHL All-Star Game in 2008, three years before the Thrashers moved. In 2011, Atlanta hosted professional wrestling's annual WrestleMania. The city has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men's Basketball Championship four times, most recently in 2013. In college football, Atlanta hosts the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Game, the SEC Championship Game, and the Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Running is a popular local sport, and the city declares itself to be \"Running City USA\". The city hosts the Peachtree Road Race, the world's largest race, annually on Independence Day. Atlanta also hosts the nation's largest Thanksgiving day half marathon, which starts and ends at Georgia State Stadium. The Atlanta Marathon, which starts and ends at Centennial Olympic Park, routes through many of the city's historic landmarks, and its 2020 running will coincide with the U.S. Olympic marathon trials for the 2020 Summer Olympics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta's 343 parks, nature preserves, and gardens cover , which amounts to only 5.6% of the city's total acreage, compared to the national average of just over 10%. However, 64% of Atlantans live within a 10-minute walk of a park, a percentage equal to the national average. In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that among the park systems of the 50 most populous U.S. cities, Atlanta's park system received a ranking of 31. Piedmont Park, in Midtown, is Atlanta's most iconic green space. The park, which underwent a major renovation and expansion in recent years, attracts visitors from across the region and hosts cultural events throughout the year. Other notable city parks include Centennial Olympic Park, a legacy of the 1996 Summer Olympics that forms the centerpiece of the city's tourist district; Woodruff Park, which anchors the campus of Georgia State University; Grant Park, home to Zoo Atlanta; Chastain Park, which houses an amphitheater used for live music concerts; and the currently-under construction Westside Park at Bellwood Quarry, the 280-acre green space and reservoir project slated to become the city's largest park when fully complete in the 2020s. The Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area, in the northwestern corner of the city, preserves a stretch of the river for public recreation opportunities. The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, contains formal gardens, including a Japanese garden and a rose garden, woodland areas, and a conservatory that includes indoor exhibits of plants from tropical rainforests and deserts. The BeltLine, a former rail corridor that forms a loop around Atlanta's core, has been transformed into a series of parks, connected by a multi-use trail, increasing Atlanta's park space by 40%.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta offers resources and opportunities for amateur and participatory sports and recreation. Golf and tennis are popular in Atlanta, and the city contains six public golf courses and 182 tennis courts. Facilities along the Chattahoochee River cater to watersports enthusiasts, providing the opportunity for kayaking, canoeing, fishing, boating, or tubing. The city's only skate park, a facility that offers bowls, curbs, and smooth-rolling concrete mounds, is at Historic Fourth Ward Park.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta is governed by a mayor and the Atlanta City Council. The city council consists of 15 representatives\u2014one from each of the city's 12 districts and three at-large positions. The mayor may veto a bill passed by the council, but the council can override the veto with a two-thirds majority. The mayor of Atlanta is Keisha Lance Bottoms, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot whose first term in office began on January 2, 2018.\nEvery mayor elected since 1973 has been black. In 2001, Shirley Franklin became the first woman to be elected Mayor of Atlanta, and the first African-American woman to serve as mayor of a major southern city. Atlanta city politics suffered from a notorious reputation for corruption during the 1990s administration of Mayor Bill Campbell, who was convicted by a federal jury in 2006 on three counts of tax evasion in connection with gambling winnings during trips he took with city contractors.", "qas": [{"question": "who governs seattle ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 52, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As the state capital, Atlanta is the site of most of Georgia's state government. The Georgia State Capitol building, located downtown, houses the offices of the governor, lieutenant governor and secretary of state, as well as the General Assembly. The Governor's Mansion is in a residential section of Buckhead. Atlanta serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy, including the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Atlanta also plays an important role in the federal judiciary system, containing the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the state capital of houston ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 53, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Historically, Atlanta has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party. Although municipal elections are officially nonpartisan, nearly all of the city's elected officials are registered Democrats. The city is split among 14 state house districts and four state senate districts, all held by Democrats. At the federal level, Atlanta is split between two congressional districts. Most of the northern portion of the city is in the 5th district, represented by Democrat John Lewis. The southern fourth is in the 13th district, represented by Democrat David Scott. A sliver in the north is in the 11th district, represented by Republican Barry Loudermilk.", "qas": [{"question": "what party has historically been a rival for the democratic party ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 54, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The city is served by the Atlanta Police Department, which numbers 2,000 officers and oversaw a 40% decrease in the city's crime rate between 2001 and 2009. Specifically, homicide decreased by 57%, rape by 72%, and violent crime overall by 55%. Crime is down across the country, but Atlanta's improvement has occurred at more than twice the national rate. Nevertheless, Forbes ranked Atlanta as the sixth most dangerous city in the United States in 2012.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Atlanta Fire Rescue Department provides fire protection and first responder emergency medical services to the city from its 35 fire stations. In 2017, AFRD responded to over 100,000 calls for service over a coverage area of . The department also protects Hartsfield\u2013Jackson with 5 fire stations on the property; serving over 1 million passengers from over 100 different countries. The department protects over 3000 highrise buildings, of the rapid rail system, and of interstate highway.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Emergency ambulance services are provided to city residents by hospital based Grady EMS (Fulton County), and American Medical Response (DeKalb County). The EMS providers provide BLS and ALS care.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to the more than 30 colleges and universities in the city, Atlanta is considered an important hub for higher education.\nThe Georgia Institute of Technology is one of the most prominent public universities in the nation; it is a major research university in Midtown that consistently ranks among the nation's top ten public universities. It offers highly ranked degree programs in engineering, design, business administration, the sciences, and architecture.\nThe University of Georgia, chartered in 1785, is one of the top public research universities in the nation with \u201cHighest Research Activity\u201d and is approximately an hour away in Athens, Georgia; however, the Atlanta Center of its Terry College of Business is in the Buckhead area of Atlanta, while the university also has a metropolitan Atlanta Gwinnett Campus that occupies 60,000 square feet of the Intellicenter.\nGeorgia State University is a major public research university in Downtown Atlanta; it is the largest of the 29 public colleges and universities in the University System of Georgia and is a significant contributor to the revitalization of the city's central business district.\nAtlanta is home to nationally renowned private colleges and universities, most notably Emory University, a leading liberal arts and research institution that consistently ranks among the top 20 universities in the United States and operates Emory Healthcare, the largest health care system in Georgia.\nThe Atlanta University Center is also in the city; it is the largest contiguous consortium of historically black colleges in the nation, comprising Spelman College, Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College, and Morehouse School of Medicine. Atlanta contains a campus of the Savannah College of Art and Design, a private art and design university that has proven to be a major factor in the recent growth of Atlanta's visual art community. Atlanta and nearby Athens also boast American Bar Association accredited law schools: Atlanta's John Marshall Law School, Emory University School of Law, Georgia State University College of Law and University of Georgia School of Law.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fifty-five thousand students are enrolled in 106 schools in Atlanta Public Schools, some of which are operated as charter schools. Atlanta is served by many private schools including, without limitation, Atlanta Jewish Academy, Greenfield Hebrew Academy, Atlanta International School, The Westminster Schools, Pace Academy, The Lovett School, The Paideia School, Holy Innocents' Episcopal School and Roman Catholic parochial schools operated by the Archdiocese of Atlanta.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The primary network-affiliated television stations in Atlanta are WXIA-TV 11 (NBC), WGCL-TV 46 (CBS), WSB-TV 2 (ABC), and WAGA-TV 5 (Fox). Other major commercial stations include WPXA-TV 14 (Ion), WPCH-TV 17 (Ind.), WUVG-TV 34 (Univision), WUPA 69 (CW), and WATL 36 (MyNetworkTV). WPXA-TV, WUVG-TV, WAGA-TV and WUPA are network O&O's. The Atlanta metropolitan area is served by two public television stations (both PBS member stations), and one public radio station. WGTV 8 is the flagship station of the statewide Georgia Public Television network, while WPBA is owned by Atlanta Public Schools. Georgia Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, WABE, a classical music station operated by Atlanta Public Schools.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta is served by the \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. The \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" is the result of a 1950 merger between \"The Atlanta Journal\" and \"The Atlanta Constitution\", with staff consolidation occurring in 1982 and separate publication of the morning \"Constitution\" and afternoon \"Journal\" ceasing in 2001. Alternative weekly newspapers include \"Creative Loafing\", which has a weekly print circulation of 80,000. \"Atlanta\" magazine is an award-winning, monthly general-interest magazine based in and covering Atlanta.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the only major newspaper in philadelphia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 61, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the magazine published in richmond ?", "answers": [], "id": "(0, 61, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Atlanta's transportation infrastructure comprises a complex network that includes a heavy rail rapid transit system, a light rail streetcar loop, a multi-county bus system, Amtrak service via the Crescent, multiple freight train lines, an Interstate Highway System, several airports, including the world's busiest, and over of bike paths.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta has a network of freeways that radiate out from the city, and automobiles are the dominant means of transportation in the region. Three major interstate highways converge in Atlanta: I-20 (east-west), I-75 (northwest-southeast), and I-85 (northeast-southwest). The latter two combine in the middle of the city to form the Downtown Connector (I-75/85), which carries more than 340,000 vehicles per day and is one of the most congested segments of interstate highway in the United States. Atlanta is mostly encircled by Interstate 285, a beltway locally known as \"the Perimeter\" that has come to mark the boundary between \"Inside the Perimeter\" (ITP), the city and close-in suburbs, and \"Outside the Perimeter\" (OTP), the outer suburbs and exurbs. The heavy reliance on automobiles for transportation in Atlanta has resulted in traffic, commute, and air pollution rates that rank among the worst in the country. The City of Atlanta has a higher than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 15.2 percent of Atlanta households lacked a car, and increased slightly to 16.4 percent in 2016. The national average is 8.7 percent in 2016. Atlanta averaged 1.31 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) provides public transportation in the form of buses and heavy rail. Notwithstanding heavy automotive usage in Atlanta, the city's subway system is the eighth busiest in the country. MARTA rail lines connect key destinations, such as the airport, Downtown, Midtown, Buckhead, and Perimeter Center. However, significant destinations, such as Emory University and Cumberland, remain unserved. As a result, a 2011 Brookings Institution study placed Atlanta 91st of 100 metro areas for transit accessibility. Emory University operates its Cliff shuttle buses with 200,000 boardings per month, while private minibuses supply Buford Highway. Amtrak, the national rail passenger system, provides service to Atlanta via the \"Crescent train\" (New\u00a0York\u2013New\u00a0Orleans), which stops at Peachtree Station. In 2014, the Atlanta Streetcar opened to the public. The streetcar's line, which is also known as the Downtown Loop, runs around the downtown tourist areas of Peachtree Center, Centennial Olympic Park, the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, and Sweet Auburn. The Atlanta Streetcar line is also being expanded on in the coming years to include a wider range of Atlanta's neighborhoods and important places of interest, with a total of over of track in the plan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport is the world's busiest airport as measured by passenger traffic and aircraft traffic. The facility offers air service to over 150 U.S. destinations and more than 75 international destinations in 50 countries, with over 2,500 arrivals and departures daily. Delta Air Lines maintains its largest hub at the airport. Situated () south of downtown, the airport covers most of the land inside a wedge formed by Interstate 75, Interstate 85, and Interstate 285.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cycling is a growing mode of transportation in Atlanta, more than doubling since 2009, when it comprised 1.1% of all commutes (up from 0.3% in 2000). Although Atlanta's lack of bike lanes and hilly topography may deter many residents from cycling, the city's transportation plan calls for the construction of of bike lanes by 2020, with the BeltLine helping to achieve this goal. In 2012, Atlanta's first \"bike track\" was constructed on 10th Street in Midtown. The two lane bike track runs from Monroe Drive west to Charles Allen Drive, with connections to the Beltline and Piedmont Park. Starting in June 2016, Atlanta received a bike sharing program, known as Relay Bike Share, with 100 bikes in Downtown and Midtown, which expanded to 500 bikes at 65 stations as of April 2017.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the 2016 American Community Survey (five-year average), 68.6% of working city of Atlanta residents commuted by driving alone, 7% carpooled, 10% used public transportation, and 4.6% walked. About 2.1% used all other forms of transportation, including taxi, bicycle, and motorcycle. About 7.6% worked at home.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta has a reputation as a \"city in a forest\" due to an abundance of trees that is rare among major cities. The city's main street is named after a tree, and beyond the Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead business districts, the skyline gives way to a dense canopy of woods that spreads into the suburbs. The city is home to the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, an annual arts and crafts festival held one weekend during early April, when the native dogwoods are in bloom. The nickname is factually accurate, as vegetation covers 47.9% of the city as of 2017, the highest among all major American cities, and well above the national average of 27%. Atlanta's tree coverage does not go unnoticed\u2014it was the main reason cited by \"National Geographic\" in naming Atlanta a \"Place of a Lifetime\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city's lush tree canopy, which filters out pollutants and cools sidewalks and buildings, has increasingly been under assault from man and nature due to heavy rains, drought, aged forests, new pests, and urban construction. A 2001 study found Atlanta's heavy tree cover declined from 48% in 1974 to 38% in 1996. Community organizations and the city government are addressing the problem. Trees Atlanta, a non-profit organization founded in 1985, has planted and distributed over 113,000 shade trees in the city, and Atlanta's government has awarded $130,000 in grants to neighborhood groups to plant trees. Fees are additionally imposed on developers that remove trees on their property per a citywide ordinance, active since 1993.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atlanta has 17 sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International, Inc. (SCI):", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Axiology", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Axiology (from Greek , \"axia\", \"value, worth\"; and , \"-logia\") is the philosophical study of value. It is either the collective term for ethics and aesthetics, philosophical fields that depend crucially on notions of worth, or the foundation for these fields, and thus similar to value theory and meta-ethics. The term was first used by Paul Lapie, in 1902, and Eduard von Hartmann, in 1908.", "qas": [{"question": "who first used the term `` quran '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 0, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Axiology studies mainly two kinds of values: ethics and aesthetics. Ethics investigates the concepts of \"right\" and \"good\" in individual and social conduct. Aesthetics studies the concepts of \"beauty\" and \"harmony.\" Formal axiology, the attempt to lay out principles regarding value with mathematical rigor, is exemplified by Robert S. Hartman's science of value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Between the 5th and 6th centuries BC, it was important in Greece to be knowledgeable if you were to be successful. Philosophers began to recognize that differences existed between the laws and morality of society. Socrates believed that knowledge had a vital connection to virtue, making morality and democracy closely intertwined. Socrates' student, Plato furthered the belief by establishing virtues which should be followed by all. With the fall of the government, values became individual, causing skeptic schools of thought to flourish, ultimately shaping a pagan philosophy that is thought to have influenced and shaped Christianity. During the medieval period, Thomas Aquinas made the distinction between natural and supernatural (theological) virtues. This concept led philosophers to distinguish between judgments based on fact and judgments based on values, creating division between science and philosophy.", "qas": [{"question": "what was important in greece in the 8th century bc ?", "answers": [], "id": "(1, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "A Doll's House", "paragraphs": [{"context": "A Doll's House (; also translated as \"A Doll House\") is a three-act play written by Norway's Henrik Ibsen. It premiered at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 21 December 1879, having been published earlier that month. The play is set in a Norwegian town circa 1879.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The play is significant for the way it deals with the fate of a married woman, who at the time in Norway lacked reasonable opportunities for self-fulfillment in a male-dominated world. It aroused a great sensation at the time, and caused a \u201cstorm of outraged controversy\u201d that went beyond the theatre to the world newspapers and society.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2006, the centennial of Ibsen's death, \"A Doll's House\" held the distinction of being the world's most performed play that year. UNESCO has inscribed Ibsen's autographed manuscripts of \"A Doll's House\" on the Memory of the World Register in 2001, in recognition of their historical value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The title of the play is most commonly translated as \"A Doll's House\", though some scholars use \"A Doll House\". John Simon says that \"A Doll\u2019s House\" is \"the British term for what [Americans] call a 'dollhouse'\". Egil T\u00f6rnqvist says of the alternative title: \"Rather than being superior to the traditional rendering, it simply sounds more idiomatic to Americans.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe play opens at Christmas time as Nora Helmer enters her home carrying many packages. Nora's husband Torvald is working in his study when she arrives. He playfully rebukes her for spending so much money on Christmas gifts, calling her his \"little squirrel.\" He teases her about how the previous year she had spent weeks making gifts and ornaments by hand because money was scarce. This year Torvald is due a promotion at the bank where he works, so Nora feels that they can let themselves go a little. The maid announces two visitors: Mrs. Kristine Linde, an old friend of Nora's, who has come seeking employment; and Dr. Rank, a close friend of the family, who is let into the study. Kristine has had a difficult few years, ever since her husband died leaving her with no money or children. Nora says that things have not been easy for them either: Torvald became sick, and they had to travel to Italy so he could recover. Kristine explains that when her mother was ill she had to take care of her brothers, but now that they are grown she feels her life is \"unspeakably empty.\" Nora promises to talk to Torvald about finding her a job. Kristine gently tells Nora that she is like a child. Nora is offended, so she teases the idea that she got money from \"some admirer,\" so they could travel to Italy to improve Torvald's health. She told Torvald that her father gave her the money, but in fact she managed to illegally borrow it without his knowledge because women couldn't do anything economical like signing checks without their husband. Over the years, she has been secretly working and saving up to pay it off.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Krogstad, a lower-level employee at Torvald's bank, arrives and goes into the study. Nora is clearly uneasy when she sees him. Dr. Rank leaves the study and mentions that he feels wretched, though like everyone he wants to go on living. In contrast to his physical illness, he says that the man in the study, Krogstad, is \"morally diseased.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what is krogstad ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After the meeting with Krogstad, Torvald comes out of the study. Nora asks him if he can give Kristine a position at the bank and Torvald is very positive, saying that this is a fortunate moment, as a position has just become available. Torvald, Kristine, and Dr. Rank leave the house, leaving Nora alone. The nanny returns with the children and Nora plays with them for a while until Krogstad creeps into the living room and surprises her. Krogstad tells Nora that Torvald intends to fire him at the bank and asks her to intercede with Torvald to allow him to keep his job. She refuses, and Krogstad threatens to blackmail her about the loan she took out for the trip to Italy; he knows that she obtained this loan by forging her father's signature. Krogstad leaves and when Torvald returns, Nora tries to convince him not to fire Krogstad. Torvald refuses to hear her pleas, explaining that Krogstad is a liar and a hypocrite and that he committed a terrible crime: he forged someone's name. Torvald feels physically ill in the presence of a man \"poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what does torvald say about the study of the study ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Kristine arrives to help Nora repair a dress for a costume function that she and Torvald plan to attend the next day. Torvald returns from the bank, and Nora pleads with him to reinstate Krogstad, claiming she is worried Krogstad will publish libelous articles about Torvald and ruin his career. Torvald dismisses her fears and explains that, although Krogstad is a good worker and seems to have turned his life around, he must be fired because he is not deferential enough to Torvald in front of other bank personnel. Torvald then retires to his study to work.", "qas": [{"question": "how did his study his study ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 7, 3)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the plan that madonna and torvald plan to attend a costume function ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Dr. Rank, the family friend, arrives. Nora asks him for a favor, but Rank responds by revealing that he has entered the terminal stage of tuberculosis of the spine and that he has always been secretly in love with her. Nora tries to deny the first revelation and make light of it but is more disturbed by his declaration of love. She then clumsily attempts to tell him that she is not in love with him, but that she loves him dearly as a friend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Desperate after being fired by Torvald, Krogstad arrives at the house. Nora convinces Dr. Rank to go into Torvald's study so he will not see Krogstad. When Krogstad confronts Nora, he declares that he no longer cares about the remaining balance of Nora's loan, but that he will instead preserve the associated bond to blackmail Torvald into not only keeping him employed but also promoting him. Nora explains that she has done her best to persuade her husband, but he refuses to change his mind. Krogstad informs Nora that he has written a letter detailing her crime (forging her father's signature of surety on the bond) and put it in Torvald's mailbox, which is locked.", "qas": [{"question": "who fired desperate at the house ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what does her informs mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 9, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Nora tells Kristine of her difficult situation. Having had a relationship with Krogstad in the past before her marriage, Kristine says that they are still in love and promises to try to convince him to relent.", "qas": [{"question": "who tells kristine of her lack ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Torvald enters and tries to retrieve his mail, but Nora distracts him by begging him to help her with the dance she has been rehearsing for the costume party, feigning anxiety about performing. She dances so badly and acts so childishly that Torvald agrees to spend the whole evening coaching her. When the others go to dinner, Nora stays behind for a few minutes and contemplates killing herself to save her husband from the shame of the revelation of her crime and to pre-empt any gallant gesture on his part to save her reputation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kristine tells Krogstad that she only married her husband because she had no other means to support her sick mother and young siblings and that she has returned to offer him her love again. She believes that he would not have stooped to unethical behavior if he had not been devastated by her abandonment and been in dire financial straits. Krogstad changes his mind and offers to take back his letter to Torvald. However, Kristine decides that Torvald should know the truth for the sake of his and Nora's marriage.", "qas": [{"question": "what does kristine say torvald should do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 12, 3)"}]}, {"context": "After literally dragging Nora home from the party, Torvald goes to check his mail but is interrupted by Dr. Rank, who has followed them. Dr. Rank chats for a while, conveying obliquely to Nora that this is a final goodbye, as he has determined that his death is near. Dr. Rank leaves, and Torvald retrieves his letters. As he reads them, Nora steels herself to take her life. Torvald confronts her with Krogstad's letter. Enraged, he declares that he is now completely in Krogstad's power; he must yield to Krogstad's demands and keep quiet about the whole affair. He berates Nora, calling her a dishonest and immoral woman and telling her that she is unfit to raise their children. He says that from now on their marriage will be only a matter of appearances.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the party who literally home ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A maid enters, delivering a letter to Nora. The letter is from Krogstad, yet Torvald demands to read the letter and takes it from Nora. Torvald exults that he is saved, as Krogstad has returned the incriminating bond, which Torvald immediately burns along with Krogstad's letters. He takes back his harsh words to his wife and tells her that he forgives her. Nora realizes that her husband is not the strong and gallant man she thought he was, and that he truly loves himself more than he does Nora.", "qas": [{"question": "what did nora do with his wife ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 14, 4)"}, {"question": "what is a maid ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Torvald explains that when a man has forgiven his wife, it makes him love her all the more since it reminds him that she is totally dependent on him, like a child. He dismisses the fact that Nora had to make the agonizing choice between her conscience and his health, and ignores her years of secret efforts to free them from the ensuing obligations and the danger of loss of reputation. He preserves his peace of mind by thinking of the incident as a mere mistake that she made owing to her foolishness, one of her most endearing feminine traits.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nora tells Torvald that she is leaving him, and in a confrontational scene expresses her sense of betrayal and disillusionment. She says he has never loved her, they have become strangers to each other. She feels betrayed by his response to the scandal involving Krogstad, and she says she must get away to understand herself. She has lost her religion. She says that she has been treated like a doll to play with for her whole life, first by her father and then by him. Concerned for the family reputation, Torvald insists that she fulfill her duty as a wife and mother, but Nora says that she has duties to herself that are just as important, and that she cannot be a good mother or wife without learning to be more than a plaything. She reveals that she had expected that he would want to sacrifice his reputation for hers and that she had planned to kill herself to prevent him from doing so. She now realizes that Torvald is not at all the kind of person she had believed him to be and that their marriage has been based on mutual fantasies and misunderstandings.", "qas": [{"question": "who says that madonna is left ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Torvald is unable to comprehend Nora's point of view, since it contradicts all that he has been taught about the female mind throughout his life. Furthermore, he is so narcissistic that it is impossible for him to understand how he appears to her, as selfish, hypocritical, and more concerned with public reputation than with actual morality. Nora leaves her keys and wedding ring, and as Torvald breaks down and begins to cry, baffled by what has happened, Nora then leaves the house, slamming the door behind her. Whether or not she ever comes back is never made clear.", "qas": [{"question": "how is torvald able to understand the view of mary ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Ibsen's German agent felt that the original ending would not play well in German theatres. Therefore, for it to be considered acceptable, Ibsen was forced to write an alternative ending for the German premiere. In this ending, Nora is led to her children after having argued with Torvald. Seeing them, she collapses, and the curtain is brought down. Ibsen later called the ending a disgrace to the original play and referred to it as a \"barbaric outrage\". Virtually all productions today use the original ending, as do nearly all of the film versions of the play.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A Doll's House\" was based on the life of Laura Kieler (maiden name Laura Smith Petersen), a good friend of Ibsen. Much that happened between Nora and Torvald happened to Laura and her husband, Victor. Similar to the events in the play, Laura signed an illegal loan to save her husband. She wanted the money to find a cure for her husband's tuberculosis. She wrote to Ibsen, asking for his recommendation of her work to his publisher, thinking that the sales of her book would repay her debt. At his refusal, she forged a check for the money. At this point she was found out. In real life, when Victor discovered about Laura's secret loan, he divorced her and had her committed to an asylum. Two years later, she returned to her husband and children at his urging, and she went on to become a well-known Danish author, living to the age of 83.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ibsen wrote \"A Doll's House\" at the point when Laura Kieler had been committed to the asylum, and the fate of this friend of the family shook him deeply, perhaps also because Laura had asked him to intervene at a crucial point in the scandal, which he did not feel able or willing to do. Instead, he turned this life situation into an aesthetically shaped, successful drama. In the play, Nora leaves Torvald with head held high, though facing an uncertain future given the limitations single women faced in the society of the time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kieler eventually rebounded from the shame of the scandal and had her own successful writing career while remaining discontented with sole recognition as \"Ibsen's Nora\" years afterwards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ibsen started thinking about the play around May 1878, although he did not begin its first draft until a year later, having reflected on the themes and characters in the intervening period (he visualised its protagonist, Nora, for instance, as having approached him one day wearing \"a blue woollen dress\"). He outlined his conception of the play as a \"modern tragedy\" in a note written in Rome on 19 October 1878. \"A woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" he argues, since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ibsen sent a fair copy of the completed play to his publisher on 15 September 1879. It was first published in Copenhagen on 4 December 1879, in an edition of 8,000 copies that sold out within a month; a second edition of 3,000 copies followed on 4 January 1880, and a third edition of 2,500 was issued on 8 March.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A Doll's House\" received its world premiere on 21 December 1879 at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, with Betty Hennings as Nora, Emil Poulsen as Torvald, and Peter Jerndorff as Dr. Rank. Writing for the Norwegian newspaper \"Folkets Avis\", the critic Erik B\u00f8gh admired Ibsen's originality and technical mastery: \"Not a single declamatory phrase, no high dramatics, no drop of blood, not even a tear.\" Every performance of its run was sold out. Another production opened at the Royal Theatre in Stockholm, on 8 January 1880, while productions in Christiania (with Johanne Juell as Nora and Arnoldus Reimers as Torvald) and Bergen followed shortly after.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Germany, the actress Hedwig Niemann-Raabe refused to perform the play as written, declaring, \"\"I\" would never leave \"my\" children!\" Since the playwright's wishes were not protected by copyright, Ibsen decided to avoid the danger of being rewritten by a lesser dramatist by committing what he called a \"barbaric outrage\" on his play himself and giving it an alternative ending in which Nora did not leave. A production of this version opened in Flensburg in February 1880. This version was also played in Hamburg, Dresden, Hanover, and Berlin, although, in the wake of protests and a lack of success, Niemann-Raabe eventually restored the original ending. Another production of the original version, some rehearsals of which Ibsen attended, opened on 3 March 1880 at the Residenz Theatre in Munich.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Great Britain, the only way in which the play was initially allowed to be given in London was in an adaptation by Henry Arthur Jones and Henry Herman called \"Breaking a Butterfly\". This adaptation was produced at the Princess Theatre, 3 March 1884. Writing in 1896 in his book \"The Foundations of a National Drama\", Jones says: \"A rough translation from the German version of A Doll's House was put into my hands, and I was told that if it could be turned into a sympathetic play, a ready opening would be found for it on the London boards. I knew nothing of Ibsen, but I knew a great deal of Robertson and H. J. Byron. From these circumstances came the adaptation called \"Breaking a Butterfly\".\" H. L. Mencken writes that it was \"A Doll\u2019s House\" \u201cdenaturized and dephlogisticated. \u2026 Toward the middle of the action Ibsen was thrown to the fishes, and Nora was saved from suicide, rebellion, flight and immortality by making a faithful old clerk steal her fateful promissory note from Krogstad\u2019s desk. \u2026 The curtain fell upon a happy home.\u201c", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before 1899 there were two private productions of the play in London (in its original form as Ibsen wrote it) \u2014 one featured George Bernard Shaw in the role of Krogstad. The first public British production of the play in its regular form opened on 7 June 1889 at the Novelty Theatre, starring Janet Achurch as Nora and Charles Charrington as Torvald. Achurch played Nora again for a 7-day run in 1897. Soon after its London premiere, Achurch brought the play to Australia in 1889.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The play was first seen in America in 1883 in Louisville, Kentucky; Helena Modjeska acted Nora. The play made its Broadway premiere at the Palmer's Theatre on 21 December 1889, starring Beatrice Cameron as Nora Helmer. It was first performed in France in 1894.\nOther productions in the United States include one in 1902 starring Minnie Maddern Fiske, a 1937 adaptation with acting script by Thornton Wilder and starring Ruth Gordon, and a 1971 production starring Claire Bloom.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year was the play first seen in america ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A new translation by Zinnie Harris at the Donmar Warehouse, starring Gillian Anderson, Toby Stephens, Anton Lesser, Tara FitzGerald and Christopher Eccleston opened in May 2009.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The play was performed by in March 2011, one of their early performances following their December 2010 lower Manhattan launch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In August 2013, Young Vic, London, Great Britain, produced a new adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" directed by Carrie Cracknell based on the English language version by Simon Stephens.\nIn September 2014, in partnership with Brisbane Festival, La Boite located in Brisbane, Australia, hosted an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" written by Lally Katz and directed by Stephen Mitchell Wright.\nIn June 2015, Space Arts Centre in London staged an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" featuring the discarded alternate ending.\n'Manaveli' Toronto is preparing to stage a Tamil version of \"A Doll's House\"(\u0b92\u0bb0\u0bc1 \u0baa\u0bca\u0bae\u0bcd\u0bae\u0bc8\u0baf\u0bbf\u0ba9\u0bcd \u0bb5\u0bc0\u0b9f\u0bc1)on 30 June 2018, Directed by Mr P Wikneswaran.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A Doll's House\" questions the traditional roles of men and women in 19th-century marriage. To many 19th-century Europeans, this was scandalous. The covenant of marriage was considered holy, and to portray it as Ibsen did was controversial. However, the Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw found Ibsen's willingness to examine society without prejudice exhilarating.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Swedish playwright August Strindberg criticised the play in his volume of essays and short stories \"Getting Married\" (1884). Strindberg questioned Nora's walking out and leaving her children behind with a man that she herself disapproved of so much that she would not remain with him. Strindberg also considers that Nora's involvement with an illegal financial fraud that involved Nora forging a signature, all done behind her husband's back, and then Nora's lying to her husband regarding Krogstad's blackmail, are serious crimes that should raise questions at the end of the play, when Nora is moralistically judging her husband. And Strindberg points out that Nora's complaint that she and Torvald \u201chave never exchanged one serious word about serious things,\u201d is contradicted by the discussions that occur in act one and two.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The reasons Nora leaves her husband are complex, and various details are hinted at throughout the play. In the last scene, she tells her husband she has been \u201cgreatly wronged\u201d by his disparaging and condescending treatment of her, and his attitude towards her in their marriage \u2014 as though she were his \u201cdoll wife\u201d \u2014 and the children in turn have become her \u201cdolls,\u201d leading her to doubt her own qualifications to raise her children. She is troubled by her husband's behavior in regard to the scandal of the loaned money. She does not love her husband, she feels they are strangers, she feels completely confused, and suggests that her issues are shared by many women. George Bernard Shaw suggests that she left to begin \u201ca journey in search of self-respect and apprenticeship to life,\u201d and that her revolt is \u201cthe end of a chapter of human history.\u201d", "qas": [{"question": "where are the reasons that leaves leaves ?", "answers": [], "id": "(2, 34, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Ibsen was inspired by the belief that \"a woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint.\" Its ideas can also be seen as having a wider application: Michael Meyer argued that the play's theme is not women's rights, but rather \"the need of every individual to find out the kind of person he or she really is and to strive to become that person.\" In a speech given to the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights in 1898, Ibsen insisted that he \"must disclaim the honor of having consciously worked for the women's rights movement,\" since he wrote \"without any conscious thought of making propaganda,\" his task having been \"the \"description of humanity\".\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of the departure from traditional behavior and theatrical convention involved in Nora's leaving home, her act of slamming the door as she leaves has come to represent the play itself. In \"Iconoclasts\" (1905), James Huneker noted \"That slammed door reverberated across the roof of the world.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A Doll's House\" has been adapted for the cinema on many occasions, including:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "AIM-7 Sparrow", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The AIM-7 Sparrow is an American, medium-range semi-active radar homing air-to-air missile operated by the United States Air Force, United States Navy, and United States Marine Corps, as well as other various air forces and navies. Sparrow and its derivatives were the West's principal beyond visual range (BVR) air-to-air missile from the late 1950s until the 1990s. It remains in service, although it is being phased out in aviation applications in favor of the more advanced AIM-120 AMRAAM.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The early Sparrow was intended primarily for use against larger targets and especially bombers, and had numerous operational limitations in other uses. Against smaller targets, the need to receive a strong reflected radar signal made achieving lock-on at the missile's effective range difficult. As the launching aircraft's own radar needed to be pointed at the target throughout the engagement, this meant that in fighter-vs-fighter combat the enemy fighter would often approach within the range of shorter-range infrared homing missiles while the launching aircraft had to continue flying towards its target. Additionally, early models were only effective against targets at roughly the same or higher altitudes, below which reflections from the ground became a problem.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A number of upgraded Sparrow designs were developed to address these issues. In the early 1970s, the RAF developed a version with an inverse monopulse seeker and improved motor known as Skyflash, while the Italian Air Force introduced the similar Aspide. Both had the ability to be fired at targets below the launching fighter (\"look-down, shoot down\"), were more resistant to countermeasures, and much more accurate in the terminal phases. This basic concept was then made part of the US Sparrows in the M model (for monopulse) and some of these were later updated as the P model, the last to be produced in the US. Aspides sold to China resulted in the locally produced PL10. The Japan Self-Defense Forces also employ the Sparrow missile, though it is being phased out and replaced by the Mitsubishi AAM-4.", "qas": [{"question": "what was developed to address these issues ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Sparrow was also used as the basis for a surface-to-air missile, the RIM-7 Sea Sparrow, which is used by a number of navies for air defense of their ships. Fired at low altitude and flying directly at its target through the lower atmosphere, the range of the missile in this role is greatly reduced. With the retirement of the Sparrow in the air-to-air role, a new version of the Sea Sparrow was produced to address this concern, producing the much larger and more capable RIM-162 ESSM.", "qas": [{"question": "what is used as the basis for a missile ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the new version of the sea snake ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 3, 2)"}]}, {"context": "NATO pilots use the brevity code \"Fox One\" in radio communication to signal launch of a Semi-Active Radar Homing Missile such as the Sparrow.", "qas": []}, {"context": " from a late-1940s United States Navy program to develop a guided rocket weapon for air-to-air use. In 1947 the Navy contracted Sperry to build a beam riding version of a standard HVAR, the standard unguided aerial rocket, under Project Hotshot. The weapon was initially dubbed KAS-1, then AAM-2, and, from 1948 on, AAM-N-2. The airframe was developed by Douglas Aircraft Company. The diameter of the HVAR proved to be inadequate for the electronics, leading Douglas to expand the missile's airframe to diameter. The prototype weapon began unpowered flight-tests in 1947, and made its first aerial interception in 1952.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After a protracted development cycle the initial AAM-N-2 \"Sparrow\" entered limited operational service in 1954 with specially modified Skyknights all weather carrier night fighters. In 1956, they were joined by the F3H-2M Demon and F7U Cutlass fighter aircraft. Compared to the modern versions, the Sparrow I was more streamlined and featured a bullet-shaped airframe with a long pointed nose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sparrow I was a limited and rather primitive weapon. The limitations of beam-riding guidance (which was slaved to an optical sight on single seater fighters and a radar with night fighters) restricted the missile to attacks against targets flying a straight course and made it essentially useless against a maneuvering target. Only about 2,000 rounds were produced to this standard.", "qas": [{"question": "what was a limited and not primitive weapon ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As early as 1950 Douglas examined equipping the Sparrow with an active radar seeker, initially known as XAAM-N-2a \"Sparrow II, the original retroactively becoming Sparrow I\". In 1952 it was given the new code AAM-N-3. The active radar made the Sparrow II a \"fire and forget\" weapon, allowing several to be fired at separate targets at the same time.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the original name of the active ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the ship made by the usaf ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "By 1955 Douglas proposed going ahead with development, intending it to be the primary weapon for the F5D Skylancer interceptor. It was later selected, with some controversy, to be the primary weapon for the Canadian Avro Arrow supersonic interceptor, along with the new Astra fire-control system. For Canadian use and as a second source for US missiles, Canadair was selected to build the missiles in Quebec.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The small size of the missile forebody and the K-band AN/APQ-64-radar limited performance, and it was never able to work in testing. After considerable development and test firings in the U.S. and Canada, Douglas abandoned development in 1956. Canadair continued development until the Arrow was cancelled in 1959.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A subvariant of the Sparrow I armed with the same nuclear warhead as the MB-1 Genie was proposed in 1958, but was cancelled shortly thereafter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Concurrently with the development of the Sparrow I, in 1951, Raytheon began work on the semi-active radar homing version of Sparrow family of missiles, the AAM-N-6 \"Sparrow III\". The first of these weapons entered United States Navy service in 1958.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the raytheon system created by raytheon ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The AAM-N-6a was similar to the -6, but used a new Thiokol liquid-fuel rocket engine for improved performance. It also included changes to the guidance electronics to make it effective at higher closing speeds. The -6a was also selected to arm the Air Force's \"F-110A Spectre\" (F-4 Phantom) fighters in 1962, known to them as the AIM-101. It entered production in 1959, with 7500 being built.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another upgrade reverted to a Rocketdyne solid-fuel motor for the AAM-N-6b, which started production in 1963. The new motor significantly increased maximum range to for head-on attacks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During this year the Air Force and Navy agreed on standardized naming conventions for their missiles. The Sparrows became the AIM-7 series. The original Sparrow I and aborted Sparrow II became the AIM-7A and AIM-7B, despite both being out of service. The -6, -6a, and -6B became the AIM-7C, AIM-7D, and AIM-7E respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "25,000 AIM-7Es were produced, and saw extensive use during the Vietnam War, where its performance was generally considered disappointing. The mixed results were a combination of reliability problems (exacerbated by the tropical climate), limited pilot training in fighter-to-fighter combat, and restrictive rules of engagement that generally prohibited BVR (beyond visual range) engagements. The P (kill probability) of the AIM-7E was less than 10%; US fighter pilots shot down 59 aircraft out of the 612 Sparrows fired. Of the 612 AIM-7D/E/E-2 missiles fired, 97 (or 15.8%) hit their targets, resulting in 56 (or 9.2%) kills. Two kills were obtained beyond visual range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1969 an improved version, the E-2, was introduced with clipped wings and various changes to the fuzing. Considered a \"dogfight Sparrow\", the AIM-7E-2 was intended to be used at shorter ranges where the missile was still travelling at high speeds, and in the head-on aspect, making it much more useful in the visual limitations imposed on the engagements. Even so, its kill rate was only 13% in combat, leading to a practice of ripple-firing all four at once in hopes of increasing kill probability. Its worst tendency was that of detonating prematurely, approximately a thousand feet in front of the launching aircraft, but it also had many motor failures, erratic flights, and fuzing problems. An E-3 version included additional changes to the fuzing, and an E-4 featured a modified seeker for use with the F-14 Tomcat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Improved versions of the AIM-7 were developed in the 1970s in an attempt to address the weapon's limitations. The AIM-7F, which entered service in 1976, had a dual-stage rocket motor for longer range, solid-state electronics for greatly improved reliability, and a larger warhead. Even this version had room for improvement, leading British Aerospace and the Italian firm Alenia to develop advanced versions of Sparrow with better performance and improved electronics as the BAe Skyflash and Alenia Aspide, respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The most common version of the Sparrow today, the AIM-7M, entered service in 1982 and featured a new inverse monopulse seeker (matching the capabilities of Skyflash), active radar proximity fuse, digital controls, improved ECM resistance, and better low-altitude performance. It was used to good advantage in the 1991 Gulf War, where it scored many USAF air-to-air kills. Of 44 missiles fired, 30 (68.2%) hit their intended targets resulting in 24/26 (54.5%/59.1%) kills. 19 kills were obtained beyond visual range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-7P is similar in most ways to the M versions, and was primarily an upgrade program for existing M-series missiles. The main changes were to the software, improving low-level performance. A follow-on Block II upgrade added a new rear receiver allowing the missile to receive mid-course correction from the launching aircraft. Plans initially called for all M versions to be upgraded, but currently P's are being issued as required to replace M's lost or removed from the inventory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The final version of the missile was to have been the AIM-7R, which added an infrared homing seeker to an otherwise unchanged AIM-7P Block II. A general wind-down of the budget led to it being cancelled in 1997.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sparrow is now being phased out with the availability of the active-radar AIM-120 AMRAAM, but is likely to remain in service for several years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As part of the Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow program, Canadair (now Bombardier) partnered with Douglas Aircraft Company in the development of the Sparrow II (AAM-N-3/AIM-7B). After Douglas dropped out of this program, Canadair continued on with it until the termination of the Arrow project.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AAM-N-3 Sparrow II was unique in that it had a fully active radar guidance system. This combined both a radar transmitter and receiver in the missile, making it unnecessary for the pilot to keep the aircraft aimed at the target after firing the missile, unlike Semi-active radar homing (SARH) missiles which require continuous radar-assisted guidance throughout flight. This allowed the aircraft that fired the AAM-N-3 to turn away, prosecute other targets, and/or escape from potential retaliatory missiles fired by the enemy aircraft during the time it takes for the Sparrow to reach its target. Despite the significant advantages of this design over SARH guidance, all subsequent models of the Sparrow use semi-active radar homing.", "qas": [{"question": "what was unique about the aam-n-3 bird ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 24, 0)"}, {"question": "what kind of radar did the sparrow use ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 24, 3)"}]}, {"context": "To accommodate the active radar guidance system, the AAM-N-3 Sparrow II had a much greater volume than its predecessor. Its size would subsequently set the precedent for all future Sparrow variants.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of bird had a better volume ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 25, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the size of all new lyric variants ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 25, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 1959, Canadair had completed five missiles based on airframes from Douglas, and built two models from scratch, when the program was cancelled with the cancellation of the Arrow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Skyguard I is an anti-aircraft system, utilizing ground-based AIM-7 Sparrow launchers.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of system is skyguard i ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Italian company Finmeccanica (now Leonardo S.p.A.), Alenia Difesa licensed the AIM-7E Sparrow technology from the US, and produced its own improved version called Aspide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The LY-60/FD-60/PL-10 is a family of PRC missiles developed by the Shanghai Academy of Science and Technology, largely based on the Italian Aspide missile - a version of the Sparrow. There are four versions of the basic design, three of which are surface-to-air and one air-to-air.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Soviet Union acquired an AIM-7 in 1968 and a Vympel team started copying it as the K-25. The missile did not enter production as the R-23 was perceived to have better versatility, range, signal processing logic, and immunity from interference. K-25 work ended in 1971, but analysis of the Sparrow was later used to inform the design of the Vympel R-27, particularly the servomechanisms and movable wings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "British Aerospace (BAe) licensed the AIM-7E2 technology in the 1970s, producing the Skyflash missile. Skyflash used a Marconi XJ521 monopulse Semi-Active seeker together with improvements to the electronics. It was powered by the Aerojet Mk52 mod 2 rocket engine (later by the Rocketdyne Mk38 mod 4). Skyflash entered service with the Royal Air Force (RAF) on their Phantom FG.1/FGR.2 in 1978, and later on the Tornado F3. Skyflash was also exported to Sweden for use on their Viggen fighters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An upgraded version with active radar seeker, called Active Sky Flash was proposed by BAe and Thomson-CSF, but did not receive funding because the RAF opted for other missiles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Sparrow has four major sections: guidance section, warhead, control, and rocket motor (currently the Hercules MK-58 solid-propellant rocket motor). It has a cylindrical body with four wings at mid-body and four tail fins. Although the external dimensions of the Sparrow remained relatively unchanged from model to model, the internal components of newer missiles represent major improvements, with vastly increased capabilities. The warhead is of the continuous-rod type.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As with other semi-active radar guided missiles, the missile does not generate radar signals, but instead homes in on reflected continuous-wave signals from the launch platform's radar. The receiver also senses the guidance radar to enable comparisons that enhance the missile's resistance to passive jamming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The launching aircraft will illuminate the target with its radar. In radars of the 1950s these were single target tracking devices using a nutating horn as part of the antenna. This caused the beam to be swept in a small cone. Signal processing would be applied to determine the direction of maximum illumination and so develop a signal to steer the antenna toward the target. The missile detects the reflected signal from the target with a high gain antenna in a similar fashion and steers the entire missile toward closure with the target. The missile guidance also samples a portion of the illuminating signal via rearward pointing waveguides. The comparison of these two signals enabled logic circuits to determine the true target reflection signal, even if the target were to eject radar-reflecting chaff.", "qas": [{"question": "what will illuminate the target with its radar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(3, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "AIM-120 AMRAAM", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The AIM-120 Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile, or AMRAAM (pronounced ), is a modern American beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile (BVRAAM) capable of all-weather day-and-night operations. Designed with a 7-inch (180mm) diameter form-and-fit factor, and employing active transmit-receive radar guidance instead of semi-active receive-only radar guidance, it has the advantage of being a fire-and-forget weapon when compared to the previous generation Sparrow missiles. When an AMRAAM missile is launched, NATO pilots use the brevity code Fox Three.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AMRAAM is the world's most popular beyond-visual-range missile, and more than 14,000 have been produced for the United States Air Force, the United States Navy, and 33 international customers. The AMRAAM has been used in several engagements and is credited with ten air-to-air kills.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the amraam used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The AIM-7 Sparrow medium range missile (MRM) was purchased by the US Navy from original developer Hughes Aircraft in the 1950s as its first operational air-to-air missile with \"beyond visual range\" (BVR) capability. With an effective range of about , it was introduced as a radar beam-riding missile and then it was improved to a semiactive radar guided missile which would home in on reflections from a target illuminated by the radar of the launching aircraft. It was effective at visual to beyond visual range. The early beam riding versions of the Sparrow missiles were integrated onto the F3H Demon and F7U Cutlass, but the definitive AIM-7 Sparrow was the primary weapon for the all-weather F-4 Phantom II fighter/interceptor, which lacked an internal gun in its U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, and early U.S. Air Force versions. The F-4 carried up to four AIM-7s in built-in recesses under its belly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although designed for use against non-maneuvering targets such as bombers, because of poor performance against fighters over North Vietnam, these missiles were progressively improved until they proved highly effective in dogfights. Together with the short-range, infrared-guided AIM-9 Sidewinder, they replaced the AIM-4 Falcon IR and radar guided series for use in air combat by the USAF as well. A disadvantage to semi-active homing was that only one target could be illuminated by the launching fighter plane at a time. Also, the launching aircraft had to remain pointed in the direction of the target (within the azimuth and elevation of its own radar set) which could be difficult or dangerous in air-to-air combat.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the launching aircraft do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 3, 3)"}]}, {"context": "An active-radar variant called the Sparrow II was developed to address these drawbacks, but the U.S. Navy pulled out of the project in 1956. The Royal Canadian Air Force, which took over development in the hopes of using the missile to arm their prospective CF-105 Arrow interceptor, soon followed in 1958. The electronics of the time simply could not be miniaturized enough to make Sparrow II a viable working weapon. It would take decades, and a new generation of digital electronics, to produce an effective active-radar air-to-air missile as compact as the Sparrow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The US Navy later developed the AIM-54 Phoenix long-range missile (LRM) for the fleet air defense mission. It was a large , Mach 5 missile designed to counter cruise missiles and the bombers that launched them. Originally intended for the straight-wing Douglas F6D Missileer and then the navalized version of the F-111B, it finally saw service with the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, the only fighter capable of carrying such a heavy missile. Phoenix was the first US fire-and-forget, multiple-launch, radar-guided missile: one which used its own active guidance system to guide itself without help from the launch aircraft when it closed on its target. This, in theory, gave a Tomcat with a six-Phoenix load the unprecedented capability of tracking and destroying up to six targets beyond visual range, as far as away\u2014the only US fighter with such capability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A full load of six Phoenix missiles and its dedicated launcher exceeded a typical Vietnam-era bomb load. Its service in the US Navy was primarily as a deterrent, as its use was hampered by restrictive rules of engagement in conflicts such as Operations Desert Storm, Southern Watch, and Iraqi Freedom. The US Navy retired the Phoenix in 2004 in light of availability of the AIM-120 AMRAAM on the F/A-18 Hornet and the pending retirement of the F-14 Tomcat from active service in late 2006.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the us navy retire the tucson ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 6, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The Department of Defense conducted an extensive evaluation of air combat tactics and missile technology from 1974 to 1978 at Nellis AFB using the F-14 Tomcat and F-15 Eagle equipped with Sparrow and Sidewinder missiles as the blue force and aggressor F-5E aircraft equipped with AIM-9L all-aspect Sidewinders as the red force. This joint test and evaluation (JT&E) was designated Air Combat Evaluation/Air Intercept Missile Evaluation (ACEVAL/AIMVAL). A principal finding was that the necessity to produce illumination for the Sparrow until impact resulted in the red force's being able to launch their all-aspect Sidewinders before impact, resulting in mutual kills. What was needed was Phoenix-type multiple-launch and terminal active capability in a Sparrow-size airframe. This led to a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with European allies (principally the UK and Germany for development) for the US to develop an advanced, medium-range, air-to-air missile with the USAF as lead service. The MOA also assigned responsibility for development of an advanced, short-range, air-to-air missile to the European team; this would become the British ASRAAM.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the 1990s, the reliability of the Sparrow had improved so much from the dismal days of Vietnam that it accounted for the largest number of aerial targets destroyed in Desert Storm. But while the USAF had passed on the Phoenix and their own similar AIM-47/YF-12 to optimize dogfight performance, they still needed a multiple-launch fire-and-forget capability for the F-15 and F-16. AMRAAM would need to be fitted on fighters as small as the F-16, and fit in the same spaces that were designed to fit the Sparrow on the F-4 Phantom. The European partners needed AMRAAM to be integrated on aircraft as small as the Sea Harrier. The US Navy needed AMRAAM to be carried on the F/A-18 Hornet and wanted capability for two to be carried on a launcher that normally carried one Sparrow to allow for more air-to-ground weapons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AMRAAM became one of the primary air-to-air weapons of the new F-22 Raptor fighter, which needed to place all of its weapons into internal weapons bays in order to help achieve an extremely low radar cross-section.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AMRAAM was developed as the result of an agreement (the Family of Weapons MOA, no longer in effect by 1990), among the United States and several other NATO nations to develop air-to-air missiles and to share production technology. Under this agreement the U.S. was to develop the next generation medium range missile (AMRAAM) and Europe would develop the next generation short range missile (ASRAAM). Although Europe initially adopted the AMRAAM, an effort to develop the Meteor, a competitor to AMRAAM, was begun in Great Britain. Eventually the ASRAAM was developed solely by the British, but using another source for its infrared seeker. After protracted development, the deployment of AMRAAM (AIM-120A) began in September 1991 in US Air Force F-15 Eagle fighter squadrons. The US Navy soon followed (in 1993) in its F/A-18 Hornet squadrons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The eastern counterpart of AMRAAM is the somewhat similar Russian Air Force AA-12 \"Adder\", sometimes referred to in the West as the \"AMRAAMski.\" Likewise, France began its own air-to-air missile development with the MICA concept that used a common airframe for separate radar-guided and infrared-guided versions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AMRAAM has an all-weather, beyond-visual-range (BVR) capability. It improves the aerial combat capabilities of US and allied aircraft to meet the threat of enemy air-to-air weapons as they existed in 1991. AMRAAM serves as a follow-on to the AIM-7 Sparrow missile series. The new missile is faster, smaller, and lighter, and has improved capabilities against low-altitude targets. It also incorporates a datalink to guide the missile to a point where its active radar turns on and makes terminal intercept of the target. An inertial reference unit and micro-computer system makes the missile less dependent upon the fire-control system of the aircraft.", "qas": [{"question": "what is amraam ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Once the missile closes in on the target, its active radar guides it to intercept. This feature, known as \"fire-and-forget\", frees the aircrew from the need to further provide guidance, enabling the aircrew to aim and fire several missiles simultaneously at multiple targets and perform evasive maneuvers while the missiles guide themselves to the targets.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the target of the missile ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The missile also features the ability to \"Home on Jamming,\" giving it the ability to switch over from active radar homing to passive homing \u2013 homing on jamming signals from the target aircraft. Software on board the missile allows it to detect if it is being jammed, and guide on its target using the proper guidance system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AMRAAM uses two-stage guidance when fired at long range. The aircraft passes data to the missile just before launch, giving it information about the location of the target aircraft from the launch point and its direction and speed. The missile uses this information to fly on an interception course to the target using its built-in inertial navigation system (INS). This information is generally obtained using the launching aircraft's radar, although it could come from an infra-red search and track system, from a data link from another fighter aircraft, or from an AWACS aircraft.", "qas": [{"question": "what kind of aircraft is the data used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 15, 3)"}, {"question": "what does amraam stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After launch, if the firing aircraft or surrogate continues to track the target, periodic updates\u2014such as changes in the target's direction and speed\u2014are sent from the launch aircraft to the missile, allowing the missile to adjust its course, via actuation of the rear fins, so that it is able to close to a self-homing distance where it will be close enough to \"catch\" the target aircraft in the \"basket\" (the missile's radar field of view in which it will be able to lock onto the target aircraft, unassisted by the launch aircraft).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Not all armed services using the AMRAAM have elected to purchase the mid-course update option, which limits AMRAAM's effectiveness in some scenarios. The RAF initially opted not to use mid-course update for its Tornado F3 force, only to discover that without it, testing proved the AMRAAM was less effective in beyond visual range (BVR) engagements than the older semi-active radar homing BAE Skyflash weapon\u2014the AIM-120's own radar is necessarily of limited range and power compared to that of the launch aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Once the missile closes to self-homing distance, it turns on its active radar seeker and searches for the target aircraft. If the target is in or near the expected location, the missile will find it and guide itself to the target from this point. If the missile is fired at short range, within visual range (WVR) or the near BVR, it can use its active seeker just after launch, making the missile truly \"fire and forget\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is the target of the missile ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Apart from the slave mode, there is a free guidance mode, called boresight. This mode is radar guidance-free, the missile just fires and locks onto the first thing it sees. This mode can be used for defensive shot, i.e. when the enemy has numerical superiority.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The kill probability (P) is determined by several factors, including aspect (head-on interception, side-on or tail-chase), altitude, the speed of the missile and the target, and how hard the target can turn. Typically, if the missile has sufficient energy during the terminal phase, which comes from being launched at close range to the target from an aircraft with an altitude and speed advantage, it will have a good chance of success. This chance drops as the missile is fired at longer ranges as it runs out of overtake speed at long ranges, and if the target can force the missile to turn it might bleed off enough speed that it can no longer chase the target. Operationally, the missile, which was designed for beyond visual range combat, has a P of 63.15% (19 missiles for 12 kills, including the Syrian Su-22 downed by a US Navy F/A-18E). The targets included six MiG-29s, a MiG-25, a MiG-23, two Su-22s, a Galeb and a US Army Blackhawk that was targeted by mistake.", "qas": [{"question": "how many mig-29s did a us army have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 20, 4)"}]}, {"context": "There are currently four main variants of AMRAAM, all in service with the United States Air Force, United States Navy, and the United States Marine Corps. The AIM-120A is no longer in production and shares the enlarged wings and fins with the successor AIM-120B. The AIM-120C has smaller \"clipped\" aerosurfaces to enable internal carriage on the USAF F-22 Raptor. AIM-120B deliveries began in 1994.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-120C deliveries began in 1996. The C-variant has been steadily upgraded since it was introduced. The AIM-120C-6 contained an improved fuse (Target Detection Device) compared to its predecessor. The AIM-120C-7 development began in 1998 and included improvements in homing and greater range (actual amount of improvement unspecified). It was successfully tested in 2003 and is currently being produced for both domestic and foreign customers. It helped the U.S. Navy replace the F-14 Tomcats with F/A-18E/F Super Hornets\u00a0\u2013 the loss of the F-14's long-range AIM-54 Phoenix missiles (already retired) is offset with a longer-range AMRAAM-D. The lighter weight of the advanced AMRAAM enables an F/A-18E/F pilot greater bring-back weight upon carrier landings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-120D is an upgraded version of the AMRAAM with improvements in almost all areas, including 50% greater range (than the already-extended range AIM-120C-7) and better guidance over its entire flight envelope yielding an improved kill probability (P). Raytheon began testing the D model on August 5, 2008, the company reported that an AIM-120D launched from an F/A-18F Super Hornet passed within lethal distance of a QF-4 target drone at the White Sands Missile Range. The range of the AIM-120D is classified, but is thought to extend to about .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-120D (P3I Phase 4, formerly known as AIM-120C-8) is a development of the AIM-120C with a two-way data link, more accurate navigation using a GPS-enhanced IMU, an expanded no-escape envelope, and improved HOBS (high off-boresight) capability. The AIM-120D is a joint USAF/USN project, and is currently in the testing phase. The USN was scheduled to field it from 2014, and AIM-120D will be carried by all Pacific carrier groups by 2020, although the 2013 sequestration cuts could push back this later date to 2022. The Royal Australian Air Force requested 450 AIM-120D missiles, which would make it the first foreign operator of the missile. The procurement, approved by the US Government in April 2016, will cost $1.1 billion and will be integrated for use on the F/A-18F Super Hornet, EA-18G Growler and the F-35 Lightning II aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are also plans for Raytheon to develop a ramjet-powered derivative of the AMRAAM, the Future Medium Range Air-Air Missile (FMRAAM). It is not known whether the FMRAAM will be produced since the target market, the British Ministry of Defence, has chosen the Meteor missile over the FMRAAM for a BVR missile for the Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Raytheon is also working with the Missile Defense Agency to develop the Network Centric Airborne Defense Element (NCADE), an anti-ballistic missile derived from the AIM-120. This weapon will be equipped with a ramjet engine and an infrared homing seeker derived from the Sidewinder missile. In place of a proximity-fused warhead, the NCADE will use a kinetic energy hit-to-kill vehicle based on the one used in the Navy's RIM-161 Standard Missile 3.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The -120A and -120B models are currently nearing the end of their service life while the -120D variant has just entered full production. AMRAAM was due to be replaced by the USAF, the U.S. Navy, and the U.S. Marine Corps after 2020 by the Joint Dual Role Air Dominance Missile (Next Generation Missile). This was unexpectedly terminated in the 2013 budget plan, and so the future replacement is uncertain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2017, exploratory work on a replacement called Long-Range Engagement Weapon was started.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Raytheon successfully tested launching AMRAAM missiles from a five-missile carrier on a M1097 Humvee. This system will be known as the SLAMRAAM (Surface Launched (SL) and AMRAAM). They receive their initial guidance information from a radar not mounted on the vehicle. Since the missile is launched without the benefit of an aircraft's speed or high altitude, its range is considerably shorter. Raytheon is currently marketing an SL-AMRAAM EX, purported to be an extended range AMRAAM and bearing a resemblance to the RIM-162 ESSM.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Norwegian Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS), developed by Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace, consists of a number of vehicle-pulled launch batteries (containing six AMRAAMs each) along with separate radar trucks and control station vehicles. A more recent version of the program is the \"High Mobility Launcher\", made in cooperation with Raytheon (Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace was already a subcontractor on the SLAMRAAM system), where the launch-vehicle is a Humvee (M1152A1 HMMWV), containing four AMRAAMs each.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While still under evaluation for replacement of current US Army assets, the SL-AMRAAM has been deployed in several nations' military forces. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has requested the purchasing of SL-AMRAAM as part of a larger $7 billion foreign military sales package. The sale would include 288 AMRAAM C-7 missiles.", "qas": [{"question": "how many amraam missiles did the sale include ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 31, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The US Army has test fired the SL-AMRAAM from a HIMARS artillery rocket launcher as a common launcher, as part of a move to switch to a larger and more survivable launch platform.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On January 6, 2011, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that the U.S. Army has decided to terminate acquisition of the SLAMRAAM as part of a budget-cutting effort.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The National Guard Association of the United States has sent a letter asking for the United States Senate to stop the Army's plan to drop the SLAMRAAM program because without it there would be no path to modernize the Guard's AN/TWQ-1 Avenger Battalions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On February 22, 2015 Raytheon announced an Extended Range upgrade to NASAMS-launched AMRAAM, calling it AMRAAM-ER. This combines the AMRAAM seeker with the ESSM rocket motor.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the upgrade to nasams-launched amraam called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 35, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the combines ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 35, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The AMRAAM was used for the first time on December 27, 1992, when a USAF F-16D shot down an Iraqi MiG-25 that violated the southern no-fly-zone. This missile had been returned from the flight line as defective a day earlier. AMRAAM gained a second victory in January 1993 when an Iraqi MiG-23 was shot down by a USAF F-16C.", "qas": [{"question": "when did amraam gain a second victory ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 36, 2)"}, {"question": "what was the amraam used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 36, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The third combat use of the AMRAAM was in 1994, when a Republika Srpska Air Force J-21 Jastreb aircraft was shot down by a USAF F-16C that was patrolling the UN-imposed no-fly zone over Bosnia. In that engagement, at least three other Serbian aircraft were shot down by USAF F-16C fighters using AIM-9 missiles (see Banja Luka incident for more details). At that point, three launches in combat had resulted in three kills, resulting in the AMRAAM's being informally named \"slammer\" in the second half of the 1990s.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the third combat use of the amraam ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 37, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1998 and 1999 AMRAAMs were again fired by USAF F-15 fighters at Iraqi aircraft violating the No-Fly-Zone, but this time they failed to hit their targets. During the spring of 1999, AMRAAMs saw their main combat action during Operation Allied Force, the Kosovo bombing campaign. Six Serbian MiG-29 were shot down by NATO (four USAF F-15Cs, one USAF F-16C, and one Dutch F-16A MLU), all of them using AIM-120 missiles (the supposed kill by the F-16C may have actually been friendly fire, an SA-7 MANPADS fired by Serbian infantry).", "qas": [{"question": "who fired the iraqi aircraft ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 18 June 2017, a US F/A-18E Super Hornet engaged and shot down a Sukhoi Su-22 of the Syrian Air Force over northern Syria, using an AIM-120. The Su-22 had previously avoided an AIM-9X Sidewinder by using flares.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As of 2017, the AIM-120 AMRAAM has shot down ten aircraft (six MiG-29s, one MiG-25, one MiG-23, one Su-22, one Soko J-21 Jastreb, and two UH-60 Black Hawk). The latter being a friendly fire incident in 1994 when F-15 fighters patrolling Iraq's Northern No-Fly Zone inadvertently shot down a pair of U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopters.", "qas": [{"question": "how many aircraft does the aim-120 amraam have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 40, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In August 7, 2018, a Spanish Air Force Eurofighter Typhoon accidentally launched a missile in Estonia. There were no human casualties, but a ten-day search operation for missile remains was unsuccessful.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Canadair, now Bombardier, had largely helped with the development of the AIM-7 Sparrow and Sparrow II, and assisted to a lesser extent in the AIM-120 development. Canada had placed an order for 256 AIM-120's, but cancelled half of them after engine ignition problems due to cold weather conditions. The AIM-9X & AIM-7 were ordered as replacements.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In early 1995 South Korea ordered 88 AIM-120A missiles for its KF-16 fleet. In 1997 South Korea ordered 737 additional AIM-120B missiles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2006 Poland received AIM-120C-5 missiles to arm its new F-16C/D Block 52+ fighters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In early 2006, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) ordered 500 AIM-120C-5 AMRAAM missiles as part of a $650 million F-16 ammunition deal to equip its F-16C/D Block 50/52+ and F-16A/B Block 15 MLU fighters. The PAF got the first three F-16C/D Block 50/52+ aircraft on July 3, 2010 and first batch of AMRAAMs on July 26, 2010.", "qas": [{"question": "on what date did the first three f-16c/d block 50/52+ aircraft first occur ?", "answers": [], "id": "(4, 45, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 2007, the United States government agreed to sell 218 AIM-120C-7 missiles to Taiwan as part of a large arms sales package that also included 235 AGM-65G-2 Maverick missiles. Total value of the package, including launchers, maintenance, spare parts, support and training rounds, was estimated at around US$421 million. This supplemented an earlier Taiwanese purchase of 120 AIM-120C-5 missiles a few years ago.", "qas": []}, {"context": "2008 has brought announcements of new or additional sales to Singapore, Finland, Morocco and South Korea; in December 2010 the Swiss government requested 150 AIM-120C-7 missiles. Sales to Finland have stalled, because the manufacturer has not been able to fix a mysterious bug that causes the rocket motors of the missile to fail in cold tests. In May 5, 2015, the State Department has made a determination approving a possible Foreign Military Sale to Royal Malaysian Air Force for AIM-120C7 AMRAAM Missiles and associated equipment, parts and logistical support for an estimated cost of $21 million.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In March 2016, the US government approved the sales of AIM-120C-7 missiles to the Indonesian Air Force to equip their fleet of F-16 C/D Block 32+.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "AGM-88 HARM", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The AGM-88 HARM (High-speed Anti-radiation Missile) is a tactical, air-to-surface anti-radiation missile designed to home in on electronic transmissions coming from surface-to-air radar systems. It was originally developed by Texas Instruments as a replacement for the AGM-45 Shrike and AGM-78 Standard ARM system. Production was later taken over by Raytheon Corporation when it purchased the defense production business of Texas Instruments.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AGM-88 can detect, attack and destroy a radar antenna or transmitter with minimal aircrew input. The proportional guidance system that homes in on enemy radar emissions has a fixed antenna and seeker head in the missile's nose. A smokeless, solid-propellant, booster-sustainer rocket motor propels the missile at speeds over Mach 2.0. The HARM missile was a program led by the U.S. Navy, and it was first carried by the A-6E, A-7, and F/A-18A/B aircraft, and then it equipped the EA-6B aircraft. RDT&E for use on the F-14 aircraft was begun, but not completed. \nThe U.S. Air Force (USAF) put the HARM onto the F-4G Wild Weasel aircraft, and later on specialized F-16s equipped with the HARM Targeting System (HTS). The HTS pod, used by the USAF, only, allows F-16 to detect and automatically target radars with HARMs instead of relying on the missile's sensors alone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The HARM missile was approved for full production in March 1983, obtained initial operating capability (IOC) on the A-7E Corsair II in late 1983 and then deployed in late 1985 with VA-46 aboard the aircraft carrier USS \"America\". In 1986, the first successful firing of the HARM from an EA-6B was performed by VAQ-131. It was soon used in combat\u2014in March 1986 against a Libyan SA-5 site in the Gulf of Sidra, and then during Operation Eldorado Canyon in April. HARM was used extensively by the Navy, Marine Corps, and the Air Force in Operation Desert Storm during the Persian Gulf War of 1991.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Gulf War, the HARM was involved in a friendly fire incident when the pilot of an F-4G Wild Weasel escorting a B-52 bomber mistook the latter's tail gun radar for an Iraqi AAA site. (This was after the tail gunner of the B-52 had targeted the F-4G, mistaking it for an Iraqi MiG.) The F-4 pilot launched the missile and then saw that the target was the B-52, which was hit. It survived with shrapnel damage to the tail and no casualties. The B-52 was subsequently renamed \"In HARM's Way\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the b-52 renamed to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 3, 4)"}, {"question": "what kind of weapon was the harm airborne gun ?", "answers": [], "id": "(5, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"Magnum\" is spoken over the radio to announce the launch of an AGM-88. During the Gulf War, if an aircraft was illuminated by enemy radar a bogus \"Magnum\" call on the radio was often enough to convince the operators to power down.\nThis technique would also be employed in Serbia during air operations in 1999.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2013 President Obama offered the AGM-88 to Israel for the first time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The newest upgrade, the \"AGM-88E Advanced Antiradiation Guided Missile (AARGM),\" features the latest software, enhanced capabilities intended to counter enemy radar shutdown, and passive radar using an additional active millimeter-wave seeker. It was released in November 2010, and it is a joint venture by the US Department of Defense and the Italian Ministry of Defense, produced by Orbital ATK.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 2005, the Italian Ministry of Defense and the U.S. Department of Defense signed a Memorandum of Agreement on the joint development of the AGM-88E AARGM missile. Italy was providing $20 million of developmental funding as well as several million dollars worth of material, equipment, and related services. The Italian Air Force was expected to buy up to 250 missiles for its Tornado ECR aircraft. A flight test program was set to integrate the AARGM onto Tornado ECR's weapon system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The U.S. Navy demonstrated the AARGM's capability during Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) in spring 2012 with live firing of 12 missiles. Aircrew and maintenance training with live missiles was completed in June.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Navy authorized Full-Rate Production (FRP) of the AARGM in August 2012, with 72 missiles for the Navy and nine for the Italian Air Force to be delivered in 2013. A U.S. Marine Corps F/A-18 Hornet squadron will be the first forward-deployed unit with the AGM-88E.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In September 2013, ATK delivered the 100th AARGM to the U.S. Navy. The AGM-88E program is on schedule and on budget, with Full Operational Capability (FOC) planned for September 2014. The AGM-88E was designed to improve the effectiveness of legacy HARM variants against fixed and relocatable radar and communications sites, particularly those that would shut down to throw off anti-radiation missiles, by attaching a new seeker to the existing Mach 2-capable rocket motor and warhead section, adding a passive anti-radiation homing receiver, satellite and inertial navigation system, a millimeter-wave radar for terminal guidance, and the ability to beam up images of the target via a satellite link just seconds before impact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This model of the HARM will be integrated onto the F/A-18C/D, F/A-18E/F, EA-18G, and Tornado ECR aircraft, and later on the F-35.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In September 2015, the AGM-88E successfully hit a mobile ship target in a live-fire test, demonstrating the missile's ability to use antiradiation homing and millimeter-wave radar to detect, identify, locate, and engage moving targets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Navy's FY 2016 budget included funding for an extended range AARGM-ER that utilizes the existing guidance system and warhead of the AGM-88E with a solid integrated rocket-ramjet for double the range. Development funding will last to 2020. In September 2016, Orbital ATK unveiled its extended-range AARGM-ER, which incorporates a redesigned control section and -diameter rocket motor for twice the range and internal carriage on the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II. The U.S. Navy awarded Orbital ATK an contract for AARGM-ER development in January 2018.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the U.S. chose the Orbital ATK-produced AGM-88E, Raytheon created its own version of the AARGM called the AGM-88F HARM Control Section Modification (HCSM), one which incorporates similar upgrade features, which could allow the company to offer their missile for export.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "AGM-65 Maverick", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The AGM-65 Maverick is an air-to-ground missile (AGM) designed for close air support. It is the most widely produced precision-guided missile in the Western world, and is effective against a wide range of tactical targets, including armor, air defenses, ships, ground transportation and fuel storage facilities.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the agm-65 maverick designed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Development began in 1966 at Hughes as the first missile to use an electronic contrast seeker. It entered service with the United States Air Force in August 1972. Since then, it has been exported to more than 30 countries and is certified on 25 aircraft. The Maverick served during the Vietnam, Yom Kippur, Iran\u2013Iraq, and Persian Gulf Wars, along with other smaller conflicts, destroying enemy forces and installations with varying degrees of success.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since its introduction into service, numerous Maverick versions had been designed and produced using electro-optical, laser, and imaging infrared guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warhead: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating. The missile is currently produced by Raytheon Missile Systems.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Maverick shares the same configuration as Hughes's AIM-4 Falcon and AIM-54 Phoenix, and measures more than in length and in diameter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Maverick's development history began in 1965, when the United States Air Force (USAF) began a program to develop a replacement to the AGM-12 Bullpup. With a range of , the radio-guided Bullpup was introduced in 1959 and was considered a \"silver bullet\" by operators. However, the launch aircraft was required to fly straight towards the target during the missile's flight instead of performing evasive maneuvers, thus risking the crew. Even when it hit, the small warhead was only useful against small targets like bunkers, when used against larger targets like the Thanh H\u00f3a Bridge it did little other than char the structure. The USAF began a series of projects to replace Bullpup, both larger versions of Bullpup, models C and D, as well as a series of Bullpup adaptations offering fire-and-forget guidance. Among the later were the AGM-83 Bulldog, AGM-79 Blue Eye and AGM-80 Viper.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the names of the agm-83 bulldog ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 4, 5)"}, {"question": "when did the us air force begin to replace a replacement to the agm-12 bullpup ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From 1966 to 1968, Hughes Missile Systems Division and Rockwell competed for the contract to build an entirely new fire-and-forget missile with far greater range performance than any of the Bullpup versions. Each were allocated $3\u00a0million for preliminary design and engineering work of the Maverick in 1966. In 1968, Hughes emerged with the $95\u00a0million contract for further development and testing of the missile; at the same time, contract options called for 17,000 missiles to be procured. Hughes conducted a smooth development of the AGM-65 Maverick, with the first unguided test launch from a F-4 on 18 September 1969, with the first guided test on 18 December successfully performing a direct hit on a M41 tank target at the Air Force Missile Development Center at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In July\u00a01971, the USAF and Hughes signed a $69.9\u00a0million contract for 2,000 missiles, the first of which was delivered in 1972. Although early operational results were favorable, military planners predicted that the Maverick would fare less successfully in the hazy conditions of Central Europe, where it would have been used against Warsaw Pact forces. As such, development of the AGM-65B began in 1975 before it was delivered during the late 1970s. When production of the AGM-65A/B was ended in 1978, more than 35,000 missiles had been built.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More versions of the Maverick appeared, among which was the laser-guided AGM-65C/E. Development of the AGM-65C started in 1978 by Rockwell, who built a number of development missiles for the USAF. Due to high cost, the version was not procured by the USAF, and instead entered service with the United States Marine Corps (USMC) as the AGM-65E.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the laser-guided agm-65c/e ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Another major development was the AGM-65D, which employed an imaging infrared (IIR) seeker. By imaging on radiated heat, the IIR is all-weather operable as well as showing improved performance in acquiring and tracking the hot engines, such as in tanks and trucks, that were to be one of its major missions. The seekerhead mechanically scanned the scene over a nitrogen-cooled 4-by-4 pixel array using a series of mirrored facets machined into the inner surface of the ring-shaped main gyroscope. The five-year development period of the AGM-65D started in 1977 and ended with the first delivery to the USAF in October 1983. The version received initial operating capability in February 1986.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AGM-65F is a hybrid Maverick combining the AGM-65D's IIR seeker and warhead and propulsion components of the AGM-65E. Deployed by the United States Navy (USN), the AGM-65F is optimized for maritime strike roles. The first AGM-65F launch from the P-3C took place in 1989, and in 1994, the USN awarded Unisys a contract to integrate the version with the P-3C. Meanwhile, Hughes produced the AGM-65G, which essentially has the same guidance system as the D, with some software modifications that track larger targets, coupled with a shaped-charge warhead.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the agm-65f ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the mid-1990s to early 2000s, there were several ideas of enhancing the Maverick's potential. Among them was the stillborn plan to incorporate the Maverick millimeter wave active radar homing, which can determine the exact shape of a target. Another study called \"Longhorn Project\" was conducted by Hughes, and later Raytheon following the absorption of Hughes into Raytheon, looked a Maverick version equipped with turbojet engines instead of rocket motors. The \"Maverick ER\", as it was dubbed, would have a \"significant increase in range\" compared to the Maverick's current range of . The proposal was abandoned, but if the Maverick ER had entered production, it would have replaced the AGM-119B Penguin carried on the MH-60R.\nThe most modern versions of the Maverick are the AGM-65H/K, which were in production . The AGM-65H was developed by coupling the AGM-65B with a charge-coupled device (CCD) seeker optimized for desert operations and which has three times the range of the original TV-sensor; a parallel USN program aimed at rebuilding AGM-65Fs with newer CCD seekers resulted in the AGM-65J. The AGM-65K, meanwhile, was developed by replacing the AGM-65G's IR guidance system with an electro-optical television guidance system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Maverick has a modular design construction, allowing a different combination of the guidance package and warhead to be attached to the rocket motor section to produce a different weapon. It has long-chord delta wings and a cylindrical body, reminiscent of the AIM-4 Falcon and the AIM-54 Phoenix.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Different models of the AGM-65 have used electro-optical, laser, and imaging infrared guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warheads: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating. The latter is most effective against large, hard targets. The propulsion system for both types is a solid-fuel rocket motor behind the warhead.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Maverick missile is unable to lock onto targets on its own; it has to be given input by the pilot or weapon systems officer (WSO) after which it follows the path to the target autonomously, allowing the WSO to fire and forget. In an A-10 Thunderbolt IIs, for example, the video fed from the seeker head is relayed to a screen in the cockpit, where the pilot can check the locked target of the missile before launch. A crosshair on the head-up display is shifted by the pilot to set the approximate target while the missile will then automatically recognize and lock on to the target. Once the missile is launched, it requires no further assistance from the launch vehicle and tracks its target automatically. This fire-and-forget property is not shared by the E version that uses semi-active laser homing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe Maverick was declared operational on 30\u00a0August\u00a01972 with the F-4D/Es and A-7s initially cleared for the type; the missile made its combat debut four months later with the USAF in the Vietnam War. During the Yom Kippur War in October\u00a01973, the Israelis used Mavericks to destroy and disable enemy vehicles. Deployment of early versions of the Mavericks in these two wars were successful due to the favorable atmospheric conditions that suited the electro-optical TV seeker. Ninety-nine missiles were fired during the two wars, eighty-four of which were successful.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In June 1975, during a border confrontation, a formation of Iranian F4E Phantoms destroyed a group of Iraqi tanks by firing 12 Mavericks at them. Five years later, during Operation \"Pearl\" as part of the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Iranian F-4s used Mavericks to sink three Osa II missile boats and four P-6 combat ships.\nDue to weapons embargoes, Iran had to equip its AH-1J SeaCobra helicopters with AGM-65 Maverick missiles and used them with some success in various operations such as Operation \"Undeniable Victory\" whereas Iranian AH-1Js fired 11 Mavericks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait. In early 1991, the US-led Coalition executed Operation \"Desert Storm\" during which Mavericks played a crucial role in the ousting of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Employed by F-15E Strike Eagles, F/A-18 Hornets, AV-8B Harriers, F-16 Fighting Falcons and A-10 Thunderbolt IIs, but used mainly by the last two, more than 5,000 Mavericks were used to attack armored targets. The most-used variant by the USAF was the IIR-guided AGM-65D. The reported hit rate by USAF Mavericks was 80\u201390%, while for the USMC it was 60%. The Maverick was used again in Iraq during the 2003 Iraq War, during which 918 were fired.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the iraq war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 16, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The first time the Maverick were fired from a Lockheed P-3 Orion at a hostile vessel was when the USN and coalition units came to the aid of Libyan rebels to engage the Libyan Coast Guard vessel \"Vittoria\" in the port of Misrata, Libya, during the late evening of 28\u00a0March\u00a02011. \"Vittoria\" was engaged and fired upon by a USN P-3C Maritime Patrol aircraft with AGM-65 Maverick missiles.", "qas": [{"question": "who was fired upon the hms ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "LAU-117 Maverick launchers have been used on US Army, USN, USAF, and USMC aircraft:", "qas": [{"question": "who have been used on us army ?", "answers": [], "id": "(6, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Maverick has been exported to at least 35 countries:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAccording to the article on Kh-23 Grom the guidance system of the Serbian Grom-B is based on the Maverick system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "AIM-54 Phoenix", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The AIM-54 Phoenix is a radar-guided, long-range air-to-air missile (AAM), carried in clusters of up to six missiles on the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, its only operational launch platform. The Phoenix was the United States' only long-range air-to-air missile. The combination of Phoenix missile and the AN/AWG-9 guidance radar was the first aerial weapons system that could simultaneously engage multiple targets. Due to its active radar tracking, the brevity code \"Fox Three\" was used when firing the AIM-54.", "qas": [{"question": "how many missiles are on the aim-54 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the brevity code used when firing the aim-54. code ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 0, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Both the missile and the aircraft were used by Iran and the United States Navy. In US service both are now retired, the AIM-54 Phoenix in 2004 and the F-14 in 2006. They were replaced by the shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAM, employed on the F/A-18 Hornet and F/A-18E/F Super Hornet\u2014in its AIM-120D version, the latest version of the AMRAAM just matches the Phoenix's maximum range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-54 is credited with 62 air-to-air kills, all scored by Iran during the long Iran\u2013Iraq War. Following the retirement of the F-14 by the U.S. Navy, the weapon's only current operator is the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force.", "qas": [{"question": "how many air-to-air does the aim-54 have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since 1951, the Navy faced the initial threat from the Tupolev Tu-4K 'Bull' carrying anti-ship missiles or nuclear bombs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eventually, during the height of the Cold War, the threat would have expanded into regimental-size raids of Tu-16 Badger and Tu-22M Backfire bombers equipped with low-flying, long-range, high-speed, nuclear-armed cruise missiles and considerable electronic countermeasures (ECM) of various types. This combination was considered capable of saturating fleet defenses and threatening carrier groups.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Navy would require a long-range, long-endurance interceptor aircraft to defend carrier battle groups against this threat. The proposed F6D Missileer was intended to fulfill this mission and oppose the attack as far as possible from the fleet it was defending. The weapon needed for interceptor aircraft, the Bendix AAM-N-10 Eagle, was to be an air-to-air missile of unprecedented range when compared to contemporary AIM-7 Sparrow missiles. It would work together with Westinghouse AN/APQ-81 radar. The Missileer project was cancelled in December 1960.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early 1960s, the U.S. Navy made the next interceptor attempt with the F-111B, and they needed a new missile design. At the same time, the USAF canceled the projects for their land-based high-speed interceptor aircraft, the North American XF-108 Rapier and the Lockheed YF-12, and left the capable AIM-47 Falcon missile at a quite advanced stage of development, but with no effective launch platform.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-54 Phoenix, developed for the F-111B fleet air defense fighter, had an airframe with four cruciform fins that was a scaled-up version of the AIM-47. One characteristic of the Missileer ancestry was that the radar sent it mid-course corrections, which allowed the fire control system to \"loft\" the missile up over the target into thinner air where it had better range.", "qas": [{"question": "who developed the f-111b ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The F-111B was canceled in 1968. Its weapons system, the AIM-54 working with the AWG-9 radar, migrated to the new U.S. Navy fighter project, the VFX, which would later become the F-14 Tomcat.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the navy fighter project ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 8, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In 1977, development of a significantly improved Phoenix version, the AIM-54C, was developed to better counter projected threats from tactical anti-naval aircraft and cruise missiles, and its final upgrade included a re-programmable memory capability to keep pace with emerging ECM.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AIM-54/AWG-9 combination had multiple track capability (up to 24 targets) and launch (up to six Phoenixes can be launched nearly simultaneously); the large missile is equipped with a conventional warhead.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the F-14, four missiles can be carried under the fuselage tunnel attached to special aerodynamic pallets, plus two under glove stations. A full load of six Phoenix missiles and the unique launch rails weighs in at over , about twice the weight of Sparrows, so it was more common to carry a mixed load of four Phoenix, two Sparrow, and two Sidewinder missiles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Most other US aircraft relied on the smaller, semi-active medium-range AIM-7 Sparrow. Semi-active guidance meant the aircraft no longer had a search capability while supporting the launched Sparrow, reducing situational awareness.", "qas": [{"question": "what do most us aircraft rely on ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Tomcat's radar could track up to 24 targets in track-while-scan mode, with the AWG-9 selecting up to six potential targets for the missiles. The pilot or radar intercept officer (RIO) could then launch the Phoenix missiles once parameters were met. The large tactical information display (TID) in the RIO's cockpit gave information to the aircrew (the pilot had the ability to monitor the RIO's display) and the radar could continually search and track multiple targets after Phoenix missiles were launched, thereby maintaining situational awareness of the battlespace.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Link 4 datalink allowed US Navy Tomcats to share information with the E-2C Hawkeye AEW aircraft. During Desert Shield in 1990, the Link 4A was introduced; this allowed the Tomcats to have a fighter-to-fighter datalink capability, further enhancing overall situational awareness. The F-14D entered service with the JTIDS that brought the even better Link 16 datalink \"picture\" to the cockpit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Phoenix has several guidance modes and achieves its longest range by using mid-course updates from the F-14A/B AWG-9 radar (APG-71 radar in the F-14D) as it climbs to cruise between and at close to Mach 5. The Phoenix uses this high altitude to gain gravitational potential energy, which is later converted into kinetic energy as the missile dives at high velocity towards its target. At around from the target, the missile activates its own radar to provide terminal guidance. Minimum engagement range for the Phoenix is around and active homing would initiate upon launch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix was retired from USN service on September 30, 2004. F-14 Tomcats were retired on September 22, 2006. They were replaced by shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAMs, employed on the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the coach of the aim-54 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Despite the much-vaunted capabilities, the Phoenix was rarely used in combat, with only two confirmed launches and no confirmed targets destroyed in US Navy service, though a large number of kills were claimed by Iranian F-14s during the Iran\u2013Iraq War. The USAF F-15 Eagle had responsibility for overland combat air patrol duties in Operation Desert Storm in 1991, primarily because of the onboard F-15 IFF capabilities. The Tomcat did not have the requisite IFF capability mandated by the JFACC to satisfy the rules of engagement to utilize the Phoenix capability at beyond visual range. The AIM-54 was not adopted by any foreign nation besides Iran, or any other US armed service, and was not used on any aircraft other than the F-14.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the aim-54 not used on ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 17, 3)"}]}, {"context": "There is very little information available regarding Iran's use of its 79 F-14A Tomcats (delivered prior to 1979) in most western outlets. The exception is a book released by Osprey Publishing titled \"Iranian F-14 Tomcats in Combat\" by Tom Cooper and Farzad Bishop. Most of the research contained in the book was based on pilot interviews. Reports vary on the use of the 285 missiles supplied to Iran, during the Iran\u2013Iraq War (1980\u20131988), and achieving at least 78 victories against Iraqi MiG-21/23/25s, Mirage F-1s, Superetandard, and even one AM-39 Exocet and one C-601 anti-ship cruise missiles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The US refused to supply spare parts and maintenance after the 1979 revolution, except for a brief period during the Iran-Contra Affair. According to Cooper, the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force kept its F-14 fighters and AIM-54 missiles in regular use during the entire Iran\u2013Iraq War, though periodic lack of spares grounded large parts of the fleet at times. During late 1987, the stock of AIM-54 missiles was at its lowest, with fewer than 50 operational missiles available. The missiles needed fresh thermal batteries that could only be purchased from the US. Iran found a clandestine buyer that supplied it with batteries, which cost up to US$10,000 each. Iran received spares and parts for both the F-14s and AIM-54s from various sources during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, and has received more spares after the conflict. Iran started a program to build spares for the planes and missiles, and although there are claims that it no longer relies on outside sources to keep its F-14s and AIM-54s operational, there is evidence that Iran continues to procure parts clandestinely.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both the F-14 Tomcat and AIM-54 Phoenix missile continue in the service of the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force. Iran claimed to be working on building an equivalent missile and in 2013 unveiled the Fakour-90, an upgraded and reverse-engineered version of the Phoenix.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the phoenix missile force ?", "answers": [], "id": "(7, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nThere were also test, evaluation, ground training, and captive air training versions of the missile; designated ATM-54, AEM-54, DATM-54A, and CATM-54. The flight versions had A and C versions. The DATM-54 was not made in a C version as there was no change in the ground handling characteristics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe following is a list of AIM-54 Phoenix specifications:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Lockheed AC-130", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Lockheed AC-130 gunship is a heavily armed, long-endurance ground-attack variant of the C-130 Hercules transport fixed-wing aircraft. It carries a wide array of anti-ground oriented weapons that are integrated with sophisticated sensors, navigation, and fire-control systems. Unlike other military fixed-wing aircraft, the AC-130 relies on visual targeting. Because its large profile and low operating altitudes (around 7,000\u00a0ft) make it an easy target, it usually flies close air support missions at night.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The airframe is manufactured by Lockheed Martin, while Boeing is responsible for the conversion into a gunship and for aircraft support. Developed during the Vietnam War as \"Project Gunship II\", the AC-130 replaced the Douglas AC-47 Spooky, or \"Gunship I\". The sole operator is the United States Air Force, which uses the AC-130U Spooky and AC-130W Stinger II variants for close air support, air interdiction, and force protection, with the AC-130J Ghostrider in development. Close air support roles include supporting ground troops, escorting convoys, and urban operations. Air interdiction missions are conducted against planned targets and targets of opportunity. Force protection missions include defending air bases and other facilities. AC-130Us are based at Hurlburt Field, Florida, while AC-130Ws are based at Cannon AFB, New Mexico; gunships can be deployed worldwide. The squadrons are part of the Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC), a component of the United States Special Operations Command (SOCOM).", "qas": [{"question": "who is responsible for conversion into a gunship and for aircraft support ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The AC-130 has an unpressurized cabin, with the weaponry mounted to fire from the port side of the fuselage. During an attack, the gunship performs a pylon turn, flying in a large circle around the target, therefore being able to fire at it for far longer than in a conventional strafing attack. The AC-130H Spectre was armed with two M61 Vulcan cannons, one L60 Bofors 40 mm cannon, and one M102 howitzer; after 1994, the cannons were removed. The upgraded AC-130U Spooky has a single GAU-12 Equalizer cannon in place of the Spectre's two cannons, an improved fire control system, and increased ammunition capacity. The new AC-130J was based on the MC-130J Commando II special operations tanker. The AC-130W Stinger II is a modified C-130H with upgrades including a precision strike package.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Vietnam War, the C-130 Hercules was selected to replace the Douglas AC-47 Spooky gunship (Project Gunship I) in order to improve mission endurance and increase capacity to carry munitions. Capable of flying faster than helicopters and at high altitudes with excellent loiter time, the use of the pylon turn allowed the AC-47 to deliver continuous accurate fire to a single point on the ground.\nIn 1967, JC-130A 54-1626 was selected for conversion into the prototype AC-130A gunship (Project Gunship II). The modifications were done at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base by the Aeronautical Systems Division. A direct view night vision telescope was installed in the forward door, an early forward looking infrared device in the forward part of the left wheel well, and Gatling guns fixed facing down and aft along the left side. The analog fire control computer prototype was handcrafted by RAF Wing Commander Tom Pinkerton at the USAF Avionics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB. Flight testing of the prototype was performed primarily at Eglin Air Force Base, followed by further testing and modifications. By September 1967, the aircraft was certified ready for combat testing and was flown to Nha Trang Air Base, South Vietnam for a 90-day test program. The AC-130 was later supplemented by the AC-119 Shadow (Project Gunship III), which later proved to be underpowered.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the ac-130 vision ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 3, 8)"}]}, {"context": "Seven more warplanes were converted to the \"Plain Jane\" configuration like the AC-130 prototype in 1968, and one aircraft received the \"Surprise Package\" refit in 1969. The Surprise Package upgrade included the latest 20\u00a0mm rotary autocannons and 40 mm Bofors cannon but no 7.62\u00a0mm close support armament. The Surprise Package configuration served as a test bed for the avionic systems and armament for the AC-130E. In 1970, ten more AC-130As were acquired under the \"Pave Pronto\" project. In the summer of 1971, Surprise Package AC-130s were converted to the Pave Pronto configuration and assumed the new nickname of 'Thor'. Conversion of C-130Es into AC-130Es for the \"PAVE Spectre\" project followed. Regardless of their project names the aircraft were more commonly referred to by the squadron's call sign 'Spectre'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2007, Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) initiated a program to upgrade the armament of AC-130s. The test program planned for the 25\u00a0mm GAU-12/U and 40\u00a0mm Bofors cannon on the AC-130U gunships to be replaced with two 30\u00a0mm Mk 44 Bushmaster II cannons. In 2007, the Air Force modified four AC-130U gunships as test platforms for the Bushmasters. These were referred to as AC-130U Plus 4 or AC-130U+4. AFSOC, however, canceled its plans to install the new cannons on its fleet of AC-130Us. It has since removed the guns and re-installed the original 40\u00a0mm and 25\u00a0mm cannons and returned the planes to combat duty. Brigadier General Bradley A. Heithold, AFSOC's director of plans, programs, requirements, and assessments, said on 11 August 2008 that the effort was canceled because of problems with the Bushmaster's accuracy in tests \"at the altitude we were employing it\". There were also schedule considerations that drove the decision, he said.", "qas": [{"question": "what does afsoc stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There were also plans to possibly replace the 105\u00a0mm cannon with a breech-loading 120\u00a0mm M120 mortar, and to give the AC-130 a standoff capability using either the AGM-114 Hellfire missile, the Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System (based on the Hydra 70 rocket), or the Viper Strike glide bomb.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2010, the Air Force awarded L-3 Communications a $61\u00a0million contract to add precision strike packages to eight MC-130W Combat Spear special-mission aircraft to give them a gunship-like attack capability; such-equipped MC-130Ws are known as \"Dragon Spears\". Air Force Special Operations Command is arming these aircraft to relieve the high operational demands on AC-130 gunships until new AC-130Js enter service. The MC-130W Dragon Spear was renamed AC-130W Stinger II in 2011. The precision strike packages consist of a 30\u00a0mm gun and several precision guided munitions (PGMs). Rails are mounted on the out-board pylon of the wing for four Hellfire missiles, SDBs, or SDB IIs under each. 10 Common Launch Tubes (CLTs) are mounted on the rear ramp to fire Griffin A missiles; additional missiles are stored in the aircraft that can be reloaded in flight. CLTs are able to fire other small munitions able to fit inside the -diameter, -long tubes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Air Force launched an initiative in 2011 to acquire 16 new gunships based on new-built MC-130J Combat Shadow II special operations tankers outfitted with a \"precision strike package\" to give them an attack capability, requesting $1.6\u00a0billion from Fiscal Years 2011 through 2015. This would increase the size of the gunship fleet to 33 aircraft, a net increase of eight after the planned retirement of eight aging AC-130Hs. The first aircraft would be bought in Fiscal 2012, followed by two in Fiscal 2013, five in Fiscal 2014, and the final eight in Fiscal 2015. The decision to retain the C-130 came after funding for 16 C-27Js was removed from the fiscal 2010 budget.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AC-130J will follow the path of the Dragon Spear program. On 9 January 2013, the Air Force began converting the first MC-130J Combat Shadow II into an AC-130J Ghostrider and delivered it to AFSOC on 29 July 2015. The first AC-130J gunships achieved initial operational capability (IOC) on 30 September 2017. The AC-130J has two planned increments: the Block 10 configuration includes an internal 30\u00a0mm gun, small diameter bombs, and laser-guided missiles launched from the rear cargo door; and Block 20 configuration adds a 105\u00a0mm cannon, large aircraft infrared countermeasures, wing-mounted Hellfire missiles, and radio-frequency countermeasures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Air Force decided to add a 105\u00a0mm cannon to the AC-130J in addition to the 30\u00a0mm cannon and smart bombs, the shells being more accurate and cheaper than dropping SDBs. AFSOC is interested in adding a directed-energy weapon to the AC-130J by 2020, similar to the previous Advanced Tactical Laser program. It is to produce a beam of up to 120\u00a0kW, or potentially even 180\u2013200\u00a0kW, weigh about , defensively destroy anti-aircraft missiles, and offensively engage communications towers, boats, cars, and aircraft. However, laser armament may only be installed on a few aircraft rather than the entire AC-130J fleet; the laser will be mounted on the side in place of the 30\u00a0mm cannon. Other potential additions include an active denial system to perform airborne crowd control, and small unmanned aerial vehicles from the common launch tubes to provide remote video feed and coordinates to weapons operators through cloud cover. Called the Tactical Off-board Sensor (TOBS), the drones would be expendable and fly along a pre-programmed orbit to verify targets the aircraft can't see itself because of bad weather or standing off from air defenses. AFSOC will initially utilize the Raytheon Coyote small UAV for the TOBS mission, as it is an off-the-shelf design with a one-hour endurance, but plans to fulfill the role with a new drone capable of a four-hour endurance by 2019.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the air force add to the ac-130j ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Air Force was also interested in acquiring a glide bomb that can be launched from the common launch tubes capable of hitting ground vehicles traveling as fast as 120\u00a0km/h (70\u00a0mph) while above . In June 2016, Dynetics was awarded a contract by SOCOM to integrate its tactical munition onto the AC-130. Designated the GBU-69/B Small Glide Munition, the weapon weighs and is armed with a blast-fragmentation warhead that can detonate by direct impact or at a pre-selected height; despite being smaller, being unpowered allows more volume for its warhead to be heavier than those on the Hellfire and Griffin A missiles, and respectively. Guidance is provided by a GPS receiver with anti-spoofing software and four Distributed Aperture Semi-Active Laser Seeker (DASALS) apertures adapted from the WGU-59/B APKWS for terminal guidance. Approval for fielding occurred in early 2017. Dynetics was awarded a contract to deliver an initial batch of 70 SGMs in June 2017, with plans to buy up to 1,000. The SGM can travel .", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 2018, AC-130 gunships will have been providing close air support for special operators for 50 years. Although the aircraft have been kept relevant through constant upgrades to their weaponry, sensor packages, and countermeasures, they are not expected to be survivable in future non-permissive environments due to their high signatures and low airspeeds. Military analysts, such as the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, have suggested that AFSOC invest in more advanced technologies to fill the role to operate in future contested combat zones, including a mix of low-cost disposable unmanned and stealthy strike aircraft.", "qas": [{"question": "who has been critical close air support for special operators ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The AC-130 is a heavily armed long-endurance aircraft carrying an array of anti-ground oriented weapons that are integrated with sophisticated sensors, navigation, and fire-control systems. It is capable of delivering precision firepower or area-saturation fire over a target area over a long period of time, at night or in adverse weather. The sensor suite consists of a television sensor, infrared sensor, and radar. These sensors allow the gunship to visually or electronically identify friendly ground forces and targets in most weather conditions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AC-130U is equipped with the AN/APQ-180, a synthetic aperture radar for long-range target detection and identification. The gunship's navigational devices include inertial navigation systems and a Global Positioning System. The AC-130U employs technologies developed in the 1990s which allow it to attack two targets simultaneously. It has twice the munitions capacity of the AC-130H. Although the AC-130U conducts some operations in daylight, most of its combat missions are conducted at night. The AC-130H's unit cost is US$132.4\u00a0million, and the AC-130U's cost is US$190\u00a0million (fiscal 2001 dollars).", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Vietnam War era, the various AC-130 versions following the Pave Pronto modifications were equipped with a magnetic anomaly detector system called Black Crow (designated AN/ASD-5), a highly sensitive passive device with a phased-array antenna located in the left-front nose radome that could pick up localized deviations in the Earth's magnetic field normally used to detect submerged submarines. The Black Crow system was slaved into the targeting computers of the AC-130A/E/H, enabling the detection of the unshielded ignition coils of North Vietnamese trucks hidden under dense jungle foliage along the Ho Chi Minh trail. It could also detect hand-held transmitter signals of air controllers on the ground to identify and locate targets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The PGM-38/U enhanced 25\u00a0mm high explosive incendiary round was created to expand the AC-130U gunships' mission in standoff range and survivability for its 25\u00a0mm GAU-12/U gun. This round is a combination of the existing PGU-25 HEI and a M758 fuze designated as FMU-151/B to meet the MIL-STD-1316. The FMU-151 has an improved arming delay with multi-sensitive range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AC-130 gunship first arrived in South Vietnam on 21 September 1967 under the Gunship II program and began combat operations over Laos and South Vietnam that year. In June 1968, AC-130s were deployed to Tan Son Nhut AB near Saigon for support against the Tet Offensive. By 30 October 1968, enough AC-130 Gunship IIs arrived to form a squadron, the 16th Special Operations Squadron (SOS) of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing (TFW), at Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base, Thailand. It was at this time that the C-130A gunship was designated the AC-130A.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the gunship ii begin fighting ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 17, 0)"}, {"question": "who designated the ac-130a ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 17, 3)"}]}, {"context": "On 18 August 1968, an AC-130 gunship flying an armed reconnaissance mission in Vietnam's III Corps was diverted to support the Katum Special Forces Camp. The ground commander quickly assessed the accurate fire and capabilities of this weapon system and called for fire on his own perimeter when the Viet Cong attempted to bridge the wire on the west side of his position.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the armed mission in vietnam's iii corps ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By December 1968, most AC-130s flew under F-4 Phantom II escort (to protect the gunship against heavy and concentrated AAA fire) from the 497th Tactical Fighter Squadron, normally three Phantoms per Gunship. On 24 May 1969, the first Spectre gunship was lost to enemy fire.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first spectre gunship to destroy fire ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 19, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In late 1969, under code name \"Surprise Package\", 56-0490 arrived with solid-state laser-illuminated low-light-level-TV with a companion YAG laser designator, an improved forward looking infrared (FLIR) sensor, video recording for TV and FLIR, an inertial navigation system, and a prototype digital fire control computer. The remaining AC-130s were refitted with upgraded similar equipment in the summer of 1970, and then redeployed to Ubon RTAFB. On 25 October 1971, the first \"Cadillac\" gunship, the AC-130E arrived in Vietnam. On 17 February 1972, the first 105\u00a0mm cannon arrived for service with Spectre and was installed on Gunship 570. It was used from mid-February until the aircraft received battle damage to its right flap. The cannon was switched to Gunship 571 and was used until 30 March when the aircraft was shot down.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the cannon switched to gunship ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 20, 5)"}]}, {"context": "On 28 January 1973, the Vietnam peace accord went into effect, marking the end of Spectre operations in Vietnam. Spectre was still needed and active in the region, supporting operations in Laos and Cambodia. On 22 February 1973, American offensive operations in Laos ended and the gunships became totally committed to operations in the Cambodian conflict.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 12 April 1975, the Khmer Rouge were threatening the capital of Phnom Penh and AC-130s were called on to help in Operation Eagle Pull, the final evacuation of American and allied officials from Phnom Penh before it was conquered by the communists. The AC-130 was also over Saigon on 30 April 1975 to protect the final evacuation in Operation Frequent Wind. Spectres were also called in when the SS Mayaguez was seized, on the open sea, by Khmer Rouge soldiers and sailors on 15 May 1975.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Six AC-130s and 52 air crew members were lost during the war. AC-130s destroyed more than 10,000 trucks and participated in many crucial close air support missions in Vietnam.", "qas": [{"question": "how many air crew members were lost during the war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 23, 0)"}, {"question": "how many vehicles were destroyed in vietnam ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 23, 1)"}]}, {"context": "With the conclusion of hostilities in Southeast Asia in the mid-1970s, the AC-130H became the sole gunship in the regular Air Force, home based at Hurlburt Field, Florida, while the AC-130A fleet was transferred to the Air Force Reserve's 919th Tactical Airlift Group (919 TAG) at Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field #3/Duke Field, Florida. With the transition to the AC-130A, the 919 TAG was then redesignated as the 919th Special Operations Group (919 SOG).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the late 1970s, when the AC-130H fleet was first being modified for in-flight refueling capability, a demonstration mission was planned and flown from Hurlburt Field, Florida, non-stop, to conduct a 2-hour live-fire mission over Empire Firing Range in the Republic of Panama, then return home. This 13-hour mission with two in-flight refuelings from KC-135 tankers proved the validity of flying long-range missions outside the contiguous United States to attack targets then return to home base without intermediate stops.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AC-130s from both the 4th and 16th Special Operations Squadrons have been deployed in nearly every conflict the United States has been involved in, officially and unofficially, since the end of the Vietnam War.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In July 1979, AC-130H crews deployed to Howard Air Force Base, Panama, as a precaution against possible hostile actions against American personnel during the Nicaraguan Revolution. New time aloft and non-stop distance records were subsequently set by a 16th SOS 2-ship AC-130H formation flight that departed Hurlburt Field on 13 November 1979 and landed on 15 November at Andersen Air Force Base, Guam, a distance of and 29 hours 43 minutes non-stop, refueling four times in-flight. Refueling support for the Guam deployment was provided by KC-135 crews from the 305th Air Refueling Wing from Grissom AFB, Indiana.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 1979, four AC-130H gunships flew nonstop from Hurlburt Field to Anderson AFB, Guam, because of the hostage situation at the Embassy in Iran. At Guam, AC-130H crews developed communications-out/lights-out refueling procedures for later employment by trial-and-error. This deployment with the 1 SOW/CC as Task Force commander was directed from the office of the CJCS for fear that Iranian militants could begin executing American Embassy personnel who had been taken hostage on 4 November. One early option considered AC-130H retaliatory punitive strikes deep within Iran. Later gunship flights exceeded the 1979 Hurlburt-to-Guam flight. Upon return in March 1980, the four planes soon found themselves in Egypt to support the ill-fated hostage rescue attempt.\nDuring Operation Urgent Fury in Grenada in 1983, AC-130s suppressed enemy air defense systems and attacked ground forces enabling the assault of the Point Salines Airfield via airdrop and air-land of friendly forces. The AC-130 aircrew earned the Lieutenant General William H. Tunner Award for the mission.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AC-130Hs of the 16th Special Operations Squadron unit maintained an ongoing rotation to Howard AB, Panama, monitoring activities in El Salvador and other Central American points of interest, with rules of engagement eventually permitting attacks on FMLN targets. This commitment of Maintainers and crews started in 1983 and lasted until 1990. The AC-130 is considered to have hastened the end of the Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s. Crews flew undercover missions from Honduras and attacked guerrilla camps and concentrations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AC-130s also had a primary role during the United States invasion of Panama (named Operation Just Cause) in 1989, when they destroyed Panama Defense Force headquarters and numerous command-and-control facilities, and provided close air support for US ground troops. Aircrews earned the Mackay Trophy for the most meritorious flight of the year, and the Tunner Award.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Gulf War of 1990\u201391 (Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm), Regular Air Force and Air Force Reserve AC-130s provided close air support and force protection (air base defense) for ground forces, and battlefield interdiction. The primary interdiction targets were early warning/ground control intercept (EW/GCI) sites along the southern border of Iraq. At its standard altitude of 12,000 feet, the aircraft had a proven ability to engage moving ground targets. The first gunship to enter the Battle of Khafji helped stop a southbound Iraqi armored column on 29 January 1991. One day later, three more gunships provided further aid to Marines participating in the operation. The gunships attacked Iraqi positions and columns moving south to reinforce their positions north of the city.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the air force protect ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Despite the threat of surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and increasing visibility during the early morning hours of 31 January 1991, one AC-130H, AF Serial No. 69-6567, call-sign Spirit 03, opted to stay to continue to protect the Marines. A lone Iraqi with a Strela-2 MANPADS shot Spirit 03 down, and all 14 crew members died.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The military has used AC-130 gunships during the humanitarian operations in Somalia (Operation Restore Hope and Operation United Shield) in 1992\u201393, Operation Uphold Democracy in Haiti in 1994. AC-130s took part in Operation Assured Response in Liberia in 1996 and in Operation Silver Wake in 1997, the evacuation of American non-combatants from Albania.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AC-130s took part in the NATO missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo during the 1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AC-130U gunship set a new record for the longest sustained flight by any C-130 on 22 and 23 October 1997, when two AC-130U gunships flew 36 hours nonstop from Hurlburt Field, Florida to Taegu Air Base (Daegu), South Korea, being refueled seven times in the air by KC-135 tankers. The two gunships took on 410,000\u00a0lb (186,000\u00a0kg) of fuel. Gunships also were part of the buildup of U.S. forces in 1998 to compel Iraq to allow UNSCOM weapons inspections.", "qas": [{"question": "how many times did the ac-130u gunship fly ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 35, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The U.S. has used gunships with deployments to the War in Afghanistan (Operation Enduring Freedom \u2013 Afghanistan) (2001\u20132014), and Iraq War (Operation Iraqi Freedom) (2003\u201311). AC-130 strikes were directed by special forces on known Taliban locations during the early days of the war in Afghanistan. U.S. Special Operations Forces are using the AC-130 to support its operations. The day after arriving in Afghanistan, the AC-130s attacked Taliban and Al-Qaeda forces near the city of Konduz and were directly responsible for the city's surrender the next day. On 26 November 2001, Spectres were called in to put down a rebellion at the prison fort of Qala-I-Janghi. The 16 SOS flew missions over Mazar-i-Sharif, Kunduz, Kandahar, Shkin, Asadabad, Bagram, Baghran, Tora Bora, and virtually every other part of Afghanistan. The Spectre participated in countless operations within Afghanistan, performing on-call close air support and armed reconnaissance. In March 2002, three AC-130 Spectres provided 39 crucial combat missions in support of Operation Anaconda in Afghanistan. During the intense fighting, the planes fired more than 1,300 40\u00a0mm and 1,200 105\u00a0mm rounds.", "qas": [{"question": "how many lumens did the planes fire ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 36, 8)"}]}, {"context": "Close air support was the main mission of the AC-130 in Iraq. Night after night, at least one AC-130 was in the air to fulfill one or more air support requests (ASRs). A typical mission had the AC\u2013130 supporting a single brigade's ASRs followed by aerial refueling and another two hours with another brigade or SOF team. The use of AC-130s in places like Fallujah, urban settings where insurgents were among crowded populations of non-combatants, was criticized by human rights groups. AC-130s were also used for intelligence gathering with their sophisticated long-range video, infrared and radar sensors. In 2007, US Special Operations forces also used the AC-130 in attacks on suspected Al-Qaeda militants in Somalia.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the main mission of the ac-130 in iraq ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 37, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There were eight AC-130H and seventeen AC-130U aircraft in active-duty service as of July 2010. In March 2011, the U.S. Air Force deployed two AC-130U gunships to take part in Operation Odyssey Dawn, the U.S. military intervention in Libya, which eventually came under NATO as Operation Unified Protector.\nBy September 2013, 14 MC-130W Dragon Spear aircraft have been converted to AC-130W Stinger II gunships. The Stinger gunships have been deployed to Afghanistan to replace the aging AC-130H aircraft and provide an example for the new AC-130J Ghostrider. Modifications began with crews cutting holes in the plane to make room for weapons, and adding kits and bomb bases for laser-guided munitions. Crews added a 105\u00a0mm cannon, 20-inch infrared and electro-optical sensors, and the ability to carry 250-pound bombs on the wings.", "qas": [{"question": "how many ac-130u aircraft were there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(8, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On 15 November 2015, two days after the attacks in Paris by ISIL, AC-130s and A-10 Thunderbolt II attack aircraft destroyed a convoy of over 100 ISIL-operated oil tanker trucks in Syria. The attacks were part of an intensification of the U.S.-led Military intervention against ISIL called Operation Tidal Wave II (named after the original Operation Tidal Wave during World War II, a failed attempt to raid German oil fields that resulted in heavy aircraft and aircrew loss) in an attempt to cut off oil smuggling as a source of funding for the group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 3 October 2015, an AC-130 mistakenly attacked the Doctors Without Borders hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan. In five separate runs, the gunship struck the hospital that was erroneously identified as the source of attacks on coalition members. Subsequent inquiries led to punishment of 16 military personnel and cited \"human error\" as the root cause.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 30 September 2017, the Air Force declared the AC-130J Ghostrider had achieved initial operational capability (IOC), with six gunships having been delivered; the aircraft is planned to reach full operational capability by 2023 with a total of 37 gunships delivered. The J-variant is lighter and more fuel efficient than previous versions, able to fly at with a range of and service ceiling of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nUnited States Air Force", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the first seven AC-130A aircraft deployed to Vietnam was AF serial no. 53-3129, named \"First Lady\" in November 1970. This aircraft was a conversion of the first production C-130. On 25 March 1971, it took an anti-aircraft artillery hit in the belly just aft of the nose gear wheel well over the Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos. The 37\u00a0mm shell destroyed everything below the crew deck and barely missed striking two crew members. The pilot was able to crash land the aircraft safely. In 1975, after the conclusion of US involvement in the Vietnam war, it was transferred to the Air Force Reserve, where it served with the 711th Special Operations Squadron of the 919th Special Operations Wing. In 1980, the aircraft was upgraded from the original three-bladed propellers to the quieter four-bladed propellers and was eventually retired in late 1995. The retirement also marked an end to the Air Force Reserve Command flying the AC-130A. The aircraft now sits on display in the final Air Force Reserve Command configuration with grey paint, black markings, and the four-bladed Hamilton Sunstrand 54H60-91 props at the Air Force Armament Museum at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, USA.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A second aircraft, AF serial no. 56-0509, named the \"Ultimate End\", was originally accepted as an C-130A by the Air Force on 28 February 1957, and modified to the AC-130A configuration on 27 July 1970. The aircraft participated in the Vietnam War and the rescue of the SS Mayaguez. \"Ultimate End\" demonstrated the durability of the C-130 after surviving hits in five places by 37\u00a0mm anti-aircraft artillery on 12 December 1970, extensive left wing leading edge damage on 12 April 1971 and a 57\u00a0mm round damaging the belly and injuring one crewman on 4 March 1972. \"Ultimate End\" was reassigned to the Air Force Reserve's 919th Special Operations Wing at Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field No.3 / Duke Field on 17 June 1975, where it continued in service until retired in the fall 1994 and transferred to Air Force Special Operations Command's \"Heritage Air Park\" at Hurlburt Field, Florida. While assigned to the 711th Special Operations Squadron, \"Ultimate End\" served in Operations JUST CAUSE in Panama, DESERT STORM in Kuwait and Iraq, and UPHOLD DEMOCRACY in Haiti. After 36 years and seven months of service, 24 years as a gunship, \"Ultimate End\" retired from active service on 1 October 1994. It made its last flight from Duke Field to Hurlburt Field on 20 October 1994. The Spectre Association dedicated \"Ultimate End\" (which served with the 16 SOS in Vietnam) on 4 May 1995. Lt Col Michael Byers, then 16 SOS commander, represented the active-duty gunship force and Clyde Gowdy of the Spectre Association represented all Spectre personnel past and present for the unveiling of a monument at the aircraft and the dedication as a whole.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A third AC-130A, AF serial no. 54-1630, is on display in the Cold War Gallery at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. Named \"Azrael\" for the angel of death in Islam who severs the soul from the body, this aircraft figured prominently in the closing hours of Operation Desert Storm. On 26 February 1991, Coalition ground forces were driving the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait. With an Air Force Reserve crew called to active duty, Azrael was sent to the Al Jahra highway (Highway 80) between Kuwait City and Basra, Iraq, to intercept the convoys of tanks, trucks, buses, and cars fleeing the battle. Facing SA-6 and SA-8 surface-to-air missiles and 37\u00a0mm and 57\u00a0mm radar-guided anti-aircraft artillery the crew attacked and destroyed or disabled most of the convoys. \"Azrael\" was also assigned to the 919th Special Operations Wing and retired to the museum in October 1995.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another AC-130A, AF serial no. 54-1626, the original prototype AC-130 named \"Gunship II\" is on display at the outdoor Air Park at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. This aircraft served in Southeast Asia from 1967 to 1972, then served in JC-130A test configuration. It was transferred to the National Museum of the United States Air Force in 1976, and converted back to AC-130A configuration in the late 1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AC-130A serial no. 54-1623, c/n 3010, named \"Ghost Rider\" served in Southeast Asia and later conflicts until being retired in 1997 to Dobbins AFB, Georgia. Ghost Rider eventually was transferred and displayed at the Aviation Wing Museum at Marietta, Georgia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n(Prior to c. 2000)\n(Latest armament)", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Alternative algebra", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In abstract algebra, an alternative algebra is an algebra in which multiplication need not be associative, only alternative. That is, one must have\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\" in the algebra.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for `` x '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 0, 1)"}, {"question": "what is an alternative calculus ?", "answers": [], "id": "(9, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Every associative algebra is obviously alternative, but so too are some strictly non-associative algebras such as the octonions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alternative algebras are so named because they are the algebras for which the associator is alternating. The associator is a trilinear map given by\nBy definition, a multilinear map is alternating if it vanishes whenever two of its arguments are equal. The left and right alternative identities for an algebra are equivalent to\nBoth of these identities together imply that the associator is totally skew-symmetric. That is,\nfor any permutation \u03c3. It follows that\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\". This is equivalent to the \"flexible identity\"\nThe associator of an alternative algebra is therefore alternating. Conversely, any algebra whose associator is alternating is clearly alternative. By symmetry, any algebra which satisfies any two of:\nis alternative and therefore satisfies all three identities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An alternating associator is always totally skew-symmetric. The converse holds so long as the characteristic of the base field is not 2.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Artin's theorem states that in an alternative algebra the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative. Conversely, any algebra for which this is true is clearly alternative. It follows that expressions involving only two variables can be written unambiguously without parentheses in an alternative algebra. A generalization of Artin's theorem states that whenever three elements formula_12 in an alternative algebra associate (i.e., formula_13), the subalgebra generated by those elements is associative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A corollary of Artin's theorem is that alternative algebras are power-associative, that is, the subalgebra generated by a single element is associative. The converse need not hold: the sedenions are power-associative but not alternative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Moufang identities\nhold in any alternative algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a unital alternative algebra, multiplicative inverses are unique whenever they exist. Moreover, for any invertible element formula_17 and all formula_18 one has\nThis is equivalent to saying the associator formula_20 vanishes for all such formula_17 and formula_18. If formula_17 and formula_18 are invertible then formula_25 is also invertible with inverse formula_26. The set of all invertible elements is therefore closed under multiplication and forms a Moufang loop. This \"loop of units\" in an alternative ring or algebra is analogous to the group of units in an associative ring or algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kleinfeld's theorem states that any simple non-associative alternative ring is a generalized octonion algebra over its center.\nThe structure theory of alternative rings is presented in .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The projective plane over any alternative division ring is a Moufang plane.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The close relationship of alternative algebras and composition algebras was given by Guy Roos in 2008: He shows (page 162) the relation for an algebra \"A\" with unit element \"e\" and an involutive anti-automorphism formula_27 such that \"a\" + \"a\"* and \"aa\"* are on the line spanned by \"e\" for all \"a\" in \"A\". Use the notation \"n\"(\"a\") = \"aa\"*. Then if \"n\" is a non-singular mapping into the field of \"A\", and \"A\" is alternative, then (\"A,n\") is a composition algebra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Arbitrage", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In economics and finance, arbitrage (, ) is the practice of taking advantage of a price difference between two or more markets: striking a combination of matching deals that capitalize upon the imbalance, the profit being the difference between the market prices. When used by academics, an arbitrage is a (imagined, hypothetical, thought experiment) transaction that involves no negative cash flow at any probabilistic or temporal state and a positive cash flow in at least one state; in simple terms, it is the possibility of a risk-free profit after transaction costs. For example, an arbitrage opportunity is present when there is the opportunity to instantaneously buy something for a low price and sell it for a higher price.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In principle and in academic use, an arbitrage is risk-free; in common use, as in statistical arbitrage, it may refer to \"expected\" profit, though losses may occur, and in practice, there are always risks in arbitrage, some minor (such as fluctuation of prices decreasing profit margins), some major (such as devaluation of a currency or derivative). In academic use, an arbitrage involves taking advantage of differences in price of a \"single\" asset or \"identical\" cash-flows; in common use, it is also used to refer to differences between \"similar\" assets (relative value or convergence trades), as in merger arbitrage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "People who engage in arbitrage are called arbitrageurs \u2014such as a bank or brokerage firm. The term is mainly applied to trading in financial instruments, such as bonds, stocks, derivatives, commodities and currencies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage has the effect of causing prices of the same or very similar assets in different markets to converge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Arbitrage\" is a French word and denotes a decision by an arbitrator or arbitration tribunal. (In modern French, \"\" usually means referee or umpire.) In the sense used here, it was first defined in 1704 by Mathieu de la Porte in his treatise \"\" as a consideration of different exchange rates to recognise the most profitable places of issuance and settlement for a bill of exchange (\" [, in modern spelling] \".)", "qas": []}, {"context": "If the market prices do not allow for profitable arbitrage, the prices are said to constitute an arbitrage equilibrium, or an arbitrage-free market. An arbitrage equilibrium is a precondition for a general economic equilibrium. The \"no arbitrage\" assumption is used in quantitative finance to calculate a unique risk neutral price for derivatives.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the market prices not allowed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "This refers to the method of valuing a coupon-bearing financial instrument by discounting its future cash flows by multiple discount rates. By doing so, a more accurate price can be obtained than if the price is calculated with a present-value pricing approach. Arbitrage-free pricing is used for bond valuation and to detect arbitrage opportunities for investors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the purpose of valuing the price of a bond, its cash flows can each be thought of as packets of incremental cash flows with a large packet upon maturity, being the principal. Since the cash flows are dispersed throughout future periods, they must be discounted back to the present. In the present-value approach, the cash flows are discounted with one discount rate to find the price of the bond. In arbitrage-free pricing, multiple discount rates are used.", "qas": [{"question": "what are some of the consumers that are used in arbitrage-free notebooks ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 7, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The present-value approach assumes that the yield of the bond will stay the same until maturity. This is a simplified model because interest rates may fluctuate in the future, which in turn affects the yield on the bond. The discount rate may be different for each of the cash flows for this reason. Each cash flow can be considered a zero-coupon instrument that pays one payment upon maturity. The discount rates used should be the rates of multiple zero-coupon bonds with maturity dates the same as each cash flow and similar risk as the instrument being valued. By using multiple discount rates, the arbitrage-free price is the sum of the discounted cash flows. Arbitrage-free price refers to the price at which no price arbitrage is possible.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the price of arbitrage-free price ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 8, 6)"}]}, {"context": "The ideas of using multiple discount rates obtained from zero-coupon bonds and discount a similar bonds cash flow to find its price is derived from the yield curve. The yield curve is a curve of the yields of the same bond with different maturities. This curve can be used to view trends in market expectations of how interest rates will move in the future. In arbitrage-free pricing of a bond, a yield curve of similar zero-coupon bonds with different maturities is created. If the curve were to be created with Treasury securities of different maturities, they would be stripped of their coupon payments through bootstrapping. This is to transform the bonds into zero-coupon bonds. The yield of these zero-coupon bonds would then be plotted on a diagram with time on the \"x\"-axis and yield on the \"y\"-axis.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the value of using multiple stores ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since the yield curve displays market expectations on how yields and interest rates may move, the arbitrage-free pricing approach is more realistic than using only one discount rate. Investors can use this approach to value bonds and find mismatches in prices, resulting in an arbitrage opportunity. If a bond valued with the arbitrage-free pricing approach turns out to be priced higher in the market, an investor could have such an opportunity:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the value of an isp ?", "answers": [], "id": "(10, 10, 2)"}]}, {"context": "If the outcome from the valuation were the reversed case, the opposite positions would be taken in the bonds. This arbitrage opportunity comes from the assumption that the prices of bonds with the same properties will converge upon maturity. This can be explained through market efficiency, which states that arbitrage opportunities will eventually be discovered and corrected accordingly. The prices of the bonds in t move closer together to finally become the same at t.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage is possible when one of three conditions is met:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nArbitrage is not simply the act of buying a product in one market and selling it in another for a higher price at some later time. The transactions must occur \"simultaneously\" to avoid exposure to market risk, or the risk that prices may change on one market before both transactions are complete. In practical terms, this is generally possible only with securities and financial products that can be traded electronically, and even then, when each leg of the trade is executed the prices in the market may have moved. Missing one of the legs of the trade (and subsequently having to trade it soon after at a worse price) is called 'execution risk' or more specifically 'leg risk'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the simplest example, any good sold in one market should sell for the same price in another. Traders may, for example, find that the price of wheat is lower in agricultural regions than in cities, purchase the good, and transport it to another region to sell at a higher price. This type of price arbitrage is the most common, but this simple example ignores the cost of transport, storage, risk, and other factors. \"True\" arbitrage requires that there is no market risk involved. Where securities are traded on more than one exchange, arbitrage occurs by simultaneously buying in one and selling on the other.", "qas": []}, {"context": "See rational pricing, particularly \u00a7 arbitrage mechanics, for further discussion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mathematically it is defined as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_2 and formula_3 denotes the portfolio value at time\u00a0\"t\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage has the effect of causing prices in different markets to converge. As a result of arbitrage, the currency exchange rates, the price of commodities, and the price of securities in different markets tend to converge. The speed at which they do so is a measure of market efficiency. Arbitrage tends to reduce price discrimination by encouraging people to buy an item where the price is low and resell it where the price is high (as long as the buyers are not prohibited from reselling and the transaction costs of buying, holding and reselling are small relative to the difference in prices in the different markets).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage moves different currencies toward purchasing power parity. As an example, assume that a car purchased in the United States is cheaper than the same car in Canada. Canadians would buy their cars across the border to exploit the arbitrage condition. At the same time, Americans would buy US cars, transport them across the border, then sell them in Canada. Canadians would have to buy American dollars to buy the cars and Americans would have to sell the Canadian dollars they received in exchange. Both actions would increase demand for US dollars and supply of Canadian dollars. As a result, there would be an appreciation of the US currency. This would make US cars more expensive and Canadian cars less so until their prices were similar. On a larger scale, international arbitrage opportunities in commodities, goods, securities and currencies tend to change exchange rates until the purchasing power is equal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In reality, most assets exhibit some difference between countries. These, transaction costs, taxes, and other costs provide an impediment to this kind of arbitrage. Similarly, arbitrage affects the difference in interest rates paid on government bonds issued by the various countries, given the expected depreciation in the currencies relative to each other (see interest rate parity).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage transactions in modern securities markets involve fairly low day-to-day risks, but can face extremely high risk in rare situations, particularly financial crises, and can lead to bankruptcy. Formally, arbitrage transactions have negative skew \u2013 prices can get a small amount closer (but often no closer than 0), while they can get very far apart. The day-to-day risks are generally small because the transactions involve small differences in price, so an execution failure will generally cause a small loss (unless the trade is very big or the price moves rapidly). The rare case risks are extremely high because these small price differences are converted to large profits via leverage (borrowed money), and in the rare event of a large price move, this may yield a large loss.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main day-to-day risk is that part of the transaction fails \u2013 execution risk. The main rare risks are counterparty risk and liquidity risk \u2013 that a counterparty to a large transaction or many transactions fails to pay, or that one is required to post margin and does not have the money to do so.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the academic literature, the idea that seemingly very low risk arbitrage trades might not be fully exploited because of these risk factors and other considerations is often referred to as limits to arbitrage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Generally it is impossible to close two or three transactions at the same instant; therefore, there is the possibility that when one part of the deal is closed, a quick shift in prices makes it impossible to close the other at a profitable price. However, this is not necessarily the case. Many exchanges and inter-dealer brokers allow multi legged trades (e.g. basis block trades on LIFFE).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Competition in the marketplace can also create risks during arbitrage transactions. As an example, if one was trying to profit from a price discrepancy between IBM on the NYSE and IBM on the London Stock Exchange, they may purchase a large number of shares on the NYSE and find that they cannot simultaneously sell on the LSE. This leaves the arbitrageur in an unhedged risk position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1980s, risk arbitrage was common. In this form of speculation, one trades a security that is clearly undervalued or overvalued, when it is seen that the wrong valuation is about to be corrected by events. The standard example is the stock of a company, undervalued in the stock market, which is about to be the object of a takeover bid; the price of the takeover will more truly reflect the value of the company, giving a large profit to those who bought at the current price\u2014if the merger goes through as predicted. Traditionally, arbitrage transactions in the securities markets involve high speed, high volume and low risk. At some moment a price difference exists, and the problem is to execute two or three balancing transactions while the difference persists (that is, before the other arbitrageurs act). When the transaction involves a delay of weeks or months, as above, it may entail considerable risk if borrowed money is used to magnify the reward through leverage. One way of reducing this risk is through the illegal use of inside information, and in fact risk arbitrage with regard to leveraged buyouts was associated with some of the famous financial scandals of the 1980s such as those involving Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another risk occurs if the items being bought and sold are not identical and the arbitrage is conducted under the assumption that the prices of the items are correlated or predictable; this is more narrowly referred to as a convergence trade. In the extreme case this is merger arbitrage, described below. In comparison to the classical quick arbitrage transaction, such an operation can produce disastrous losses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As arbitrages generally involve \"future\" movements of cash, they are subject to counterparty risk: if a counterparty fails to fulfill their side of a transaction. This is a serious problem if one has either a single trade or many related trades with a single counterparty, whose failure thus poses a threat, or in the event of a financial crisis when many counterparties fail. This hazard is serious because of the large quantities one must trade in order to make a profit on small price differences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For example, if one purchases many risky bonds, then hedges them with CDSes, profiting from the difference between the bond spread and the CDS premium, in a financial crisis the bonds may default \"and\" the CDS writer/seller may itself fail, due to the stress of the crisis, causing the arbitrageur to face steep losses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Arbitrage trades are necessarily synthetic, \"leveraged\" trades, as they involve a short position. If the assets used are not identical (so a price divergence makes the trade temporarily lose money), or the margin treatment is not identical, and the trader is accordingly required to post margin (faces a margin call), the trader may run out of capital (if they run out of cash and cannot borrow more) and be forced to sell these assets at a loss even though the trades may be expected to ultimately make money. In effect, arbitrage traders synthesize a put option on their ability to finance themselves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Prices may diverge during a financial crisis, often termed a \"flight to quality\"; these are precisely the times when it is hardest for leveraged investors to raise capital (due to overall capital constraints), and thus they will lack capital precisely when they need it most.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also known as geographical arbitrage, this is the simplest form of arbitrage. In spatial arbitrage, an arbitrageur looks for price differences between geographically separate markets. For example, there may be a bond dealer in Virginia offering a bond at 100-12/23 and a dealer in Washington bidding 100-15/23 for the same bond. For whatever reason, the two dealers have not spotted the difference in the prices, but the arbitrageur does. The arbitrageur immediately buys the bond from the Virginia dealer and sells it to the Washington dealer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also called risk arbitrage, merger arbitrage generally consists of buying/holding the stock of a company that is the target of a takeover while shorting the stock of the acquiring company.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Usually the market price of the target company is less than the price offered by the acquiring company.\nThe spread between these two prices depends mainly on the probability and the timing of the takeover being completed as well as the prevailing level of interest rates.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The bet in a merger arbitrage is that such a spread will eventually be zero, if and when the takeover is completed. The risk is that the deal \"breaks\" and the spread massively widens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also called \"municipal bond relative value arbitrage\", \"municipal arbitrage\", or just \"muni arb\", this hedge fund strategy involves one of two approaches. The term \"arbitrage\" is also used in the context of the Income Tax Regulations governing the investment of proceeds of municipal bonds; these regulations, aimed at the issuers or beneficiaries of tax-exempt municipal bonds, are different and, instead, attempt to remove the issuer's ability to arbitrage between the low tax-exempt rate and a taxable investment rate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Generally, managers seek relative value opportunities by being both long and short municipal bonds with a duration-neutral book. The relative value trades may be between different issuers, different bonds issued by the same entity, or capital structure trades referencing the same asset (in the case of revenue bonds). Managers aim to capture the inefficiencies arising from the heavy participation of non-economic investors (i.e., high income \"buy and hold\" investors seeking tax-exempt income) as well as the \"crossover buying\" arising from corporations' or individuals' changing income tax situations (i.e., insurers switching their munis for corporates after a large loss as they can capture a higher after-tax yield by offsetting the taxable corporate income with underwriting losses). There are additional inefficiencies arising from the highly fragmented nature of the municipal bond market which has two million outstanding issues and 50,000 issuers, in contrast to the Treasury market which has 400 issues and a single issuer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Second, managers construct leveraged portfolios of AAA- or AA-rated tax-exempt municipal bonds with the duration risk hedged by shorting the appropriate ratio of taxable corporate bonds. These corporate equivalents are typically interest rate swaps referencing Libor or SIFMA . The arbitrage manifests itself in the form of a relatively cheap longer maturity municipal bond, which is a municipal bond that yields significantly more than 65% of a corresponding taxable corporate bond. The steeper slope of the municipal yield curve allows participants to collect more after-tax income from the municipal bond portfolio than is spent on the interest rate swap; the carry is greater than the hedge expense. Positive, tax-free carry from muni arb can reach into the double digits. The bet in this municipal bond arbitrage is that, over a longer period of time, two similar instruments\u2014municipal bonds and interest rate swaps\u2014will correlate with each other; they are both very high quality credits, have the same maturity and are denominated in the same currency. Credit risk and duration risk are largely eliminated in this strategy. However, basis risk arises from use of an imperfect hedge, which results in significant, but range-bound principal volatility. The end goal is to limit this principal volatility, eliminating its relevance over time as the high, consistent, tax-free cash flow accumulates. Since the inefficiency is related to government tax policy, and hence is structural in nature, it has not been arbitraged away.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Note, however, that many municipal bonds are callable, and that this imposes substantial additional risks to the strategy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A convertible bond is a bond that an investor can return to the issuing company in exchange for a predetermined number of shares in the company.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A convertible bond can be thought of as a corporate bond with a stock call option attached to it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The price of a convertible bond is sensitive to three major factors:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nGiven the complexity of the calculations involved and the convoluted structure that a convertible bond can have, an arbitrageur often relies on sophisticated quantitative models in order to identify bonds that are trading cheap versus their theoretical value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Convertible arbitrage consists of buying a convertible bond and hedging two of the three factors in order to gain exposure to the third factor at a very attractive price.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For instance an arbitrageur would first buy a convertible bond, then sell fixed income securities or interest rate futures (to hedge the interest rate exposure) and buy some credit protection (to hedge the risk of credit deterioration).\nEventually what he'd be left with is something similar to a call option on the underlying stock, acquired at a very low price.\nHe could then make money either selling some of the more expensive options that are openly traded in the market or delta hedging his exposure to the underlying shares.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A depositary receipt is a security that is offered as a \"tracking stock\" on another foreign market. For instance, a Chinese company wishing to raise more money may issue a depository receipt on the New York Stock Exchange, as the amount of capital on the local exchanges is limited. These securities, known as ADRs (American depositary receipt) or GDRs (global depository receipt) depending on where they are issued, are typically considered \"foreign\" and therefore trade at a lower value when first released. Many ADR's are exchangeable into the original security (known as fungibility) and actually have the same value. In this case there is a spread between the perceived value and real value, which can be extracted. Other ADR's that are not exchangeable often have much larger spreads. Since the ADR is trading at a value lower than what it is worth, one can purchase the ADR and expect to make money as its value converges on the original. However, there is a chance that the original stock will fall in value too, so by shorting it one can hedge that risk.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cross-border arbitrage exploits different prices of the same stock in different countries:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Example: Apple is trading on NASDAQ at US$108.84. The stock is also traded on the German electronic exchange, XETRA. If 1 euro costs US$1.11, a cross-border trader could enter a buy order on the XETRA at \u20ac98.03 per Apple share and a sell order at \u20ac98.07 per share.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some brokers in Germany do not offer access to the U.S. exchanges. Hence if a German retail investor wants to buy Apple stock, he needs to buy it on the XETRA. The cross-border trader would sell the Apple shares on XETRA to the investor and buy the shares in the same second on NASDAQ. Afterwards, the cross-border trader would need to transfer the shares bought on NASDAQ to the German XETRA exchange, where he is obliged to deliver the stock.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In most cases, the quotation on the local exchanges is done electronically by high-frequency traders, taking into consideration the home price of the stock and the exchange rate. This kind of high-frequency trading benefits the public as it reduces the cost to the German investor and enables him to buy U.S. shares.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A dual-listed company (DLC) structure involves two companies incorporated in different countries contractually agreeing to operate their businesses as if they were a single enterprise, while retaining their separate legal identity and existing stock exchange listings. In integrated and efficient financial markets, stock prices of the twin pair should move in lockstep. In practice, DLC share prices exhibit large deviations from theoretical parity. Arbitrage positions in DLCs can be set up by obtaining a long position in the relatively underpriced part of the DLC and a short position in the relatively overpriced part. Such arbitrage strategies start paying off as soon as the relative prices of the two DLC stocks converge toward theoretical parity. However, since there is no identifiable date at which DLC prices will converge, arbitrage positions sometimes have to be kept open for considerable periods of time. In the meantime, the price gap might widen. In these situations, arbitrageurs may receive margin calls, after which they would most likely be forced to liquidate part of the position at a highly unfavorable moment and suffer a loss. Arbitrage in DLCs may be profitable, but is also very risky.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A good illustration of the risk of DLC arbitrage is the position in Royal Dutch Shell\u2014which had a DLC structure until 2005\u2014by the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM, see also the discussion below). Lowenstein (2000) describes that LTCM established an arbitrage position in Royal Dutch Shell in the summer of 1997, when Royal Dutch traded at an 8 to 10 percent premium. In total, $2.3 billion was invested, half of which was long in Shell and the other half was short in Royal Dutch (Lowenstein, p.\u00a099). In the autumn of 1998, large defaults on Russian debt created significant losses for the hedge fund and LTCM had to unwind several positions. Lowenstein reports that the premium of Royal Dutch had increased to about 22 percent and LTCM had to close the position and incur a loss. According to Lowenstein (p.\u00a0234), LTCM lost $286 million in equity pairs trading and more than half of this loss is accounted for by the Royal Dutch Shell trade.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The market prices for privately held companies are typically viewed from a return on investment perspective (such as 25%), whilst publicly held and or exchange listed companies trade on a Price to earnings ratio (P/E) (such as a P/E of 10, which equates to a 10% ROI). Thus, if a publicly traded company specialises in the acquisition of privately held companies, from a per-share perspective there is a gain with every acquisition that falls within these guidelines. E.g., Berkshire Hathaway and Halydean Corporation. Private to public equities arbitrage is a term which can arguably be applied to investment banking in general. Private markets to public markets differences may also help explain the overnight windfall gains enjoyed by principals of companies that just did an initial public offering (IPO).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regulatory arbitrage is where a regulated institution takes advantage of the difference between its real (or economic) risk and the regulatory position. For example, if a bank, operating under the Basel I accord, has to hold 8% capital against default risk, but the real risk of default is lower, it is profitable to securitise the loan, removing the low risk loan from its portfolio. On the other hand, if the real risk is higher than the regulatory risk then it is profitable to make that loan and hold on to it, provided it is priced appropriately. Regulatory arbitrage can result in parts of entire businesses being unregulated as a result of the arbitrage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This process can increase the overall riskiness of institutions under a risk insensitive regulatory regime, as described by Alan Greenspan in his October 1998 speech on The Role of Capital in Optimal Banking Supervision and Regulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term \"Regulatory Arbitrage\" was used for the first time in 2005 when it was applied by Scott V. Simpson, a partner at law firm Skadden, Arps, to refer to a new defence tactic in hostile mergers and acquisitions where differing takeover regimes in deals involving multi-jurisdictions are exploited to the advantage of a target company under threat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In economics, regulatory arbitrage (sometimes, tax arbitrage) may be used to refer to situations when a company can choose a nominal place of business with a regulatory, legal or tax regime with lower costs. For example, an insurance company may choose to locate in Bermuda due to preferential tax rates and policies for insurance companies. This can occur particularly where the business transaction has no obvious physical location. In the case of many financial products, it may be unclear \"where\" the transaction occurs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regulatory arbitrage can include restructuring a bank by outsourcing services such as IT. The outsourcing company takes over the installations, buying out the bank's assets and charges a periodic service fee back to the bank. This frees up cashflow usable for new lending by the bank. The bank will have higher IT costs, but counts on the multiplier effect of money creation and the interest rate spread to make it a profitable exercise.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Example:\nSuppose the bank sells its IT installations for 40 million USD. With a reserve ratio of 10%, the bank can create 400 million USD in additional loans (there is a time lag, and the bank has to expect to recover the loaned money back into its books). The bank can often lend (and securitize the loan) to the IT services company to cover the acquisition cost of the IT installations. This can be at preferential rates, as the sole client using the IT installation is the bank. If the bank can generate 5% interest margin on the 400 million of new loans, the bank will increase interest revenues by 20 million. The IT services company is free to leverage their balance sheet as aggressively as they and their banker agree to. This is the reason behind the trend towards outsourcing in the financial sector. Without this money creation benefit, it is actually more expensive to outsource the IT operations as the outsourcing adds a layer of management and increases overhead.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to PBS Frontline's 2012 four-part documentary, \"Money, Power, and Wall Street,\" regulatory arbitrage, along with asymmetric bank lobbying in Washington and abroad, allowed investment banks in the pre- and post-2008 period to continue to skirt laws and engage in the risky proprietary trading of opaque derivatives, swaps, and other credit-based instruments invented to circumvent legal restrictions at the expense of clients, government, and publics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to the Affordable Care Act\u2019s expansion of Medicaid coverage, one form of Regulatory Arbitrage can now be found when businesses engage in \u201cMedicaid Migration\u201d, a maneuver by which qualifying employees who would typically be enrolled in company health plans elect to enroll in Medicaid instead. These programs that have similar characteristics as insurance products to the employee, but have radically different cost structures, resulting in significant expense reductions for employers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Telecom arbitrage companies allow phone users to make international calls for free through certain access numbers. Such services are offered in the United Kingdom; the telecommunication arbitrage companies get paid an interconnect charge by the UK mobile networks and then buy international routes at a lower cost. The calls are seen as free by the UK contract mobile phone customers since they are using up their allocated monthly minutes rather than paying for additional calls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Such services were previously offered in the United States by companies such as FuturePhone.com. These services would operate in rural telephone exchanges, primarily in small towns in the state of Iowa. In these areas, the local telephone carriers are allowed to charge a high \"termination fee\" to the caller's carrier in order to fund the cost of providing service to the small and sparsely populated areas that they serve. However, FuturePhone (as well as other similar services) ceased operations upon legal challenges from AT&T and other service providers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Statistical arbitrage is an imbalance in expected nominal values. A casino has a statistical arbitrage in every game of chance that it offers\u2014referred to as the house advantage, house edge, vigorish or house vigorish.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) lost 4.6 billion U.S. dollars in fixed income arbitrage in September 1998. LTCM had attempted to make money on the price difference between different bonds. For example, it would sell U.S. Treasury securities and buy Italian bond futures. The concept was that because Italian bond futures had a less liquid market, in the short term Italian bond futures would have a higher return than U.S. bonds, but in the long term, the prices would converge. Because the difference was small, a large amount of money had to be borrowed to make the buying and selling profitable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The downfall in this system began on August 17, 1998, when Russia defaulted on its ruble debt and domestic dollar debt. Because the markets were already nervous due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis, investors began selling non-U.S. treasury debt and buying U.S. treasuries, which were considered a safe investment. As a result, the price on US treasuries began to increase and the return began decreasing because there were many buyers, and the return (yield) on other bonds began to increase because there were many sellers (i.e. the price of those bonds fell). This caused the difference between the prices of U.S. treasuries and other bonds to increase, rather than to decrease as LTCM was expecting. Eventually this caused LTCM to fold, and their creditors had to arrange a bail-out. More controversially, officials of the Federal Reserve assisted in the negotiations that led to this bail-out, on the grounds that so many companies and deals were intertwined with LTCM that if LTCM actually failed, they would as well, causing a collapse in confidence in the economic system. Thus LTCM failed as a fixed income arbitrage fund, although it is unclear what sort of profit was realized by the banks that bailed LTCM out.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "ACF Fiorentina", "paragraphs": [{"context": "ACF Fiorentina S.p.A., commonly referred to as simply Fiorentina , is a professional Italian football club from Florence, Tuscany. Founded by a merger in August 1926, and refounded in August 2002 following bankruptcy, Fiorentina have played at the top level of Italian football for the majority of their existence; only four clubs have played in more Serie A seasons.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the professional italian football club ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Fiorentina has won two Italian Championships, in 1955\u201356 and again in 1968\u201369, as well as six Coppa Italia trophies and one Supercoppa Italiana. On the European stage, Fiorentina won the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1960\u201361 and lost the final one year later. They finished runners-up in the 1956\u201357 European Cup, losing against Real Madrid, and also came close to winning the 1989\u201390 UEFA Cup, finishing as runners-up against Juventus after losing the first leg in Turin and drawing in the second one in Avellino.", "qas": [{"question": "how many italian prizes has fiorentina won ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Fiorentina is one of the fourteen European teams that played the finals in all three major continental competitions: the Champions League (1956\u20131957, the first Italian team to reach the final in the top continental competition), the UEFA Cup Winners (1960\u20131961 and 1961\u20131962) and the UEFA Cup (1989\u20131990).", "qas": [{"question": "how many european teams competed in the top continental competition ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since 1931, the club have played at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, which currently has a capacity of 43,147. The stadium has used several names over the years and has undergone several renovations. Fiorentina are known widely by the nickname \"Viola\", a reference to their distinctive purple colours.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Associazione Calcio Fiorentina was founded in the autumn of 1926 by local noble and National Fascist Party member Luigi Ridolfi, who initiated the merger of two older Florentine clubs, CS Firenze and PG Libertas. The aim of the merger was to give Florence a strong club to rival those of the more dominant Italian Football Championship sides of the time from Northwest Italy. Also influential was the cultural revival and rediscovery of \"Calcio Fiorentino\", an ancestor of modern football that was played by members of the Medici family.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After a rough start and three seasons in lower leagues, Fiorentina reached the Serie A in 1931. That same year saw the opening of the new stadium, originally named after Giovanni Berta, a prominent fascist, but now known as Stadio Artemio Franchi. At the time, the stadium was a masterpiece of engineering, and its inauguration was monumental. To be able to compete with the best teams in Italy, Fiorentina strengthened their team with some new players, notably the Uruguayan Pedro Petrone, nicknamed \"el Artillero\". Despite enjoying a good season and finishing in fourth place, Fiorentina were relegated the following year, although they would return quickly to Serie A. In 1941, they won their first Coppa Italia, but the team were unable to build on their success during the 1940s because of World War II and other troubles.", "qas": [{"question": "how many seasons in lower leagues did fiorentina reach after a drop ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1950, Fiorentina started to achieve consistent top-five finishes in the domestic league. The team consisted of great players such as well-known goalkeeper Giuliano Sarti, Sergio Cervato, Francesco Rosella, Guido Gratton, Giuseppe Chiappella and Aldo Scaramucci but above all, the attacking duo of Brazilian Julinho and Argentinian Miguel Montuori. This team won Fiorentina's first \"scudetto\" (Italian championship) in 1955\u201356, 12 points ahead of second-place Milan. Milan beat Fiorentina to top spot the following year, but more significantly Fiorentina became the first Italian team to play in a European Cup final, when a disputed penalty led to a 2\u20130 defeat at the hands of Alfredo Di St\u00e9fano's Real Madrid.\nFiorentina were runners-up again in the three subsequent seasons. In the 1960\u201361 season, the club won the Coppa Italia again and was also successful in Europe, winning the first Cup Winners' Cup against Scottish side Rangers.", "qas": [{"question": "what cup did barcelona win in the 1960\u201361 season ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 6, 5)"}]}, {"context": "After several years of runner-up finishes, Fiorentina dropped away slightly in the 1960s, bouncing from fourth to sixth place, although the club won the Coppa Italia and the Mitropa Cup in 1966.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the 1960s did result in some trophies and good Serie A finishes for Fiorentina, nobody believed that the club could challenge for the title. The 1968\u201369 season started with Milan as frontrunners, but on matchday 7, they lost to Bologna and were overtaken by Gigi Riva's Cagliari. Fiorentina, after an unimpressive start, then moved to the top of the Serie A, but the first half of their season finished with a 2\u20132 draw against Varese, leaving Cagliari as outright league leader. The second half of the season was a three-way battle between the three contending teams, Milan, Cagliari and Fiorentina. Milan fell away, instead focusing their efforts on the European Cup, and it seemed that Cagliari would retain top spot. After Cagliari lost against Juventus, however, Fiorentina took over at the top. The team then won all of their remaining matches, beating rivals Juve in Turin on the penultimate matchday to seal their second, and last, national title. In the European Cup competition the following year, Fiorentina had some good results, including a win in the Soviet Union against Dynamo Kyiv, but they were eventually knocked out in the quarter-finals after a 3\u20130 defeat in Glasgow to Celtic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Viola\" players began the 1970s decade with \"Scudetto\" sewed on their breast, but the period was not especially fruitful for the team. After a fifth-place finish in 1971, they finished in mid-table almost every year, even flirting with relegation in 1972 and 1978. The \"Viola\" did win the Anglo-Italian League Cup in 1974 and won the Coppa Italia again in 1975. The team consisted of young talents like Vincenzo Guerini and Moreno Roggi, who had the misfortune to suffer bad injuries, and above all Giancarlo Antognoni, who would later become an idol to Fiorentina's fans. The young average age of the players led to the team being called \"Fiorentina Ye-Ye\".\nIn 1980, Fiorentina was bought by Flavio Pontello, who came from a rich house-building family. He quickly changed the team's anthem and logo, leading to some complaints by the fans, but he started to bring in high-quality players such as Francesco Graziani and Eraldo Pecci from Torino; Daniel Bertoni from Sevilla; Daniele Massaro from Monza; and a young Pietro Vierchowod from Sampdoria. The team was built around Giancarlo Antognoni, and in 1982, Fiorentina were involved in an exciting duel with rivals Juventus. After a bad injury to Antognoni, the league title was decided on the final day of the season when Fiorentina were denied a goal against Cagliari and were unable to win. Juventus won the title with a disputed penalty and the rivalry between the two teams erupted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following years were strange for Fiorentina, who vacillated between high finishes and relegation battles. Fiorentina also bought two interesting players, \"El Puntero\" Ram\u00f3n D\u00edaz and, most significantly, the young Roberto Baggio.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1990, Fiorentina fought to avoid relegation right up until the final day of the season, but did reach the UEFA Cup final, where they again faced Juventus. The Turin team won the trophy, but Fiorentina's \"tifosi\" once again had real cause for complaint: the second leg of the final was played in Avellino (Fiorentina's home ground was suspended), a city with many Juventus fans, and emerging star Roberto Baggio was sold to the rival team on the day of the final. Pontello, suffering from economic difficulties, was selling all the players and was forced to leave the club after serious riots in Florence's streets. The club was then acquired by the famous filmmaker Mario Cecchi Gori.", "qas": [{"question": "when did fiorentina hideyoshi fight over the uefa cup ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first season under Cecchi Gori's ownership was one of stabilisation, after which the new chairman started to sign some good players like Brian Laudrup, Stefan Effenberg, Francesco Baiano and, most importantly, Gabriel Batistuta, who became an iconic player for the team during the 1990s. In 1993, however, Cecchi Gori died and was succeeded as chairman by his son, Vittorio. Despite a good start to the season, Cecchi Gori fired the coach, Luigi Radice, after a defeat against Atalanta, and replaced him with Aldo Agroppi. The results were dreadful: Fiorentina fell into the bottom half of the standings and were relegated on the last day of the season.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Claudio Ranieri was brought in as coach for the 1993\u201394 season, and that year, Fiorentina dominated Serie B, Italy's second division. Upon their return to Serie A, Ranieri put together a good team centred around new top scorer Batistuta, signing the young talent Rui Costa from Benfica and the new world champion Brazilian defender M\u00e1rcio Santos. The former became an idol to Fiorentina fans, while the second disappointed and was sold after only a season. The \"Viola\" finished the season in tenth place.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the final place in place ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 13, 3)"}, {"question": "who was brought in as coach for the 1993\u201394 season ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The following season, Cecchi Gori bought other important players, namely Swedish midfielder Stefan Schwarz. The club again proved its mettle in cup competitions, winning the Coppa Italia against Atalanta and finishing joint-third in Serie A. In the summer, Fiorentina became the first non-national champions to win the Supercoppa Italiana, defeating Milan 2\u20131 at the San Siro.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fiorentina's 1995\u201396 season was disappointing in the league, but they did reach the Cup Winners' Cup semi-final by beating Gloria Bistri\u021ba, Sparta Prague and Benfica. The team lost the semi-final to the eventual winner of the competition, Barcelona (away 1\u20131; home 0\u20132). The season's main signings were Lu\u00eds Oliveira and Andrei Kanchelskis, the latter of whom suffered from many injuries.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the final score of the cup ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At the end of the season, Ranieri left Fiorentina for Valencia in Spain, with Cecchi Gori appointing Alberto Malesani as his replacement. Fiorentina played well but struggled against smaller teams, although they did manage to qualify for the UEFA Cup. Malesani left Fiorentina after only a season and was succeeded by Giovanni Trapattoni. With Trapattoni's expert guidance and Batistuta's goals, Fiorentina challenged for the title in 1998\u201399 but finished the season in third, earning them qualification for the Champions League. The following year was disappointing in Serie A, but \"Viola\" played some historical matches in the Champions League, beating Arsenal 1\u20130 at the old Wembley Stadium and Manchester United 2\u20130 in Florence. They were ultimately eliminated in the second group stage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the end of the season, Trapattoni left the club and was replaced by Turkish coach Fatih Terim. More significantly, however, Batistuta was sold to Roma, who eventually won the title the following year. Fiorentina played well in 2000\u201301 and stayed in the top half of Serie A, despite the resignation of Terim and the arrival of Roberto Mancini. They also won the Coppa Italia for the sixth and last time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The year 2001 heralded major changes for Fiorentina, as the terrible state of the club's finances was revealed: they were unable to pay wages and had debts of around US$50 million. The club's owner, Vittorio Cecchi Gori, was able to raise some more money, but even this soon proved to be insufficient resources to sustain the club. Fiorentina were relegated at the end of the 2001\u201302 season and went into judicially-controlled administration in June 2002. This form of bankruptcy (sports companies cannot exactly fail in this way in Italy, but they can suffer a similar procedure) meant that the club was refused a place in Serie B for the 2002\u201303 season, and as a result effectively ceased to exist.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The club was promptly re-established in August 2002 as Associazione Calcio Fiorentina e Florentia Viola with shoe and leather entrepreneur Diego Della Valle as new owner and the club was admitted into Serie C2, the fourth tier of Italian football. The only player to remain at the club in its new incarnation was Angelo Di Livio, whose commitment to the club's cause further endeared him to the fans. Helped by Di Livio and 30-goal striker Christian Rigan\u00f2, the club won its Serie C2 group with considerable ease, which would normally have led to a promotion to Serie C1. Due to the bizarre \"Caso Catania\" (Catania Case), however, the club skipped Serie C1 and was admitted into Serie B, something that was only made possible by the Italian Football Federation (FIGC)'s decision to resolve the Catania situation by increasing the number of teams in Serie B from 20 to 24 and promoting Fiorentina for \"sports merits.\" In the 2003 off-season, the club also bought back the right to use the Fiorentina name and the famous shirt design, and re-incorporated itself as ACF Fiorentina. The club finished the 2003\u201304 season in sixth place and won the playoff against Perugia to return to top-flight football.\nIn their first season back in Serie A, however, the club struggled to avoid relegation, only securing survival on the last day of the season on head-to-head record against Bologna and Parma. In 2005, Della Valle decided to appoint Pantaleo Corvino as new sports director, followed by the appointment of Cesare Prandelli as head coach in the following season. The club made several signings during the summer transfer market, most notably Luca Toni and S\u00e9bastien Frey. This drastic move earned them a fourth-place finish with 74 points and a Champions League qualifying round ticket. Toni scored 31 goals in 38 appearances, the first player to pass the 30-goal mark since Antonio Valentin Angelillo in the 1958\u201359 season, for which he was awarded the European Golden Boot. On 14 July 2006, however, Fiorentina were relegated to Serie B due to their involvement in the 2006 Serie A match fixing scandal and given a 12-point penalty. The team was reinstated to the Serie A on appeal, but with a 19-point penalty for the 2006\u201307 season. The team's 2006\u201307 Champions League place was also revoked. After the start of the season, Fiorentina's penalisation was reduced from 19 points to 15 on appeal to the Italian courts. In spite of this penalty, they managed to secure a place in the UEFA Cup.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite Toni's departure to Bayern Munich, Fiorentina had a strong start to the 2007\u201308 season and were tipped by Italian national team head coach Marcello Lippi, among others, as a surprise challenger for the \"Scudetto\", and although this form tailed off towards the middle of the season, the \"Viola\" managed to qualify for the Champions League. In Europe, the club reached the semi-final of the UEFA Cup, where they were ultimately defeated by Rangers on penalties. The 2008\u201309 season continued this success, a fourth-place finish assuring Fiorentina's spot in 2010's Champions League playoffs. Their European campaign was also similar to that of the previous run, relegated to the 2008\u201309 UEFA Cup and were eliminated by Ajax in the end.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 2009\u201310 season, Fiorentina started their domestic campaign strongly before steadily losing momentum and slipped to mid-table positions at the latter half of the season. In Europe, the team proved to be a surprise dark horse: after losing their first away fixture against Lyon, they staged a comeback with a five-match streak by winning all their remaining matches (including defeating Liverpool home and away). The \"Viola\" qualified as group champions, but eventually succumbed to Bayern Munich due to the away goals rule. This was controversial due to a mistaken refereeing decision by Tom Henning \u00d8vreb\u00f8, who allowed a clearly offside goal for Bayern in the first leg. Bayern eventually finished the tournament as runners-up, making a deep run all the way to the final. The incident called into attention the possible implementation of video replays in football. Despite a good European run and reaching the semi-finals in the Coppa Italia, Fiorentina failed to qualify for Europe.", "qas": [{"question": "who began their domestic campaign in the 2009\u201310 season ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During this period, on 24 September 2009, Andrea Della Valle resigned from his position as chairman of Fiorentina, and announced all duties would be temporarily transferred to Mario Cognini, Fiorentina's vice-president until a permanent position could be filled.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In June 2010, the \"Viola\" bid farewell to long-time manager Cesar Prandelli, by then the longest-serving coach in the team's history, who was departing to coach the Italian national team. Catania manager Sini\u0161a Mihajlovi\u0107 was appointed to replace him. The club spent much of the early 2010\u201311 season in last place, but their form improved and Fiorentina ultimately finished ninth. Following a 1\u20130 defeat to Chievo in November 2011, Mihajlovi\u0107 was sacked and replaced by Delio Rossi. After a brief period of improvements, the \"Viola\" were again fighting relegation, prompting the sacking of Sporting Director Pantaleo Corvino in early 2012 following a 0\u20135 home defeat to Juventus. Their bid for survival was kept alive by a number of upset victories away from home, notably at Roma and Milan. During a home game against Novara, trailing 0\u20132 within half an hour, manager Rossi decided to substitute midfielder Adem Ljaji\u0107 early. Ljaji\u0107 sarcastically applauded him in frustration, whereupon Rossi retaliated by physical assaulting his player, an action that ultimately prompted his termination by the club. His replacement, caretaker manager Vincenzo Guerini, then guided the team away from the relegation zone to a 13th-place finish to end the turbulent year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To engineer a resurrection of the club after the disappointing season, the Della Valle family invested heavily in the middle of 2012, buying 17 new players and appointing Vincenzo Montella as head coach. The team began the season well, finishing the calendar year in joint third place and eventually finishing the 2012\u201313 season in fourth, enough for a position in the 2013\u201314 Europa League.", "qas": [{"question": "what year did the cubs finish the 2012\u201313 europa league ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 24, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The club lost fan favourite Stevan Joveti\u0107 during the middle of 2013, selling him to English Premier League club Manchester City for a \u20ac30\u00a0million transfer fee. They also sold Adem Ljaji\u0107 to Roma and Alessio Cerci to Torino, using the funds to bring in Mario G\u00f3mez, Josip Ili\u010di\u0107 and Ante Rebi\u0107, among others. During the season, Fiorentina topped their Europa League group, moving on to the round of 32 to face Danish side Esbjerg fB, which Fiorentina defeated 4\u20132 on aggregate. In the following round of 16, however, they then lost to Italian rivals Juventus 2\u20131 on aggregate, ousting Fiorentina from the competition. At the end of the season, the team finished fourth again in the league, and also finishing the year as Coppa Italia runners-up after losing 3\u20131 to Napoli in the final.", "qas": [{"question": "how many wins did the team finish in the final season ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 25, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In 2014\u201315, during the 2015 winter transfer window, the team club sold star winger Juan Cuadrado to Chelsea for \u20ac30\u00a0million but were able to secure the loan of Mohamed Salah in exchange, who was a revelation in the second half of the season. Their 2014\u201315 Europa League campaign saw them progress to the semi-finals, where they were knocked-out by Spanish side Sevilla, the eventual champions. In the 2014\u201315 domestic season, Fiorentina once again finished fourth, thus qualifying for the 2015\u201316 Europa League. In June 2015, Vincenzo Montella was sacked as manager after the club grew impatient with the coaches inability to prove his commitment to the club, and was replaced by Paulo Sousa, who lasted until June 2017 and the appointment of Stefano Pioli. Club captain Davide Astori died suddenly at the age of 31 in March 2018. The club subsequently retired Astori's kit number, 13.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nFiorentina have had many managers and head coaches throughout their history. Below is a chronological list from the club's foundation in 1926 to the present day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The official emblem of the city of Florence, a red fleur-de-lis on a white field, has been pivotal in the all-round symbolism of the club.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over the course of the club's history, they have had several badge changes, all of which incorporated Florence's fleur-de-lis in some way. The first one was nothing more than the city's coat of arms, a white shield with the red fleur-de-lis inside. It was soon changed to a very stylised fleur-de-lis, always red, and sometimes even without the white field. The most common symbol, adopted for about 20 years, had been a white lozenge with the flower inside. During the season they were Italian champions, the lozenge disappeared and the flower was overlapped with the \"scudetto\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The logo introduced by owner Flavio Pontello in 1980 was particularly distinct, consisting of one-half of the city of Florence's emblem and one-half of the letter \"F\", for Fiorentina. People disliked it when it was introduced, believing it was a commercial decision and, above all, because the symbol bore more of a resemblance to a halberd than a fleur-de-lis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today's logo is a kite shaped double lozenge bordered in gold. The outer lozenge has a purple background with the letters \"AC\" in white and the letter \"F\" in red, standing for the club's name. The inner lozenge is white with a gold border and the red fleur-de-lis of Florence. This logo had been in use from 1992 to 2002, but after the financial crisis and resurrection of the club the new one couldn't use the same logo. Florence's \"comune\" instead granted Florentia Viola use of the stylised coat of arms used in other city documents. Diego Della Valle acquired the current logo the following year in a judicial auction for a fee of \u20ac2.5\u00a0million, making it the most expensive logo in Italian football.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Fiorentina was founded in 1926, the players wore red and white halved shirts derived from the colour of the city emblem. The more well-known and highly distinctive purple kit was adopted in 1928 and has been used ever since, giving rise to the nickname \"La Viola\" (\"The Purple (team)\"). Tradition has it that Fiorentina got their purple kit by mistake after an accident washing the old red and white coloured kits in the river.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The away kit has always been predominantly white, sometimes with purple and red elements, sometimes all-white. The shorts had been purple when the home kit was with white shorts. Fiorentina's third kit was first worn in the 1995\u201396 season and it was all-red with purple borders and two lilies on the shoulders. The red shirt has been the most worn 3rd shirt by Fiorentina, although they also wore rare yellow shirts ('97\u2013'98, '99\u2013'00 and '10\u2013'11) and a sterling version, mostly in the Coppa Italia, in 2000\u201301.", "qas": [{"question": "where is the red shirts most worn ?", "answers": [], "id": "(11, 33, 3)"}]}, {"context": "For the 2017\u201318 season and the first time in its history, the club used five kits during the season, composing of one home kit (all-purple) and four away kits, each one representing one historic quartiere of the city of Florence: all-blue (Santa Croce), all-white (Santo Spirito), all-green (San Giovanni) and all-red (Santa Maria Novella).", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Serie A:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Serie B", "qas": []}, {"context": "Serie C2 (as \"Florentia Viola\")", "qas": []}, {"context": "Coppa Italia:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Supercoppa Italiana:", "qas": []}, {"context": "European Cup:", "qas": []}, {"context": "UEFA Cup:", "qas": []}, {"context": "UEFA Cup Winners' Cup:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Coppa Grasshoppers", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mitropa Cup", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anglo-Italian League Cup", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is the UEFA club's coefficient as of 6 January 2017:\nA.C. Fiorentina S.p.A. was unable to register for 2002\u201303 Serie B due to financial difficulties, and then the sports title was transferred to a new company thanks to Article 52 of N.O.I.F., while the old company was liquidated. At that time the club was heavily relying on windfall profit from selling players, especially in pure player swap or cash plus player swap that potentially increased the cost by the increase in amortisation of player contracts (an intangible assets). For example, Marco Rossi joined Fiorentina for 17\u00a0billion lire in 2000, but at the same time Lorenzo Collacchioni moved to Salernitana for 1\u00a0billion lire, meaning the club had a player profit of 997 million lire and extra 1\u00a0billion lire to be amortised in 5-years. In 1999, Emiliano Bigica also swapped with Giuseppe Taglialatela, which the latter was valued for 10\u00a0billion lire. The operating income (excluding windfall profit from players trading) of 2000\u201301 season was minus 113,271,475,933 Italian lire (minus \u20ac58,499,835). It was only boosted by the sales of Francesco Toldo and Rui Costa in June 2001 (a profit of 134.883\u00a0billion lire; \u20ac69.661\u00a0million). However, it was alleged they were to transfer to Parma for a reported 140 million lire. The two players eventually joined Inter Milan and A.C. Milan in 2001\u201302 financial year instead, for undisclosed fees. Failing to have financial support from the owner Vittorio Cecchi Gori, the club was forced to windup due to its huge imbalance in operating income.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since re-established in 2002, ACF Fiorentina S.p.A. are yet to self-sustain to keep the team in top division as well as in European competitions. In the 2005 financial year, which cover the first Serie A season, the club made a net loss of \u20ac9,159,356, followed by a net loss of \u20ac19,519,789. In 2006 (2005\u201306 Serie A and 2006\u201307 Serie A), Fiorentina heavily invested on players, meaning the amortisation of intangible asset (the player contract) had increased from \u20ac17.7\u00a0million to \u20ac24\u00a0million. However the club suffered from the 2006 Italian football scandal, which meant the club did not qualify for Europe. In 2007 Fiorentina almost broke-even, with a net loss of just \u20ac3,704,953. In the 2007 financial year the TV revenue increased after they qualified to the 2007\u201308 UEFA Cup. Despite qualifying to the 2008\u201309 UEFA Champions League, Fiorentina made a net loss of \u20ac9,179,484 in 2008 financial year after the increase in TV revenue was outweighed by the increase in wage. In the 2009 financial year, Fiorentina made a net profit of \u20ac4,442,803, largely due to the profit on selling players (\u20ac33,631,489 from players such as Felipe Melo, Giampaolo Pazzini and Zdravko Kuzmanovi\u0107; increased from about \u20ac3.5\u00a0million in 2008). However it was also offset by the write-down of selling players (\u20ac6,062,545, from players such as Manuel da Costa, Arturo Lupoli and Davide Carcuro).", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the club failed to qualify to Europe at the end of 2009\u201310 Serie A, as well as lack of player profit, Fiorentina turnover was decreased from \u20ac140,040,713 in 2009 to just \u20ac79,854,928, despite the wage bill also falling, \"la Viola\" still made a net loss of \u20ac9,604,353. In the 2011 financial year, the turnover slipped to \u20ac67,076,953, as the club's lack of capital gains from selling players and 2010 financial year still included the instalments from UEFA for participating 2009\u201310 UEFA Europa League. Furthermore, the gate income had dropped from \u20ac11,070,385 to \u20ac7,541,260. The wage bill did not fall much and in reverse the amortisation of transfer fee had sightly increased due to new signings. \"La Viola\" had savings in other costs but counter-weighted by huge \u20ac11,747,668 write-down for departed players, due to D'Agostino, Frey and Mutu, but the former would counter-weight by co-ownership financial income, which all made the operating cost remained high as worse as last year. Moreover, in 2010 the result was boosted by acquiring the asset from subsidiary (related to AC Fiorentina) and the re-valuation of its value in separate balance sheet. If deducting that income (\u20ac14,737,855), 2010 financial year was net loss 24,342,208 and 2011 result was worse with \u20ac8,131,876 only in separate balance sheet. In 2012, the club benefited from the sales of Matija Nastasi\u0107 and Valon Behrami, followed by Stevan Joveti\u0107 and Adem Ljaji\u0107 in 2013. In 2014, due to \u20ac28.4\u00a0million drop from the windfall profit of selling players, the club recorded their worst financial results since re-foundation, despite the fact the club maintained the same level of windfall profit, the result was still worse than in 2013. Moreover, Fiorentina also revealed that the club had a relevant football net income of minus \u20ac19.5\u00a0million in the first assessment period of UEFA Financial Fair Play Regulations in the 2013\u201314 season (in May 2014). (aggregate of 2012 and 2013 results), which within the limit of minus \u20ac45\u00a0million, as well as minus \u20ac25.5\u00a0million in assessment period 2014\u201315 (aggregate of 2012, 2013 and 2014 results). However, as the limit was reduced to minus \u20ac30\u00a0million in assessment period 2015\u201316, 2016\u201317 and 2017\u201318 season, the club had to achieve a relevant net income of positive \u20ac5.6\u00a0million in 2015 financial year. \"La Viola\" sold Juan Cuadrado to Chelsea in January 2015 for \u20ac30\u00a0million fee, to make the club eligible to 2016\u201317 edition of UEFA competitions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Afrobeat", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Afrobeat is a music genre which involves the combination of elements of West African musical styles such as fuji music and highlife with American funk and jazz influences, with a focus on chanted vocals, complex intersecting rhythms, and percussion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term was coined by Nigerian multi-instrumentalist and bandleader Fela Kuti, who is responsible for pioneering and popularizing the style both within and outside Nigeria. It was partially borne out of an attempt to distinguish Fela Kuti's music from the soul music of American artists such as James Brown.", "qas": [{"question": "what genre of music was james brown ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Afrobeat began in Ghana in the early 1920s. During that time, Ghanaian musicians incorporated foreign influences like the foxtrot and calypso with Ghanaian rhythms like \"osibisaba\" (Fante). Highlife was associated with the local African aristocracy during the colonial period and was played by numerous bands including the Jazz Kings, Cape Coast Sugar Babies, and Accra Orchestra along the country's coast. Nigeria later joined the Afrobeat wave in the late 60s led by Fela Kuti who experimented with different contemporary music of the time. Upon arriving in Nigeria, Kuti also changed the name of his group to Africa '70. The new sound hailed from a club that he established called the Afrika Shrine. The band maintained a five-year residency at the Afrika Shrine from 1970 to 1975 while afrobeat thrived among Nigerian youth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the term Afrobeat was coined as early as 1968, after making a trip to the United States, Kuti wasn't really making music in the category of Afrobeat. The name \u201cAfrobeat\u201d shows the significance of groove to the music, as opposed to Afrofunk.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1969, Kuti and his band went on a trip to the U.S. and met Sandra Smith, a singer and former Black Panther. Sandra Smith (now known as Sandra Isadore) introduced Kuti to many writings of activist such as Martin Luther King Jr., Angela Davis, Jesse Jackson, and his biggest influence of all Malcolm X.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Being that Kuti was interested in African American politics, Smith would inform him on the current events. In return, Kuti would fill her in on African culture. Since Kuti stayed at Smith's house and was spending so much time with her, he started to re-evaluate his music. That was when Fela Kuti noticed that he was not playing African music. From that day forward, Kuti changed his sound and the message behind his music.", "qas": [{"question": "how did kuti change his music ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 5, 4)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the african american leader who asked him on the current events ?", "answers": [], "id": "(12, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Prevalent in his and Lagbaja's music are native Nigerian harmonies and rhythms, taking different elements and combining, modernizing, and improvising upon them. Politics are essential to Afrobeat, since founder Kuti used social criticism to pave the way for social change. His message can be described as confrontational and controversial, which can be related to the political climate of most of the African countries in the 1970s, many of which were dealing with political injustice and military corruption while recovering from the transition from colonial governments to self-determination. As the genre spread throughout the African continent many bands took up the style. The recordings of these bands and their songs were rarely heard or exported outside the originating countries but many can now be found on compilation albums and CDs from specialist record shops.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Big band (15 to 30 pieces: Fela-era afrobeat) and energetic performances", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fela Kuti included the traditional Gbedu drum in his ensemble, with a percussionist pounding out a thunderous rhythm from a drum lying on its side.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many jazz musicians have been attracted to Afrobeat. From Roy Ayers in the 1970s to Randy Weston in the 1990s, there have been collaborations that have resulted in albums such as \"Africa: Centre of the World\" by Roy Ayers, released on the Polydore label in 1981. In 1994 Branford Marsalis, the American jazz saxophonist, included samples of Fela's \"Beast of No Nation\" on his \"Buckshot LeFonque\" album. The new generation of DJs and musicians of the 2000s who have fallen in love with both Kuti's material and other rare releases have made compilations and remixes of these recordings, thus re-introducing the genre to new generations of listeners and fans of afropop and groove (see Afrobeats section below).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afrobeat has also profoundly influenced important contemporary producers and musicians like Brian Eno and David Byrne, who credit Fela Kuti as an essential influence. Both worked on Talking Heads' highly acclaimed 1980 album \"Remain In Light\", which brought polyrhythmic afrobeat influences to Western music.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The horn section of Antibalas have been guest musicians on TV On The Radio's highly acclaimed 2008 album \"Dear Science\", as well as on British band Foals' 2008 album, \"Antidotes\". Some Afrobeat influence can also be found in the music of Vampire Weekend and Paul Simon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2009 the music label Knitting Factory Records (KFR) produced the Broadway Musical \"FELA!\" As said on the musical's website, the story showcased Fela Kuti's \u201ccourage and incredible musical mastery\u201d along with the story of his life. The show had 11 Tony nominations, receiving three for Best Costumes, Best Sound and Best Choreography. \"FELA!\" Was on Broadway for fifteen months and was produced by notables such as Shawn \u201cJay-Z\u201d Carter and Will & Jada Pinkett-Smith. Many celebrities were noted on attending the shows such as, Denzel Washington, Madonna, Sting, Spike Lee (who saw it eight times), Kofi Annan, and even Michelle Obama. Michelle Williams, former singer of girl group Destiny's Child, was cast as the role of Sandra Isadore.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nFrom early in the 21st century, a new type of sound, originating in Nigeria, has become increasingly prominent in African popular music.This name echoes Afrobeat, the 1970s fusion of Jazz and traditional Nigerian and Ghanaian music which is an important influence, but Afrobeats is a largely different style.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Afrobeats is not a style, per se, like Afrobeat. It simply means the new sound of Africa, which takes in diverse influences that take inspiration from its African roots and is combined with the sounds of Rap, Reggae/Dancehall, and even R&B. It's an extremely eclectic combination that makes for quite the enjoyable sound.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afrobeats is most identifiable by its signature driving drum beat rhythms, whether electronic or instrumental. These beats harken to the stylings of a variety of traditional African drumbeats across West Africa as well as the precursory genre of Afrobeat. The beat in Afrobeats music is not just a base for the melody, but acts as a major character of the song, taking a lead role that is sometimes equal to are of greater importance than the lyrics and almost always more central than the other instrumentals. Another distinction within Afrobeats is the notably west African, specifically Nigerian or Ghanaian, accented English that is often blended with local slangs, pidgin English, as well as local Nigerian or Ghanaian languages depending on the backgrounds of the performers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "DJs and producers like DJ Black, Elom Adablah, and C-Real (Cyril-Alex Gockel) for example, have been a crucial part in spreading the popularity of this form of music. Their artistic mixing of beats and sounds allow a younger audience to experience a sound that is somewhat familiar in its influences and yet uniquely African. Their mixing and promotion of popular hits on the continent is also a tried and true method for success. Often what the play in clubs, radio shows, podcasts, etc. are what become popularized both within Africa and abroad.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 2012, Afrobeats have gained mainstream recognition outside of Africa, especially within the UK. UK hits have included \"Oliver Twist\" by D'banj a Nigerian which reached 9 on the UK Singles Chart in 2012, and \"Million Pound Girl (Badder Than Bad)\" by the Ghanaian British artist Fuse ODG, which reached 5 on the UK Singles Chart in 2014. Afrobeats nightclubs are now primary features of UK's nightlife with clubs opening in most major cities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other mainstream popularity garnered by Afrobeat is shown in Canadian artist Drake's music. Drake's 2017 album \"More Life\" contains many Afrobeat and Dancehall influences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afrobeats has captured the attention of many award shows as well. For example, the BET Awards usually highlights the musical genre of Afrobeats and/or other types of music by having the category \u201cThe Best International Act.\u201d In the year 2018, the famous Nigerian afrobeats singer Davido won and when presented the award, the audience knew he was from Nigeria. When accepting his awards, Davido says, \u201cMy continent has been so blessed to influence other cultures. Let's collaborate everybody.\u201d In this statement, Davido tried to show the audience of American celebrities that African artists would love to collab and make their mark in America. In previous years other famous artists have won the category as well, such as the singer Wizkid (Nigeria) in 2017 and in 2016 the DJ Back Coffee (South Africa) won.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to David Drake, the eclectic genre \"reimagines diasporic influences and\u2014more often than not\u2014completely reinvents them.\" However, some caution against equating Afrobeats to contemporary pan-African music, in order to prevent the erasure of local musical contributions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afrobeats is primarily produced between Lagos, Accra, and London. Paul Gilroy, of \"The Black Atlantic\", reflects on the changing London music scene as a result of shifting demographics:\"We are moving towards an African majority which is diverse both in its cultural habits and in its relationship to colonial and postcolonial governance, so the shift away from Caribbean dominance needs to be placed in that setting. Most of the grime folks are African kids, either the children of migrants or migrants themselves. It's not clear what Africa might mean to them\"Many first and second generation African immigrants follow - and produce - Afrobeats music. Fuse ODG, a UK artist of Ghanaian descent, coins #TINA or This is New Africa as a means to change perceptions of Africa:\"This movement will shed light on Africa in a positive way and focus on how we can improve Africa. It's not about just plying your talents in the Western world; it's about going back home and helping Africa.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although originally a Nigerian genre Afrobeats has grown in popularity worldwide. It first made its global debut in the United Kingdom with the surge of African immigrants, however the tunes of this genre can now be heard everywhere. Iyanya, Wizkid, Sean Tizzle, D\u2019Bank, P-Square, and Davido serve as prime examples of Nigerian artists who have emerged in the global scale. Afrobeats\u2019 international popularity is likely rooted in the fact that beat/melody resemble a blend of EMD, R&B, and hip-hop thus providing a familiar tune for many. Furthermore, as English is an official language of Nigeria, artists often choose to sing/rap in English, Pidgeon English, and/or their local language. Afrobeats have expanded global conversation of Nigeria, which had previously been reduced to political unrest as a result of religious disputes. Afrobeats in a sense has created a platform for which the world can engage with Nigeria\u2019s vibrant and rich culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "American artist including Michelle Williams have used Afrobeats directly in their music or have been heavily influenced by Afro beat songs. This includes William\u2019s top hit \u201cSay Yes,\u201d a gospel song based on the Nigerian hymn \u201cWhen Jesus Say Yes.\u201d The song\u2019s beats are said to resemble the popular four-beat of house music, but in fact follows the 3-2 or 2-3 of Afrobeats. This beat is known as the clave and mixes a rhythm with a normal 4/4 beat, it is commonly seen in many forms West African music. Furthermore, there have been many collaborations between performers in the West and Nigerian artists including French Montana and Ice Prince, Rick Ross and P-Square, and Kanye and D\u2019Banj.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While Afrobeats international popularity has considerably grown its primary audience continues to be Africans, especially the diasporic communities that have come as a result of education. Many Nigerian artists tour the U.K and the United States to large immigrant audiences. DJ 3k, a Nigerian-American immigrant, and his brother Dee Money have developed a large network in Chicago, and usually bring Nigerian artists to the city. They have used this as a platform to bring these performers across the United States.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The variability in this genre allows for the production of a variety of songs, each one more exciting than the next. Regardless, it consistently relies on a set of heavy beats that make this music easy to dance to, which acts as a major draw for the genre. Furthermore, many major artists of Afrobeats have opted to sing in a manner that resemble those of American rap and hip hop. Furthermore, theses melodies are often occupied by opulent music videos filled with picturesque mansions, expensive cars, and other tropes familiar to American music videos. Other Nigerian artists have found inspiration in South Africa, mixing Afro-house, popular in South Africa, with Afrobeats. Artist like Patoranking have looked to the Caribbean for inspiration, particularly Jamaican dancehall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Notable musicians whose music have been classified as Afrobeats:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nA music festival that's recognized worldwide is \"One Africa Music Fest\". The festival has four different locations: New York City, Houston, London, and Dubai. \"One Africa Music Fest\" showcases modern Afrobeat music and talent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As stated on the official website, the main focus of the music festival is to help strengthen Africa's position in the entertainment industry on a global level. The festival also wants to create awareness to display the positive side of Africa that people don't usually know about. This Afrobeats music festival promotes collaboration between other artists, businesses and communities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Afro Beat Fest is an annual festival in Newark, New Jersey celebrating African culture including music, art, fashion, dance, crafts and cuisine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Arithmetic function", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In number theory, an arithmetic, arithmetical, or number-theoretic function is for most authors any function \"f\"(\"n\") whose domain is the positive integers and whose range is a subset of the complex numbers. Hardy & Wright include in their definition the requirement that an arithmetical function \"expresses some arithmetical property of \"n\"\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is a subset of the complex numbers ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "An example of an arithmetic function is the divisor function whose value at a positive integer \"n\" is equal to the number of divisors of \"n\".", "qas": [{"question": "what is an example of an arithmetic function ?", "answers": [], "id": "(13, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There is a larger class of number-theoretic functions that do not fit the above definition, e.g. the prime-counting functions. This article provides links to functions of both classes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many of the functions mentioned in this article have expansions as series involving these sums; see the article Ramanujan's sum for examples.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An arithmetic function \"a\" is", "qas": []}, {"context": "Two whole numbers \"m\" and \"n\" are called coprime if their greatest common divisor is 1; i.e., if there is no prime number that divides both of them.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then an arithmetic function \"a\" is", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_1 \u00a0 and \u00a0 formula_2 \u00a0 mean that the sum or product is over all prime numbers:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarly, \u00a0 formula_5 \u00a0 and \u00a0 formula_6 \u00a0 mean that the sum or product is over all prime powers with strictly positive exponent (so 1 is not included):", "qas": []}, {"context": "formula_8 \u00a0 and \u00a0 formula_9 \u00a0 mean that the sum or product is over all positive divisors of \"n\", including 1 and \"n\". E.g., if \"n\" = 12,", "qas": []}, {"context": "The notations can be combined: \u00a0 formula_11 \u00a0 and \u00a0 formula_12 \u00a0 mean that the sum or product is over all prime divisors of \"n\". E.g., if \"n\" = 18,", "qas": []}, {"context": "and similarly \u00a0 formula_14 \u00a0 and \u00a0 formula_15 \u00a0 mean that the sum or product is over all prime powers dividing \"n\". E.g., if \"n\" = 24,", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fundamental theorem of arithmetic states that any positive integer \"n\" can be represented uniquely as a product of powers of primes: \u00a0 formula_17 \u00a0 where \"p\" < \"p\" < ... < \"p\" are primes and the \"a\" are positive integers. (1 is given by the empty product.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is often convenient to write this as an infinite product over all the primes, where all but a finite number have a zero exponent. Define the \"p\"-adic valuation \u03bd(\"n\") to be the exponent of the highest power of the prime \"p\" that divides \"n\". That is, if \"p\" is one of the \"p\" then \u03bd(\"n\") = \"a\", otherwise it is zero. Then", "qas": []}, {"context": "In terms of the above the prime omega functions \u03c9 and \u03a9 are defined by", "qas": []}, {"context": "To avoid repetition, whenever possible formulas for the functions listed in this article are given in terms of \"n\" and the corresponding \"p\", \"a\", \u03c9, and \u03a9.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c3(\"n\") is the sum of the \"k\"th powers of the positive divisors of \"n\", including 1 and \"n\", where \"k\" is a complex number.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c3(\"n\"), the sum of the (positive) divisors of \"n\", is usually denoted by \u03c3(\"n\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since a positive number to the zero power is one, \u03c3(\"n\") is therefore the number of (positive) divisors of \"n\"; it is usually denoted by \"d\"(\"n\") or \u03c4(\"n\") (for the German \"Teiler\" = divisors).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Setting \"k\" = 0 in the second product gives", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c6(\"n\"), the Euler totient function, is the number of positive integers not greater than \"n\" that are coprime to \"n\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "J(\"n\"), the Jordan totient function, is the number of \"k\"-tuples of positive integers all less than or equal to \"n\" that form a coprime (\"k\" + 1)-tuple together with \"n\". It is a generalization of Euler's totient, .", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03bc(\"n\"), the M\u00f6bius function, is important because of the M\u00f6bius inversion formula. See Dirichlet convolution, below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This implies that \u03bc(1) = 1. (Because \u03a9(1) = \u03c9(1) = 0.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c4(\"n\"), the Ramanujan tau function, is defined by its generating function identity:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although it is hard to say exactly what \"arithmetical property of \"n\"\" it \"expresses\", (\u03c4(\"n\") is (2\u03c0) times the \"n\"th Fourier coefficient in the q-expansion of the modular discriminant function) it is included among the arithmetical functions because it is multiplicative and it occurs in identities involving certain \u03c3(\"n\") and \"r\"(\"n\") functions (because these are also coefficients in the expansion of modular forms).", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"c\"(\"n\"), Ramanujan's sum, is the sum of the \"n\"th powers of the primitive \"q\"th roots of unity:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Even though it is defined as a sum of complex numbers (irrational for most values of \"q\"), it is an integer. For a fixed value of \"n\" it is multiplicative in \"q\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "See Dedekind psi function.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03bb(\"n\"), the Liouville function, is defined by", "qas": []}, {"context": "All Dirichlet characters \u03c7(\"n\") are completely multiplicative. An example is the non-principal character (mod 4) defined in the introduction. Two characters have special notations:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The principal character (mod \"n\") is denoted by \u03c7(\"a\") (or \u03c7(\"a\")). It is defined as", "qas": []}, {"context": "The quadratic character (mod \"n\") is denoted by the Jacobi symbol for odd \"n\" (it is not defined for even \"n\".):", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this formula formula_30 is the Legendre symbol, defined for all integers \"a\" and all odd primes \"p\" by", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the normal convention for the empty product, formula_32", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c9(\"n\"), defined above as the number of distinct primes dividing \"n\", is additive (see Prime omega function).", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03a9(\"n\"), defined above as the number of prime factors of \"n\" counted with multiplicities, is completely additive (see Prime omega function).", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a fixed prime \"p\", \u03bd(\"n\"), defined above as the exponent of the largest power of \"p\" dividing \"n\", is completely additive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These important functions (which are not arithmetic functions) are defined for non-negative real arguments, and are used in the various statements and proofs of the prime number theorem. They are summation functions (see the main section just below) of arithmetic functions which are neither multiplicative nor additive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03c0(\"x\"), the prime counting function, is the number of primes not exceeding \"x\". It is the summation function of the characteristic function of the prime numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A related function counts prime powers with weight 1 for primes, 1/2 for their squares, 1/3 for cubes, \u2026 It is the summation function of the arithmetic function which takes the value 1/\"k\" on integers which are the k-th power of some prime number, and the value 0 on other integers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"\u03b8\"(\"x\") and \"\u03c8\"(\"x\"), the Chebyshev functions,\nare defined as sums of the natural logarithms of the primes not exceeding \"x\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Chebyshev function \"\u03c8\"(\"x\") is the summation function of the von Mangoldt function just below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u039b(\"n\"), the von Mangoldt function, is 0 unless the argument is a prime power, in which case it is the natural log of the prime:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"p\"(\"n\"), the partition function, is the number of ways of representing \"n\" as a sum of positive integers, where two representations with the same summands in a different order are not counted as being different:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\u03bb(\"n\"), the Carmichael function, is the smallest positive number such that formula_39 \u00a0 for all \"a\" coprime to \"n\". Equivalently, it is the least common multiple of the orders of the elements of the multiplicative group of integers modulo \"n\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "For powers of odd primes and for 2 and 4, \u03bb(\"n\") is equal to the Euler totient function of \"n\"; for powers of 2 greater than 4 it is equal to one half of the Euler totient function of \"n\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "and for general \"n\" it is the least common multiple of \u03bb of each of the prime power factors of \"n\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"h\"(\"n\"), the class number function, is the order of the ideal class group of an algebraic extension of the rationals with discriminant \"n\". The notation is ambiguous, as there are in general many extensions with the same discriminant. See quadratic field and cyclotomic field for classical examples.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"r\"(\"n\") is the number of ways \"n\" can be represented as the sum of \"k\" squares, where representations that differ only in the order of the summands or in the signs of the square roots are counted as different.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Given an arithmetic function \"a(n)\", its summation function \"A(x)\" is defined by\n\"A\" can be regarded as a function of a real variable. Given a positive integer \"m\", \"A\" is constant along open intervals \"m\" < \"x\" < \"m\" + 1, and has a jump discontinuity at each integer for which \"a(m)\" \u2260 0.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since such functions are often represented by series and integrals, to achieve pointwise convergence it is usual to define the value at the discontinuities as the average of the values to the left and right:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Individual values of arithmetic functions may fluctuate wildly \u2013 as in most of the above examples. Summation functions \"smooth out\" these fluctuations. In some cases it may be possible to find asymptotic behaviour for the summation function for large \"x\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "A classical example of this phenomenon is given by the divisor summatory function, the summation function of \"d\"(\"n\"), the number of divisors of \"n\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "An average order of an arithmetic function is some simpler or better-understood function which has the same summation function asymptotically, and hence takes the same values \"on average\". We say that \"g\" is an \"average order\" of \"f\" if", "qas": []}, {"context": "as \"x\" tends to infinity. The example above shows that \"d\"(\"n\") has the average order log(\"n\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Given an arithmetic function \"a(n)\", let \"F(s)\", for complex \"s\", be the function defined by the corresponding Dirichlet series (where it converges):\n\"F(s)\" is called a generating function of \"a(n)\". The simplest such series, corresponding to the constant function \"a\"(\"n\") = 1 for all \"n\", is \u03c2(\"s\") the Riemann zeta function.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The generating function of the M\u00f6bius function is the inverse of the zeta function:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Consider two arithmetic functions \"a\" and \"b\" and their respective generating functions \"F\"(\"s\") and \"F\"(\"s\"). The product \"F\"(\"s\")\"F\"(\"s\") can be computed as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is a straightforward exercise to show that if \"c\"(\"n\") is defined by", "qas": []}, {"context": "then", "qas": []}, {"context": "This function \"c\" is called the Dirichlet convolution of \"a\" and \"b\", and is denoted by formula_54.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A particularly important case is convolution with the constant function \"a\"(\"n\") = 1 for all \"n\", corresponding to multiplying the generating function by the zeta function:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiplying by the inverse of the zeta function gives the M\u00f6bius inversion formula:", "qas": []}, {"context": "If \"f\" is multiplicative, then so is \"g\". If \"f\" is completely multiplicative, then \"g\" is multiplicative, but may or may not be completely multiplicative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are a great many formulas connecting arithmetical functions with each other and with the functions of analysis, especially powers, roots, and the exponential and log functions. The page divisor sum identities contains many more generalized and related examples of identities involving arithmetic functions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Here are a few examples:", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is a formula for r in the section on class numbers below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Define the function \u03c3(\"n\") as", "qas": []}, {"context": "That is, if \"n\" is odd, \u03c3(\"n\") is the sum of the \"k\"th powers of the divisors of \"n\", i.e. \u03c3(\"n\"), and if \"n\" is even it is the sum of the \"k\"th powers of the even divisors of \"n\" minus the sum of the \"k\"th powers of the odd divisors of \"n\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adopt the convention that Ramanujan's \u03c4(\"x\") = 0 if \"x\" is not an integer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Here \"convolution\" does not mean \"Dirichlet convolution\" but instead refers to the formula for the coefficients of the product of two power series:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The sequence formula_82 is called the convolution or the Cauchy product of the sequences \"a\" and \"b\".\n<br>See Eisenstein series for a discussion of the series and functional identities involved in these formulas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since \u03c3(\"n\") (for natural number \"k\") and \u03c4(\"n\") are integers, the above formulas can be used to prove congruences for the functions. See Ramanujan tau function for some examples.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Extend the domain of the partition function by setting \"p\"(0) = 1.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet discovered formulas that relate the class number \"h\" of quadratic number fields to the Jacobi symbol.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An integer \"D\" is called a fundamental discriminant if it is the discriminant of a quadratic number field. This is equivalent to \"D\" \u2260 1 and either a) \"D\" is squarefree and \"D\" \u2261 1 (mod 4) or b) \"D\" \u2261 0 (mod 4), \"D\"/4 is squarefree, and \"D\"/4 \u2261 2 or 3 (mod 4).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Extend the Jacobi symbol to accept even numbers in the \"denominator\" by defining the Kronecker symbol:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then if \"D\" < \u22124 is a fundamental discriminant", "qas": []}, {"context": "h(D) & = \\frac{1}{D} \\sum_{r=1}^r\\left(\\frac{D}{r}\\right)\\\\", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "ANSI C", "paragraphs": [{"context": "ANSI C, ISO C and Standard C refer to the successive standards for the C programming language published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Historically, the names referred specifically to the original and best-supported version of the standard (known as C89 or C90). Software developers writing in C are encouraged to conform to the standards, as doing so helps portability between compilers.", "qas": [{"question": "who published the standards for the mp3 programming language ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first standard for C was published by ANSI. Although this document was subsequently adopted by International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and subsequent revisions published by ISO have been adopted by ANSI, \"ANSI C\" is still used to refer to the standard. While some software developers use the term ISO C, others are standards-body neutral and use Standard C.", "qas": [{"question": "who published the first standard for c ?", "answers": [], "id": "(14, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1983, the American National Standards Institute formed a committee, X3J11, to establish a standard specification of C. The standard was completed in 1989 and ratified as ANSI X3.159-1989 \"Programming Language C.\" This version of the language is often referred to as \"ANSI C\". Later on sometimes the label \"C89\" is used to distinguish it from C99 but using the same labelling method.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The same standard as C89 was ratified by the International Organization for Standardization as ISO/IEC 9899:1990, with only formatting changes, which is sometimes referred to as C90. Therefore, the terms \"C89\" and \"C90\" refer to essentially the same language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This standard has been withdrawn by both ANSI/INCITS and ISO/IEC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1995, the ISO published an extension, called Amendment\u00a01, for the ANSI-C standard. Its full name finally was \"ISO/IEC 9899:1990/AMD1:1995\" or nicknamed \"C95\". Aside from error correction there were further changes to the language capabilities, such as:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn addition to the amendment, two technical corrigenda were published by ISO for C90:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nIn March 2000, ANSI adopted the ISO/IEC 9899:1999 standard. This standard is commonly referred to as C99. Some notable additions to the previous standard include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThree technical corrigenda were published by ISO for C99:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThis standard has been withdrawn by both ANSI/INCITS and ISO/IEC in favour of C11.", "qas": []}, {"context": ", \"C11\" is the previous standard for the C programming language. Notable features introduced over the previous revision include improved Unicode support, type-generic expressions using the new codice_17 keyword, a cross-platform multi-threading API (codice_18) and atomic types support in both core language and the library (codice_19).", "qas": []}, {"context": "One technical corrigendum has been published by ISO for C11:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n, \"C18\" is the current standard for the C programming language.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As part of the standardization process, ISO also publishes technical reports and specifications related to the C language:", "qas": []}, {"context": "More technical specifications are in development and pending approval, including the fifth and final part of TS 18661, a software transactional memory specification, and parallel library extensions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "ANSI C is now supported by almost all the widely used compilers. Most of the C code being written nowadays is based on ANSI C. Any program written \"only\" in standard C and without any hardware dependent assumptions is virtually guaranteed to compile correctly on any platform with a conforming C implementation. Without such precautions, most programs may compile only on a certain platform or with a particular compiler, due, for example, to the use of non-standard libraries, such as GUI libraries, or to the reliance on compiler- or platform-specific attributes such as the exact size of certain data types and byte endianness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To mitigate the differences between K&R C and the ANSI C standard, the codice_20 (\"standard c\") macro can be used to split code into ANSI and K&R sections.\nIn the above example, a prototype is used in a function declaration for ANSI compliant implementations, while an obsolescent non-prototype declaration is used otherwise. Those are still ANSI-compliant as of C99. Note how this code checks both definition and evaluation: this is because some implementations may set codice_20 to zero to indicate non-ANSI compliance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Alien and Sedition Acts", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Alien and Sedition Acts were four laws passed by the Federalist-dominated 5th United States Congress and signed into law by President John Adams in 1798. They made it harder for an immigrant to become a citizen (Naturalization Act), allowed the president to imprison and deport non-citizens who were deemed dangerous (Alien Friends Act of 1798) or who were from a hostile nation (Alien Enemy Act of 1798), and criminalized making false statements that were critical of the federal government (Sedition Act of 1798).", "qas": [{"question": "what act was given to the president of 1774 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The Federalists argued that the bills strengthened national security during the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war with France from 1798 to 1800. Critics argued that they were primarily an attempt to suppress voters who disagreed with the Federalist party and its teachings, and violated the right of freedom of speech in the First Amendment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Naturalization Act increased the residency requirement for American citizenship from five to fourteen years. At the time, the majority of immigrants supported Thomas Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans, the political opponents of the Federalists. The Alien Friends Act allowed the president to imprison or deport aliens considered \"dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States\" at any time, while the Alien Enemies Act authorized the president to do the same to any male citizen of a hostile nation above the age of fourteen during times of war. Lastly, the controversial Sedition Act restricted speech that was critical of the federal government. Under the Sedition Act, the Federalists allowed people who were accused of violating the sedition laws to use truth as a defense. The Sedition Act resulted in the prosecution and conviction of many Jeffersonian newspaper owners who disagreed with the government.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The acts were denounced by Democratic-Republicans and ultimately helped them to victory in the 1800 election, when Thomas Jefferson defeated the incumbent, President Adams. The Sedition Act and the Alien Friends Act were allowed to expire in 1800 and 1801, respectively. The Alien Enemies Act, however, remains in effect as Chapter 3; Sections 21\u201324 of Title 50 of the United States Code. It was used by the government to identify and imprison dangerous enemy aliens from Germany, Japan, and Italy in World War II. (This was separate from the Japanese internment camps used to remove people of Japanese descent from the West Coast.) After the war they were deported to their home countries. In 1948 the Supreme Court determined that presidential powers under the acts continued after cessation of hostilities until there was a peace treaty with the hostile nation. The revised Alien Enemies Act remains in effect today.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the act that remains in effect today ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 3, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Opposition to the Federalists, spurred by Democratic-Republicans, reached new heights with the Democratic-Republicans' support of France, which was still in the midst of the French Revolution. Some appeared to desire in the United States an event similar to the French Revolution, in order to overthrow the government. When Democratic-Republicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws such as the 1791 whiskey tax, the first tax levied by the national government, and threatened to rebel, Federalists warned that they would send in the army to force them to capitulate. As the unrest sweeping Europe spread to the United States, calls for secession reached unparalleled heights, and the fledgling nation seemed ready to tear itself apart. Some of this agitation was seen by Federalists as having been caused by French and French-sympathizing immigrants. The Alien Act and the Sedition Act were meant to guard against this perceived threat of anarchy.", "qas": [{"question": "what act did the digimon act want to protect ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 4, 5)"}]}, {"context": "They were a major political issue in the elections of 1798 and 1800, controversial then, and remaining so today. Opposition to them resulted in the highly controversial Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, authored by James Madison and Thomas Jefferson. Prominent prosecutions under the Sedition Act include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe Democratic-Republicans made the Alien and Sedition Acts an important issue in the 1800 election campaign. Upon assuming the Presidency, Thomas Jefferson pardoned those still serving sentences under the Sedition Act, and Congress soon repaid their fines. It has been said that the Alien Acts were aimed at Albert Gallatin, and the Sedition Act aimed at Benjamin Bache's \"Aurora\". While government authorities prepared lists of aliens for deportation, many aliens fled the country during the debate over the Alien and Sedition Acts, and Adams never signed a deportation order.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the people who fled the country do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 6, 3)"}, {"question": "who made an important issue in the 1800 election ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Alien and Sedition Acts were never appealed to the Supreme Court, whose right of judicial review was not clearly established until \"Marbury v. Madison\" in 1803. Subsequent mentions in Supreme Court opinions beginning in the mid-20th century have assumed that the Sedition Act would today be found unconstitutional.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thomas Jefferson and James Madison also secretly drafted the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions denouncing the federal legislation, though many other state legislatures strongly opposed these resolutions. Though the resolutions followed Madison's \"interposition\" approach, Jefferson advocated nullification and at one point drafted a threat for Kentucky to secede. Jefferson's biographer Dumas Malone argued that this might have gotten Jefferson impeached for treason, had his actions become known at the time. In writing the Kentucky Resolutions, Jefferson warned that, \"unless arrested at the threshold,\" the Alien and Sedition Acts would \"necessarily drive these states into revolution and blood.\" Historian Ron Chernow says of this \"he wasn't calling for peaceful protests or civil disobedience: he was calling for outright rebellion, if needed, against the federal government of which he was vice president.\" Jefferson \"thus set forth a radical doctrine of states' rights that effectively undermined the constitution.\" Chernow argues that neither Jefferson nor Madison sensed that they had sponsored measures as inimical as the Alien and Sedition Acts themselves. Historian Garry Wills argued, \"Their nullification effort, if others had picked it up, would have been a greater threat to freedom than the misguided [alien and sedition] laws, which were soon rendered feckless by ridicule and electoral pressure\" The theoretical damage of the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions was \"deep and lasting, and was a recipe for disunion\". George Washington was so appalled by them that he told Patrick Henry that if \"systematically and pertinaciously pursued\", they would \"dissolve the union or produce coercion\". The influence of Jefferson's doctrine of states' rights reverberated right up to the Civil War and beyond. At the close of the Civil War, future president James Garfield said that Jefferson's Kentucky Resolution \"contained the germ of nullification and secession, and we are today reaping the fruits\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Alien Enemies Acts remained in effect at the outset of World War I. It was recodified to be part of the US war and national defense statutes (50 USC 21\u201324).", "qas": [{"question": "where did the digimon defend ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On December 7, 1941, responding to the bombing of Pearl Harbor, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt used the authority of the revised Alien Enemies Act to issue presidential proclamations 2525 (Alien Enemies \u2013 Japanese), 2526 (Alien Enemies \u2013 German), and 2527 (Alien Enemies \u2013 Italian), to apprehend, restrain, secure and remove Japanese, German, and Italian non-citizens. On February 19, 1942, citing authority of the wartime powers of the president and commander in chief, Roosevelt made Executive Order 9066, authorizing the Secretary of War to prescribe military areas and giving him authority that superseded the authority of other executives under Proclamations 2525-7. EO 9066 led to the internment of Japanese Americans, whereby over 110,000 people of Japanese ancestry living on the Pacific coast were forcibly relocated and forced to live in camps in the interior of the country, 62% of whom were United States citizens, not aliens.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hostilities with Germany and Italy ended in May 1945, and with Japan in August. Alien enemies, and U.S. citizens, continued to be interned. On July 14, 1945, President Harry S. Truman issued Presidential Proclamation 2655, titled \u201cRemoval of Alien Enemies\u201d. The proclamation gave the Attorney General authority regarding aliens enemies within the continental United States, to decide whether they are \"dangerous to the public peace and safety of the United States\", to order them removed, and to create regulations governing their removal. The proclamation cited the revised Alien Enemies Act (50 U.S.C. 21\u201324) as to powers of the President to make public proclamation regarding \"subjects of the hostile nation\" more than fourteen years old and living inside the United States but not naturalized, to remove them as alien enemies, and to determine the means of removal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 8, 1945, Truman issued Presidential Proclamation 2662, titled \"Removal of Alien Enemies\". The revised Alien Enemies Act (50 U.S.C. 21\u201324) was cited as to removal of alien enemies in the interest of the public safety. The United States had agreed, at a conference in Rio de Janeiro in 1942, to assume responsibility for the restraint and repatriation of dangerous alien enemies to be sent to the United States from Latin American republics. In another inter-American conference in Mexico City on March 8, 1945, North and South American governments resolved to recommended adoption of measures to prevent aliens of hostile nations who were deemed to be security threats or threats to welfare from remaining in North or South America. Truman gave authority to the Secretary of State to determine if alien enemies in the United States who were sent to the United States from Latin America, or who were in the United States illegally, endangered the welfare or security of the country. The Secretary of State was given power to remove them \"to destinations outside the limits of the Western Hemisphere\", to the former enemy territory of the governments to whose \"principles of which (the alien enemies) have adhered\". The Department of Justice was directed to assist the Secretary of State in their prompt removal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On April 10, 1946, Truman issued Presidential Proclamation 2685, titled \u201cRemoval of Alien Enemies\u201d, citing the revised Alien Enemies Act (50 U.S.C. 21\u201324) as to its provision for the \u201cremoval from the United States of alien enemies in the interest of the public safety\u201d. Truman proclaimed regulations that were in addition to and supplemented other \"regulations affecting the restraint and removal of alien enemies\". As to alien enemies who had been brought into the continental United States from Latin America after December 1941, the proclamation gave the Secretary of State authority to decide if their presence was \"prejudicial to the future security or welfare of the Americas\", and to make regulations for their removal. 30 days was set as the reasonable time for them to \"effect the recovery, disposal, and removal of (their) goods and effects, and for (their) departure.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the declaration that discussed the first us constitution ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1947 New York's Ellis Island continued to incarcerate hundreds of ethnic Germans. Fort Lincoln was a large internment camp still holding internees in North Dakota. North Dakota was represented by controversial Senator William \"Wild Bill\" Langer. Langer introduced a bill (S. 1749) \"for the relief of all persons detained as enemy aliens\", and directing the US Attorney General to cancel \"outstanding warrants of arrest, removal, or deportation\" for many German aliens still interned, listing many by name, and all of those detained by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), which was under the Department of Justice (DOJ). It directed the INS not to issue any more warrants or orders, if their only basis was the original warrants of arrest. The bill never passed. The Attorney General gave up plenary jurisdiction over the last internee on Ellis Island late in 1948.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Ludecke v. Watkins (1948), the Supreme Court interpreted the time of release under the Alien Enemies Act. German alien Kurt G. W. Ludecke was detained in 1941, under Proclamation 2526. and continued to be held after cessation of hostilities. In 1947, Ludecke petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus to order his release, after the Attorney General ordered him deported. The court ruled 5\u20134 to release Ludecke, but also found that the Alien Enemies Act allowed for detainment beyond the time hostilities ceased, until an actual treaty was signed with the hostile nation or government.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did the supreme court rule the time of release release ?", "answers": [], "id": "(15, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1988, President Reagan and the 100th Congress introduced the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, whose purpose amongst others was to acknowledge and apologize for actions of the US against individuals of Japanese ancestry during World War II. The statement from Congress agreed with the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians, that \"a grave injustice was done to both citizens and permanent resident aliens of Japanese... without adequate security reasons and without any acts of espionage or sabotage documented by the Commission, and were motivated largely by racial prejudice, wartime hysteria, and a failure of political leadership.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2015, presidential candidate Donald Trump made a proposal to ban foreign Muslims from entering the United States (as part of the War on Terror); Roosevelt's application of the Alien Enemies Act was cited as a possible justification. The proposal created international controversy, drawing criticism from foreign heads of state that have historically remained uninvolved in United States presidential elections. A former Reagan Administration aide noted that, despite criticism of Trump's proposal to invoke the law, \"the Alien Enemies Act... is still on the books... (and people) in Congress for many decades (haven\u2019t) repealed the law... (nor has) Barack Obama\". Other critics claimed that the proposal violated founding principles, and was unconstitutional for singling out a religion, and not a hostile nation. They included the Pentagon and others, who argued that the proposal (and its citation of the Alien Enemies proclamations as authority) played into the ISIL narrative that the United States was at war with the entire Muslim religion (not just with ISIL and other terrorist entities). On June 26, 2018 in the 5\u20124 decision \"Trump v. Hawaii\", the U.S. Supreme Court upheld Presidential Proclamation 9645, the third version of President Trump's travel ban, with the majority opinion being written by Chief Justice John Roberts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Antinomy", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Antinomy (Greek \u1f00\u03bd\u03c4\u03af, \"ant\u00ed\", \"against, in opposition to\", and \u03bd\u03cc\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2, \"n\u00f3mos\", \"law\") refers to a real or apparent mutual incompatibility of two laws. It is a term used in logic and epistemology, particularly in the philosophy of Kant.", "qas": [{"question": "in what philosophy is the term science used ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "There are many examples of antinomy. A self-contradictory phrase such as \"There is no absolute truth\" can be considered an antinomy because this statement is suggesting in itself to be an absolute truth, and therefore denies itself any truth in its statement. A paradox such as \"this sentence is false\" can also be considered to be an antinomy; for the sentence to be true, it must be false, and vice versa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term acquired a special significance in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804), who used it to describe the equally rational but contradictory results of applying to the universe of pure thought the categories or criteria of reason that are proper to the universe of sensible perception or experience (phenomena). Empirical reason cannot here play the role of establishing rational truths because it goes beyond possible experience and is applied to the sphere of that which transcends it.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the purpose of establishing subjective truth ?", "answers": [], "id": "(16, 2, 1)"}]}, {"context": "For Kant there are four antinomies, connected with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In each antinomy, a thesis is contradicted by an antithesis. For example: in the first antinomy, Kant proves the thesis that time must have a beginning by showing that if time had no beginning, then an infinity would have elapsed up until the present moment. This is a manifest contradiction because infinity cannot, by definition, be completed by \"successive synthesis\"\u2014yet just such a finalizing synthesis would be required by the view that time is infinite; so the thesis is proven. Then he proves the antithesis, that time has no beginning, by showing that if time had a beginning, then there must have been \"empty time\" out of which time arose. This is incoherent (for Kant) for the following reason: Since, necessarily, no time elapses in this pretemporal void, then there could be no alteration, and therefore nothing (including time) would ever come to be: so the antithesis is proven. Reason makes equal claim to each proof, since they are both correct, so the question of the limits of time must be regarded as meaningless.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This was part of Kant's critical program of determining limits to science and philosophical inquiry. These contradictions are inherent in reason when it is applied to the world as it is in itself, independently of any perception of it (this has to do with the distinction between phenomena and noumena). Kant's goal in his critical philosophy was to identify what claims are and are not justified, and the antinomies are a particularly illustrative example of his larger project.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Kant is not the only philosopher to employ the term, however. Another famous use of antinomy is by Karl Marx, in Capital Volume One, in the chapter entitled 'The Working Day'. On Marx's account, capitalist production sustains 'the assertion of a right to an unlimited working day, and the assertion of a right to a limited working day, both with equal justification'. Furner emphasizes that the thesis and antithesis of this antinomy are not contradictory opposites, but rather 'consist in the assertion of rights to states of affairs that are contradictory opposites'.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Ascending chain condition", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In mathematics, the ascending chain condition (ACC) and descending chain condition (DCC) are finiteness properties satisfied by some algebraic structures, most importantly ideals in certain commutative rings. These conditions played an important role in the development of the structure theory of commutative rings in the works of David Hilbert, Emmy Noether, and Emil Artin.\nThe conditions themselves can be stated in an abstract form, so that they make sense for any partially ordered set. This point of view is useful in abstract algebraic dimension theory due to Gabriel and Rentschler.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A partially ordered set (poset) \"P\" is said to satisfy the ascending chain condition (ACC) if every strictly ascending sequence of elements eventually terminates. Equivalently, given any weakly ascending sequence\nthere exists a positive integer \"n\" such that\nSimilarly, \"P\" is said to satisfy the descending chain condition (DCC) if every strictly descending sequence of elements of \"P\" eventually terminates, that is, there is no infinite descending chain. Equivalently, every weakly descending sequence\nof elements of \"P\" eventually stabilizes.", "qas": [{"question": "what does the `` p '' refer to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(17, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Adin Steinsaltz", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz () or Adin Even Yisrael () (born 1937) is a teacher, philosopher, social critic, and spiritual mentor, who has been hailed by \"Time\" magazine as a \"once-in-a-millennium scholar\". He has devoted his life to making the Talmud accessible to all Jews. Originally published in modern Hebrew, with a running commentary to facilitate learning, his \"Steinsaltz edition of the Talmud\" has also been translated into English, French, Russian, and Spanish. Beginning in 1989, Steinsaltz published several tractates in Hebrew and English of the Babylonian (Bavli) Talmud in an English-Hebrew edition. The first volume of a new English-Hebrew edition, the Koren Talmud Bavli, was released in May, 2012, with thirteen tractates in print by July 2014. New volumes are being released following the Daf Yomi cycle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Born in Jerusalem in 1937 to secular parents, Steinsaltz studied mathematics, physics, and chemistry at the Hebrew University, in addition to rabbinical studies. Following graduation, he established several experimental schools after an unsuccessful attempt to start a neo-Hassidic community in the Negev desert, and, at the age of 23, became Israel's youngest school principal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1965, he founded the Israel Institute for Talmudic Publications, and began his monumental work on the Talmud, including translation into Hebrew, English, Russian, and various other languages. The Steinsaltz editions of the Talmud include translation from the original Aramaic and a comprehensive commentary. Steinsaltz completed his Hebrew edition of the entire Babylonian Talmud in November 2010, at which time Koren Publishers Jerusalem became the publisher of all of his works, including the Talmud. While not without criticism (such as by Jacob Neusner, 1998), the Steinsaltz edition is widely used throughout Israel, the United States, and the world. Over two million volumes of the Steinsaltz Talmud have been distributed to date. The out-of-print Random House publication of \"\" is widely regarded as the most accurate and least redacted of any English language edition, and is sought after on that basis by scholars and collectors. Controversial Talmud passages previously obscured, omitted entirely or confined to footnotes in English translations like the Soncino Talmud, receive full exposition in the Steinsaltz Talmud. Random House halted publication of the Steinsaltz Talmud after less than one-third of the English translation had been published.", "qas": [{"question": "how much of the bible translation was published ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 2, 7)"}]}, {"context": "The Steinsaltz editions of the Talmud have opened up the world of Talmud study to thousands of people outside the walls of the traditional yeshiva, including women, who traditionally were not taught Talmud. Regarding the access that his work provides, Rabbi Steinsaltz says: \"I never thought that spreading ignorance has any advantage, except for those who are in a position of power and want to deprive others of their rights and spread ignorance in order to keep them underlings.\"", "qas": [{"question": "the steinsaltz editions of the talmud have opened up what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Rabbi Steinsaltz's classic work of Kabbalah, \"The Thirteen Petalled Rose\", was first published in 1980, and now appears in eight languages. In all, Steinsaltz has authored some 60 books and hundreds of articles on subjects including Talmud, Jewish mysticism, Jewish philosophy, sociology, historical biography, and philosophy. Many of these works have been translated into English by his close personal friend, now deceased, Yehuda Hanegbi. His latest book is a memoir-biography on the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, published by Maggid Books (2014).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Continuing his work as a teacher and spiritual mentor, Steinsaltz established a network of schools and educational institutions in Israel and the former Soviet Union. He has served as scholar in residence at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D. C., and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. His honorary degrees include doctorates from Yeshiva University, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Bar Ilan University, Brandeis University, and Florida International University. Steinsaltz is also Rosh Yeshiva of Yeshivat Hesder Tekoa.", "qas": [{"question": "what is also ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 5, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Being a follower of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson of Chabad-Lubavitch, he went to help Jews in the Soviet Union assisting Chabad's \"shluchim\" (propagators) network. Deeply involved in the future of the Jews in the former Soviet Union, Steinsaltz serves as the region's \"Duchovny Ravin\" (Spiritual Rabbi), a historic Russian title which indicates that he is the spiritual mentor of Russian Jewry. In this capacity, Steinsaltz travelled to Russia and the Republics once each month from his home in Jerusalem. During his time in the former Soviet Union, he founded the Jewish University, both in Moscow and Saint Petersburg. The Jewish University is the first degree-granting institution of Jewish studies in the former Soviet Union.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Steinsaltz has taken a cautious approach to interfaith dialogues. During a visit of a delegation of Roman Catholic cardinals in Manhattan in January 2004, he said that, \"You do not have to raise over-expectations of a meeting, as it doesn't signify in itself a breakthrough; however, the opportunity for cardinals and rabbis to speak face to face is valuable. It's part of a process in which we can talk to each other in a friendly way\", and called for \"a theological dialogue that asks the tough questions, such as whether Catholicism allows for Jews to enter eternal paradise\".", "qas": [{"question": "who has taken a approach to interfaith dialogues ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Steinsaltz and his wife live in Jerusalem, and have three children and more than ten grandchildren. His son, Rabbi Menachem (\"Meni\") Even-Israel, is the Executive Director of the Steinsaltz Center, Rabbi Steinsaltz's umbrella organization, located in the Nachlaot neighborhood of Jerusalem.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the executive director of the steinsaltz center ?", "answers": [], "id": "(18, 8, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Rabbi Steinsaltz accepted the position as Nasi (President) of the 2004 attempt to revive the Sanhedrin. In 2008, he resigned from this position due to differences of opinion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rabbi Steinsaltz is a prolific author and commentator, having written numerous books on Jewish knowledge, tradition and culture, and produced original commentaries on the entirety of Jewish canon: Tanakh (Torah, Prophets, and Writings), the Babylonian Talmud, the Mishna, the Mishneh Torah, and Tanya.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His published works include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nSteinsaltz is a popular University and radio commentator. He was invited to speak at the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies at Yale University in 1979.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Prior to his stroke, he gave evening seminars in Jerusalem, which, according to Newsweek, usually lasted until 2:00 in the morning, and attracted prominent politicians, such as the former Prime Minister Levi Eshkol and former Finance Minister Pinhas Sapir.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rabbi Steinsaltz has been honored with numerous awards throughout his lifetime to highlight his dedication to the dissemination of Jewish knowledge. On April 21, 1988, he received the Israel Prize for Jewish Studies, the first of these awards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Years later, on February 9, 2012, Steinsaltz was honored by Israeli President Shimon Peres with Israel's first President's Prize alongside Zubin Mehta, Uri Slonim, Henry Kissinger, Judy Feld Carr, and the Rashi Foundation.[15] Steinsaltz was presented with this award for his contribution to the study of Talmud, making it more accessible to Jews worldwide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Steinsaltz was also presented with the 2012 National Jewish Book Award in the category of Modern Jewish Thought & Experience by the Jewish Book Council for his commentary, translation, and notes in the Koren Babylonian Talmud. The Modern Jewish Thought & Experience award was awarded on January 15, 2013 in memory of Joy Ungerleider Mayerson by the Dorot Foundation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On May 22, 2017, Jerusalem Mayor Nir Barkat visited Steinsaltz at his home to present him with the Yakir Yerushalayim (\u201cWorthy Citizen of Jerusalem\u201d) medal. This medal of achievement was awarded to Steinsaltz to honor his hard work in writing and translating books to be studied by millions of Jews and non-Jews around the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On June 10, 2018, Steinsaltz was honored at a Gala Dinner at the Orient Hotel in Jerusalem as a public marking of his unparalleled pedagogical achievements throughout a lifetime dedicated to Jewish education. A limited-edition version of \u201cThe Steinsaltz Humash\u201d was presented to the attendees of this event.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jacob Neusner's \"How Adin Steinsaltz Misrepresents the Talmud. Four False Propositions from his \"Reference Guide\"\" (1998) displays strong disagreement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Steinsaltz's works aroused fierce opposition in parts of the Orthodox Jewish world, with many leading rabbis such as Elazar Shach, Yosef Shalom Eliashiv, and Eliezer Waldenberg harshly condemning his Talmud and other books. Waldenberg wrote that when the Steinsaltz Talmud was brought before him, he was \"shocked\" to see the way in which the Steinsaltz Talmud described the Patriarchs and Talmudic sages, as well as its approach to the Oral Torah. Waldenberg further wrote that the Steinsaltz Talmud had the power to \"poison the souls\" of those who read it. Mordechai Gifter delivered a pointed lecture on the subject, criticizing Steinsaltz and his defenders in strong terms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aharon Feldman has penned a lengthy critical review of the Steinsaltz Talmud. Among many criticisms, he writes, \"Specifically, the work is marred by an extraordinary number of inaccuracies stemming primarily from misreadings of the sources; it fails to explain those difficult passages which the reader would expect it to explain; and it confuses him with notes which are often irrelevant, incomprehensible, and contradictory.\" Feldman says he fears that, \"An intelligent student utilizing the Steinsaltz Talmud as his personal instructor might in fact conclude that Talmud in general is not supposed to make sense.\" Furthermore, writes Feldman, the Steinsaltz Talmud gives off the impression that the Talmud is intellectually flabby, inconsistent, and often trivial.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While certain members of the Haredi community might not agree with Steinsaltz's work, other Jewish leaders, Rabbis, and authors have spoken or written about their appreciation for Steinsaltz's unique educational approach. Rabbi John Rosove of Temple Israel of Hollywood featured \u201cOpening The Tanya\u201d, \u201cLearning the Tanya\u201d, and \u201cUnderstanding the Tanya\u201d on his list of the top ten recommended Jewish books. These volumes are written by Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi, the founder of the Chabad Lubavitch movement, and include commentary by Rabbi Steinsaltz. Through reading the Tanya, readers can explore all aspects of the central text of Chabad movement. Rabbi Elie Kaunfer, a rosh yeshiva and the CEO of Mechon Hadar Yeshiva, discussed his gratitude for Steinsaltz's Global Day of Jewish Learning and the opportunity created by this online platform for learning and creating a deeper connection to Torah, other Jewish text, and Jews worldwide. Rabbi Pinchas Allouche, who studied under Rabbi Steinsaltz, notes that Steinsaltz \u201cis a world scholar\u201d who \u201crevolutionized the Jewish landscape\u201d through his commentary, other writings, and educational organizations. Other members of the Jewish community, such as Zeev Katz, an Israeli Historian, have verbalized their appreciation of Steinsaltz's contribution to historical education by comparing Steinsaltz to Rashi and Maimonides, two great Jewish sages of medieval times, and classifying him as \u201ca once-in-a-millennium scholar\u201d. In addition, Ilana Kurshan, an American-Israeli author, wrote that Steinsaltz's ability to bring \u201cthe historical world of the Talmudic stages to life\u201d created an enjoyable Jewish learning experience for her when she was intensely studying Talmud.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "A. E. Housman", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Alfred Edward Housman (; 26 March 1859 \u2013 30 April 1936), usually known as A. E. Housman, was an English classical scholar and poet, best known to the general public for his cycle of poems \"A Shropshire Lad\". Lyrical and almost epigrammatic in form, the poems wistfully evoke the dooms and disappointments of youth in the English countryside. Their beauty, simplicity and distinctive imagery appealed strongly to Edwardian taste, and to many early 20th-century English composers both before and after the First World War. Through their song-settings, the poems became closely associated with that era, and with Shropshire itself.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the old english classical scholar who was best to the general public ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Housman was one of the foremost classicists of his age and has been ranked as one of the greatest scholars who ever lived. He established his reputation publishing as a private scholar and, on the strength and quality of his work, was appointed Professor of Latin at University College London and then at the University of Cambridge. His editions of Juvenal, Manilius and Lucan are still considered authoritative.", "qas": [{"question": "who was one of the great scholars who ever lived in the world ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The eldest of seven children, Housman was born at Valley House in Fockbury, a hamlet on the outskirts of Bromsgrove in Worcestershire, to Sarah Jane (n\u00e9e Williams, married 17 June 1858 in Woodchester, Gloucester) and Edward Housman (whose family came from Lancaster), and was baptised on 24 April 1859 at Christ Church, in Catshill. His mother died on his twelfth birthday, and his father, a country solicitor, remarried, to an elder cousin, Lucy, in 1873. Two of his siblings became prominent writers, sister Clemence Housman and brother Laurence Housman.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the brother of sister ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Housman was educated at King Edward's School in Birmingham and later Bromsgrove School, where he revealed his academic promise and won prizes for his poems. In 1877 he won an open scholarship to St John's College, Oxford and went there to study classics. Although introverted by nature, Housman formed strong friendships with two roommates, Moses John Jackson (1858 \u2013 January 14, 1923) and A. W. Pollard. Though Housman obtained a first in classical Moderations in 1879, his dedication to textual analysis, particularly of Propertius, led him to neglect the ancient history and philosophy that formed part of the Greats curriculum. Accordingly, he failed his Finals and had to return humiliated in Michaelmas term to resit the exam and at least gain a lower-level pass degree. Though some attribute Housman's unexpected performance in his exams directly to his unrequited feelings for Jackson, most biographers adduce more obvious causes. Housman was indifferent to philosophy and overconfident in his exceptional gifts, and he spent too much time with his friends. He may also have been distracted by news of his father's desperate illness.\nAfter Oxford, Jackson went to work as a clerk in the Patent Office in London and arranged a job there for Housman too. The two shared a flat with Jackson's brother Adalbert until 1885, when Housman moved to lodgings of his own, probably after Jackson responded to a declaration of love by telling Housman that he could not reciprocate his feelings. Two years later, Jackson moved to India, placing more distance between himself and Housman. When he returned briefly to England in 1889, to marry, Housman was not invited to the wedding and knew nothing about it until the couple had left the country. Adalbert Jackson died in 1892 and Housman commemorated him in a poem published as \"XLII \u2013 A.J.J.\" of \"More Poems\" (1936).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Meanwhile, Housman pursued his classical studies independently, and published scholarly articles on such authors as Horace, Propertius, Ovid, Aeschylus, Euripides and Sophocles. He gradually acquired such a high reputation that in 1892 he was offered and accepted the professorship of Latin at University College London (UCL). When, during his tenure, an immensely rare Coverdale Bible of 1535 was discovered in the UCL library and presented to the Library Committee, Housman (who had become an atheist while still an undergraduate) remarked that it would be better to sell it to \"buy some really useful books with the proceeds\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although Housman's early work and his responsibilities as a professor included both Latin and Greek, he began to specialise in Latin poetry. When asked later why he had stopped writing about Greek verse, he responded, \"I found that I could not attain to excellence in both.\" In 1911 he took the Kennedy Professorship of Latin at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he remained for the rest of his life. G. P. Goold, Classics Professor at University College, wrote of Housman's accomplishments: \"The legacy of Housman's scholarship is a thing of permanent value; and that value consists less in obvious results, the establishment of general propositions about Latin and the removal of scribal mistakes, than in the shining example he provides of a wonderful mind at work \u2026 He was and may remain the last great textual critic.\" Between 1903 and 1930 Housman published his critical edition of Manilius's \"Astronomicon\" in five volumes. He also edited works by Juvenal (1905) and Lucan (1926).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many colleagues were unnerved by his scathing attacks on those he thought guilty of shoddy scholarship. In his paper \"The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism\" (1921) Housman wrote: \"A textual critic engaged upon his business is not at all like Newton investigating the motion of the planets: he is much more like a dog hunting for fleas.\" He declared many of his contemporary scholars to be stupid, lazy, vain, or all three, saying: \"Knowledge is good, method is good, but one thing beyond all others is necessary; and that is to have a head, not a pumpkin, on your shoulders, and brains, not pudding, in your head.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "His younger colleague A. S. F. Gow quoted examples of these attacks, noting that they \"were often savage in the extreme\". Gow also related how Housman intimidated his students, sometimes reducing the women to tears. According to Gow, Housman (when teaching at University College London where, unlike Cambridge, he had students of both sexes) could never remember the names of his female students, maintaining that \"had he burdened his memory by the distinction between Miss Jones and Miss Robinson, he might have forgotten that between the second and fourth declension\". One of Housman's notable pupils at Cambridge was Enoch Powell.\nIn his private life Housman enjoyed gastronomy, flying in aeroplanes and making frequent visits to France, where he read \"books which were banned in Britain as pornographic\". But he struck A. C. Benson, a fellow don, as being \"descended from a long line of maiden aunts\".\nHis feelings about his poetry were ambivalent and he certainly treated it as secondary to his scholarship. He did not speak in public about his poems until 1933, when he gave a lecture \"The Name and Nature of Poetry\", arguing there that poetry should appeal to emotions rather than to the intellect.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Housman died, aged 77, in Cambridge. His ashes are buried just outside St Laurence's Church, Ludlow, Shropshire.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did housman die ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During his years in London, A. E. Housman completed \"A Shropshire Lad\", a cycle of 63 poems. After one publisher had turned it down, he helped subsidise its publication in 1896. At first selling slowly, it rapidly became a lasting success. Its appeal to English musicians had helped to make it widely known before World War I, when its themes struck a powerful chord with English readers. The book has been in print continuously since May 1896.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the completed completed in london ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The poems are marked by pessimism and preoccupation with death, without religious consolation. Housman wrote many of them while living in Highgate, London, before ever visiting Shropshire, which he presented in an idealised pastoral light as his 'land of lost content'. Housman himself acknowledged that \"No doubt I have been unconsciously influenced by the Greeks and Latins, but [the] chief sources of which I am conscious are Shakespeare's songs, the Scottish Border ballads, and Heine.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Housman began writing a new set of poems after the First World War. He was an influence on many British poets who became famous by their writing about the war, and wrote several poems as occasional verse to commemorate the war dead. This included his \"Epitaph on an Army of Mercenaries\", honouring the British Expeditionary Force, an elite but small force of professional soldiers, 'a rapier amongst scythes' sent to Belgium at the start of the war. Fighting a well-equipped and much larger German army, they suffered heavy losses.", "qas": [{"question": "when did housman start writing a new set of poems ?", "answers": [], "id": "(19, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the early 1920s, when Moses Jackson was dying in Canada, Housman wanted to assemble his best unpublished poems so that Jackson could read them before his death. These later poems, mostly written before 1910, show a greater variety of subject and form than those in \"A Shropshire Lad\" but lack the consistency of his previously published work. He published them as \"Last Poems\" (1922), feeling that his inspiration was exhausted and that he should not publish more in his lifetime. After his death Housman's brother, Laurence, published further poems in \"More Poems\" (1936), \"A. E .H.: Some Poems, Some Letters and a Personal Memoir by his Brother\" (1937), and \"Collected Poems\" (1939). \"A. E. H.\" includes humorous verse such as a parody of Longfellow's poem \"Excelsior\". Housman also wrote a parodic \"Fragment of a Greek Tragedy\", in English, published posthumously with humorous poems under the title \"Unkind to Unicorns\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "John Sparrow quoted a letter written late in Housman's life that described the genesis of his poems:\nSparrow himself adds, \"How difficult it is to achieve a satisfactory analysis may be judged by considering the last poem in \"A Shropshire Lad\". Of its four stanzas, Housman tells us that two were 'given' him ready made; one was coaxed forth from his subconsciousness an hour or two later; the remaining one took months of conscious composition. No one can tell for certain which was which.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1942 Laurence Housman also deposited an essay entitled \"A. E. Housman's 'De Amicitia'\" (there is a link to the text, below in this article, under \"Further reading\") in the British Library, with the proviso that it was not to be published for 25 years. The essay discussed A. E. Housman's homosexuality and his love for Moses Jackson. Despite the conservative nature of the times and his own caution in public life, Housman was quite open in his poetry, and especially in \"A Shropshire Lad\", about his deeper sympathies. Poem XXX of that sequence, for instance, speaks of how \"Fear contended with desire\": \"Others, I am not the first, / Have willed more mischief than they durst\". In \"More Poems\", he buries his love for Moses Jackson in the very act of commemorating it, as his feelings of love are not reciprocated and must be carried unfulfilled to the grave:", "qas": []}, {"context": "<poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "</poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "His poem \"Oh who is that young sinner with the handcuffs on his wrists?\", written after the trial of Oscar Wilde, addressed more general attitudes towards homosexuals. In the poem the prisoner is suffering \"for the colour of his hair\", a natural quality that, in a coded reference to homosexuality, is reviled as \"nameless and abominable\" (recalling the legal phrase \"peccatum illud horribile, inter Christianos non nominandum\", \"that horrible sin, not to be named amongst Christians\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Housman's poetry, especially \"A Shropshire Lad\", was set to music by many British, and in particular English, composers in the first half of the 20th century. The national, pastoral and traditional elements of his style resonated with similar trends in English music. In 1904 the cycle \"A Shropshire Lad\" was set by Arthur Somervell, who had begun to develop the concept of the English song-cycle in his version of Tennyson's \"Maud\" a little previously. Ralph Vaughan Williams produced his well-known settings of six songs, the cycle \"On Wenlock Edge\", for string quartet, tenor and piano in 1909. Between 1909 and 1911 George Butterworth produced settings in two collections, \"Six Songs from A Shropshire Lad\" and \"Bredon Hill and Other Songs\". He also wrote the orchestral tone poem \"A Shropshire Lad\", first performed at Leeds Festival in 1912.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ivor Gurney was another composer who made renowned settings of Housman's poems. Towards the end of World War 1 he was working on his cycle \"Ludlow and Teme\", for voice and string quartet (published in 1919), and went on to compose the eight-song cycle \"The Western Playland\" in 1921. One more who set Housman songs at this period was John Ireland in the song cycle, \"The Land of Lost Content\" (192021). Even composers not directly associated with the 'pastoral' tradition, such as Arnold Bax, Lennox Berkeley and Arthur Bliss, were attracted to Housman's poetry. A 1976 catalogue listed 400 musical settings of Housman's poems. As of 2016, Lieder Net Archive records 606 settings of 187 texts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest commemoration of Housman was in the chapel of Trinity College in Cambridge, where there is a memorial brass on the south wall. The Latin inscription was composed by his colleague there, A.S.F. Gow, who was also the author of a biographical and bibliographical sketch published immediately following his death. Translated into English, the memorial reads:", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1947, University College London's academic common room was dedicated to his memory as the Housman Room. Blue plaques followed later elsewhere, the first being on Byron Cottage in Highgate in 1969, recording the fact that \"A Shropshire Lad\" was written there. More followed on his Worcestershire birthplace, his homes and school in Bromsgrove. The latter were encouraged by the Housman Society, which was founded in the town in 1973. Another initiative was the statue in Bromsgrove High Street, showing the poet striding with walking stick in hand. The work of local sculptor Kenneth Potts, it was unveiled on 22 March 1985.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The blue plaques in Worcestershire were set up on the centenary of \"A Shropshire Lad\" in 1996. In September of the same year a memorial window lozenge was dedicated at Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey The following year saw the premi\u00e8re of Tom Stoppard's play \"The Invention of Love\", whose subject is the relationship between Housman and Moses Jackson.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the 150th anniversary of his birth approached, London University inaugurated its Housman lectures on classical subjects in 2005, initially given every second year then annually after 2011. The anniversary itself in 2009 saw the launch of a new edition of \"A Shropshire Lad\", including pictures from across Shropshire taken by local photographer Gareth Thomas. Among other events, there were performances of Vaughan Williams' \"On Wenlock Edge\" and Gurney's \"Ludlow and Teme\" at St Laurence's Church in Ludlow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "These lectures are listed by date of delivery, with date of first publication given separately if different.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Selected Prose\", edited by John Carter, Cambridge University Press, 1961", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Attribution of recent climate change", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Attribution of recent climate change is the effort to scientifically ascertain mechanisms responsible for recent climate changes on Earth, commonly known as 'global warming'. The effort has focused on changes observed during the period of instrumental temperature record, particularly in the last 50 years. This is the period when human activity has grown fastest and observations of the atmosphere above the surface have become available. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), it is \"extremely likely\" that human influence was the dominant cause of global warming between 1951 and 2010. The best estimate is that observed warming since 1951 has been entirely human caused.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some of the main human activities that contribute to global warming are:\nIn addition to human activities, some natural mechanisms can also cause climate change, including for example, climate oscillations, changes in solar activity, and volcanic activity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Multiple lines of evidence support attribution of recent climate change to human activities:", "qas": [{"question": "what changes to human activities: ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The IPCC's attribution of recent global warming to human activities is a view shared by the scientific community, and is also supported by 196 other scientific organizations worldwide (see also: scientific opinion on climate change).", "qas": [{"question": "how many scientific organizations does the scientific community support ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Factors affecting Earth's climate can be broken down into feedbacks and forcings. A forcing is something that is imposed externally on the climate system. External forcings include natural phenomena such as volcanic eruptions and variations in the sun's output. Human activities can also impose forcings, for example, through changing the composition of the atmosphere.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the purpose of human activities ?", "answers": [], "id": "(20, 4, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Radiative forcing is a measure of how various factors alter the energy balance of the Earth's atmosphere. A positive radiative forcing will tend to increase the energy of the Earth-atmosphere system, leading to a warming of the system. Between the start of the Industrial Revolution in 1750, and the year 2005, the increase in the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (chemical formula: ) led to a positive radiative forcing, averaged over the Earth's surface area, of about 1.66 watts per square metre (abbreviated W\u00a0m).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Climate feedbacks can either amplify or dampen the response of the climate to a given forcing.\nThere are many feedback mechanisms in the climate system that can either amplify (a positive feedback) or diminish (a negative feedback) the effects of a change in climate forcing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The climate system will vary in response to changes in forcings.\nThe climate system will show internal variability both in the presence and absence of forcings imposed on it, (see images opposite). This internal variability is a result of complex interactions between components of the climate system, such as the coupling between the atmosphere and ocean (see also the later section on Internal climate variability and global warming). An example of internal variability is the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Detection and attribution of climate signals, as well as its common-sense meaning, has a more precise definition within the climate change literature, as expressed by the IPCC. Detection of a climate signal does not always imply significant attribution. The IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report says \"it is \"extremely likely\" that human activities have exerted a substantial net warming influence on climate since 1750,\" where \"extremely likely\" indicates a probability greater than 95%. \"Detection\" of a signal requires demonstrating that an observed change is statistically significantly different from that which can be explained by natural internal variability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Attribution\" requires demonstrating that a signal is:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Carbon dioxide is the primary greenhouse gas that is contributing to recent climate change. is absorbed and emitted naturally as part of the carbon cycle, through animal and plant respiration, volcanic eruptions, and ocean-atmosphere exchange. Human activities, such as the burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use (see below), release large amounts of carbon to the atmosphere, causing concentrations in the atmosphere to rise.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The high-accuracy measurements of atmospheric concentration, initiated by Charles David Keeling in 1958, constitute the master time series documenting the changing composition of the atmosphere. These data have iconic status in climate change science as evidence of the effect of human activities on the chemical composition of the global atmosphere.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Along with , methane and to a lesser extent nitrous oxide are also major forcing contributors to the greenhouse effect. The Kyoto Protocol lists these together with hydrofluorocarbon (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF), which are entirely artificial gases, as contributors to radiative forcing. The chart at right attributes anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions to eight main economic sectors, of which the largest contributors are power stations (many of which burn coal or other fossil fuels), industrial processes, transportation fuels (generally fossil fuels), and agricultural by-products (mainly methane from enteric fermentation and nitrous oxide from fertilizer use).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas and is the largest contributor to the natural greenhouse effect, despite having a short atmospheric lifetime (about 10 days). Some human activities can influence local water vapor levels. However, on a global scale, the concentration of water vapor is controlled by temperature, which influences overall rates of evaporation and precipitation. Therefore, the global concentration of water vapor is not substantially affected by direct human emissions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Climate change is attributed to land use for two main reasons. Between 1750 and 2007, about two-thirds of anthropogenic emissions were produced from burning fossil fuels, and about one-third of emissions from changes in land use, primarily deforestation. Deforestation both reduces the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed by deforested regions and releases greenhouse gases directly, together with aerosols, through biomass burning that frequently accompanies it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A second reason that climate change has been attributed to land use is that the terrestrial albedo is often altered by use, which leads to radiative forcing. This effect is more significant locally than globally.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Worldwide, livestock production occupies 70% of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of the ice-free land surface of the Earth.\nMore than 18% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions are attributed to livestock and livestock-related activities such as deforestation and increasingly fuel-intensive farming practices. Specific attributions to the livestock sector include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "With virtual certainty, scientific consensus has attributed various forms of climate change, chiefly cooling effects, to aerosols, which are small particles or droplets suspended in the atmosphere.\nKey sources to which anthropogenic aerosols are attributed include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over the past 150 years human activities have released increasing quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. This has led to increases in mean global temperature, or global warming. Other human effects are relevant\u2014for example, sulphate aerosols are believed to have a cooling effect. Natural factors also contribute. According to the historical temperature record of the last century, the Earth's near-surface air temperature has risen around 0.74 \u00b1 0.18\u00a0\u00b0Celsius (1.3 \u00b1 0.32\u00a0\u00b0Fahrenheit).", "qas": []}, {"context": "A historically important question in climate change research has regarded the relative importance of human activity and non-anthropogenic causes during the period of instrumental record. In the 1995 Second Assessment Report (SAR), the IPCC made the widely quoted statement that \"The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate\". The phrase \"balance of evidence\" suggested the (English) common-law standard of proof required in civil as opposed to criminal courts: not as high as \"beyond reasonable doubt\". In 2001 the Third Assessment Report (TAR) refined this, saying \"There is new and stronger evidence that most of the warming observed over the last 50 years is attributable to human activities\". The 2007 Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) strengthened this finding:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other findings of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Over the past five decades there has been a global warming of approximately 0.65\u00a0\u00b0C (1.17\u00a0\u00b0F) at the Earth's surface (see historical temperature record). Among the possible factors that could produce changes in global mean temperature are internal variability of the climate system, external forcing, an increase in concentration of greenhouse gases, or any combination of these. Current studies indicate that the increase in greenhouse gases, most notably , is mostly responsible for the observed warming. Evidence for this conclusion includes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Recent scientific assessments find that most of the warming of the Earth's surface over the past 50 years has been caused by human activities (see also the section on scientific literature and opinion). This conclusion rests on multiple lines of evidence. Like the warming \"signal\" that has gradually emerged from the \"noise\" of natural climate variability, the scientific evidence for a human influence on global climate has accumulated over the past several decades, from many hundreds of studies. No single study is a \"smoking gun.\" Nor has any single study or combination of studies undermined the large body of evidence supporting the conclusion that human activity is the primary driver of recent warming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first line of evidence is based on a physical understanding of how greenhouse gases trap heat, how the climate system responds to increases in greenhouse gases, and how other human and natural factors influence climate. The second line of evidence is from indirect estimates of climate changes over the last 1,000 to 2,000 years. These records are obtained from living things and their remains (like tree rings and corals) and from physical quantities (like the ratio between lighter and heavier isotopes of oxygen in ice cores), which change in measurable ways as climate changes. The lesson from these data is that global surface temperatures over the last several decades are clearly unusual, in that they were higher than at any time during at least the past 400 years. For the Northern Hemisphere, the recent temperature rise is clearly unusual in at least the last 1,000 years (see graph opposite).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third line of evidence is based on the broad, qualitative consistency between observed changes in climate and the computer model simulations of how climate would be expected to change in response to human activities. For example, when climate models are run with historical increases in greenhouse gases, they show gradual warming of the Earth and ocean surface, increases in ocean heat content and the temperature of the lower atmosphere, a rise in global sea level, retreat of sea ice and snow cover, cooling of the stratosphere, an increase in the amount of atmospheric water vapor, and changes in large-scale precipitation and pressure patterns. These and other aspects of modelled climate change are in agreement with observations.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Finally, there is extensive statistical evidence from so-called \"fingerprint\" studies. Each factor that affects climate produces a unique pattern of climate response, much as each person has a unique fingerprint. Fingerprint studies exploit these unique signatures, and allow detailed comparisons of modelled and observed climate change patterns. Scientists rely on such studies to attribute observed changes in climate to a particular cause or set of causes. In the real world, the climate changes that have occurred since the start of the Industrial Revolution are due to a complex mixture of human and natural causes. The importance of each individual influence in this mixture changes over time. Of course, there are not multiple Earths, which would allow an experimenter to change one factor at a time on each Earth, thus helping to isolate different fingerprints. Therefore, climate models are used to study how individual factors affect climate. For example, a single factor (like greenhouse gases) or a set of factors can be varied, and the response of the modelled climate system to these individual or combined changes can thus be studied.\nFor example, when climate model simulations of the last century include all of the major influences on climate, both human-induced and natural, they can reproduce many important features of observed climate change patterns. When human influences are removed from the model experiments, results suggest that the surface of the Earth would actually have cooled slightly over the last 50 years (see graph, opposite). The clear message from fingerprint studies is that the observed warming over the last half-century cannot be explained by natural factors, and is instead caused primarily by human factors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another fingerprint of human effects on climate has been identified by looking at a slice through the layers of the atmosphere, and studying the pattern of temperature changes from the surface up through the stratosphere (see the section on solar activity). The earliest fingerprint work focused on changes in surface and atmospheric temperature. Scientists then applied fingerprint methods to a whole range of climate variables, identifying human-caused climate signals in the heat content of the oceans, the height of the tropopause (the boundary between the troposphere and stratosphere, which has shifted upward by hundreds of feet in recent decades), the geographical patterns of precipitation, drought, surface pressure, and the runoff from major river basins.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Studies published after the appearance of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report in 2007 have also found human fingerprints in the increased levels of atmospheric moisture (both close to the surface and over the full extent of the atmosphere), in the decline of Arctic sea ice extent, and in the patterns of changes in Arctic and Antarctic surface temperatures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The message from this entire body of work is that the climate system is telling a consistent story of increasingly dominant human influence \u2013 the changes in temperature, ice extent, moisture, and circulation patterns fit together in a physically consistent way, like pieces in a complex puzzle.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Increasingly, this type of fingerprint work is shifting its emphasis. As noted, clear and compelling scientific evidence supports the case for a pronounced human influence on global climate. Much of the recent attention is now on climate changes at continental and regional scales, and on variables that can have large impacts on societies. For example, scientists have established causal links between human activities and the changes in snowpack, maximum and minimum (diurnal) temperature, and the seasonal timing of runoff over mountainous regions of the western United States. Human activity is likely to have made a substantial contribution to ocean surface temperature changes in hurricane formation regions. Researchers are also looking beyond the physical climate system, and are beginning to tie changes in the distribution and seasonal behaviour of plant and animal species to human-caused changes in temperature and precipitation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For over a decade, one aspect of the climate change story seemed to show a significant difference between models and observations. In the tropics, all models predicted that with a rise in greenhouse gases, the troposphere would be expected to warm more rapidly than the surface. Observations from weather balloons, satellites, and surface thermometers seemed to show the opposite behaviour (more rapid warming of the surface than the troposphere). This issue was a stumbling block in understanding the causes of climate change. It is now largely resolved. Research showed that there were large uncertainties in the satellite and weather balloon data. When uncertainties in models and observations are properly accounted for, newer observational data sets (with better treatment of known problems) are in agreement with climate model results.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This does not mean, however, that all remaining differences between models and observations have been resolved. The observed changes in some climate variables, such as Arctic sea ice, some aspects of precipitation, and patterns of surface pressure, appear to be proceeding much more rapidly than models have projected. The reasons for these differences are not well understood. Nevertheless, the bottom-line conclusion from climate fingerprinting is that most of the observed changes studied to date are consistent with each other, and are also consistent with our scientific understanding of how the climate system would be expected to respond to the increase in heat-trapping gases resulting from human activities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the subjects discussed in the literature is whether or not extreme weather events can be attributed to human activities. Seneviratne \"et al.\" (2012) stated that attributing individual extreme weather events to human activities was challenging. They were, however, more confident over attributing changes in long-term trends of extreme weather. For example, Seneviratne \"et al.\" (2012) concluded that human activities had likely led to a warming of extreme daily minimum and maximum temperatures at the global scale.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another way of viewing the problem is to consider the effects of human-induced climate change on the probability of future extreme weather events. Stott \"et al.\" (2003), for example, considered whether or not human activities had increased the risk of severe heat waves in Europe, like the one experienced in 2003. Their conclusion was that human activities had very likely more than doubled the risk of heat waves of this magnitude.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An analogy can be made between an athlete on steroids and human-induced climate change. In the same way that an athlete's performance may increase from using steroids, human-induced climate change increases the risk of some extreme weather events.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hansen \"et al.\" (2012) suggested that human activities have greatly increased the risk of summertime heat waves. According to their analysis, the land area of the Earth affected by very hot summer temperature anomalies has greatly increased over time (refer to graphs on the left). In the base period 1951-1980, these anomalies covered a few tenths of 1% of the global land area. In recent years, this has increased to around 10% of the global land area. With high confidence, Hansen \"et al.\" (2012) attributed the 2010 Moscow and 2011 Texas heat waves to human-induced global warming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An earlier study by Dole \"et al.\" (2011) concluded that the 2010 Moscow heatwave was mostly due to natural weather variability. While not directly citing Dole \"et al.\" (2011), Hansen \"et al.\" (2012) rejected this type of explanation. Hansen \"et al.\" (2012) stated that a combination of natural weather variability and human-induced global warming was responsible for the Moscow and Texas heat waves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are a number of examples of published and informal support for the consensus view. As mentioned earlier, the IPCC has concluded that most of the observed increase in globally averaged temperatures since the mid-20th century is \"very likely\" due to human activities. The IPCC's conclusions are consistent with those of several reports produced by the US National Research Council.\nA report published in 2009 by the U.S. Global Change Research Program concluded that \"[global] warming is unequivocal and primarily human-induced.\"\nA number of scientific organizations have issued statements that support the consensus view. Two examples include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (2007), concluded that attribution was possible for a number of observed changes in the climate (see effects of global warming). However, attribution was found to be more difficult when assessing changes over smaller regions (less than continental scale) and over short time periods (less than 50 years).\nOver larger regions, averaging reduces natural variability of the climate, making detection and attribution easier.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "As described above, a small minority of scientists do disagree with the consensus: see list of scientists opposing global warming consensus. For example, Willie Soon and Richard Lindzen say that there is insufficient proof for anthropogenic attribution. Generally this position requires new physical mechanisms to explain the observed warming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Solar sunspot maximum occurs when the magnetic field of the sun collapses and reverse as part of its average 11 year solar cycle (22 years for complete North to North restoration).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The role of the sun in recent climate change has been looked at by climate scientists. Since 1978, output from the Sun has been measured by satellites significantly more accurately than was previously possible from the surface. These measurements indicate that the Sun's total solar irradiance has not increased since 1978, so the warming during the past 30 years cannot be directly attributed to an increase in total solar energy reaching the Earth (see graph above, left). In the three decades since 1978, the combination of solar and volcanic activity probably had a slight cooling influence on the climate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Climate models have been used to examine the role of the sun in recent climate change.\nModels are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when they only take into account variations in total solar irradiance and volcanic activity. Models are, however, able to simulate the observed 20th century changes in temperature when they include all of the most important external forcings, including human influences and natural forcings. As has already been stated, Hegerl \"et al.\" (2007) concluded that greenhouse gas forcing had \"very likely\" caused most of the observed global warming since the mid-20th century. In making this conclusion, Hegerl \"et al.\" (2007) allowed for the possibility that climate models had been underestimated the effect of solar forcing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The role of solar activity in climate change has also been calculated over longer time periods using \"proxy\" datasets, such as tree rings.\nModels indicate that solar and volcanic forcings can explain periods of relative warmth and cold between A.D.\u00a01000 and 1900, but human-induced forcings are needed to reproduce the late-20th century warming.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another line of evidence against the sun having caused recent climate change comes from looking at how temperatures at different levels in the Earth's atmosphere have changed.\nModels and observations (see figure above, middle) show that greenhouse gas results in warming of the lower atmosphere at the surface (called the troposphere) but cooling of the upper atmosphere (called the stratosphere). Depletion of the ozone layer by chemical refrigerants has also resulted in a cooling effect in the stratosphere. If the sun was responsible for observed warming, warming of the troposphere at the surface and warming at the top of the stratosphere would be expected as increase solar activity would replenish ozone and oxides of nitrogen. The stratosphere has a reverse temperature gradient than the troposphere so as the temperature of the troposphere cools with altitude, the stratosphere rises with altitude. Hadley cells are the mechanism by which equatorial generated ozone in the tropics (highest area of UV irradiance in the stratosphere) is moved poleward. Global climate models suggest that climate change may widen the Hadley cells and push the jetstream northward thereby expanding the tropics region and resulting in warmer, dryer conditions in those areas overall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Habibullo Abdussamatov (2004), head of space research at St. Petersburg's Pulkovo Astronomical Observatory in Russia, has argued that the sun is responsible for recently observed climate change. Journalists for news sources canada.com (Solomon, 2007b), National Geographic News (Ravillious, 2007), and LiveScience (Than, 2007) reported on the story of warming on Mars. In these articles, Abdussamatov was quoted. He stated that warming on Mars was evidence that global warming on Earth was being caused by changes in the sun.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ravillious (2007) quoted two scientists who disagreed with Abdussamatov: Amato Evan, a climate scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in the US, and Colin Wilson, a planetary physicist at Oxford University in the UK. According to Wilson, \"Wobbles in the orbit of Mars are the main cause of its climate change in the current era\" (see also orbital forcing). Than (2007) quoted Charles Long, a climate physicist at Pacific Northwest National Laboratories in the US, who disagreed with Abdussamatov.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Than (2007) pointed to the view of Benny Peiser, a social anthropologist at Liverpool John Moores University in the UK. In his newsletter, Peiser had cited a blog that had commented on warming observed on several planetary bodies in the Solar system. These included Neptune's moon Triton, Jupiter, Pluto and Mars. In an e-mail interview with Than (2007), Peiser stated that:\"I think it is an intriguing coincidence that warming trends have been observed on a number of very diverse planetary bodies in our solar system, (...) Perhaps this is just a fluke.\"Than (2007) provided alternative explanations of why warming had occurred on Triton, Pluto, Jupiter and Mars.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA, 2009) responded to public comments on climate change attribution. A number of commenters had argued that recent climate change could be attributed to changes in solar irradiance. According to the US EPA (2009), this attribution was not supported by the bulk of the scientific literature. Citing the work of the IPCC (2007), the US EPA pointed to the low contribution of solar irradiance to radiative forcing since the start of the Industrial Revolution in 1750. Over this time period (1750 to 2005), the estimated contribution of solar irradiance to radiative forcing was 5% the value of the combined radiative forcing due to increases in the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide (see graph opposite).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Henrik Svensmark has suggested that the magnetic activity of the sun deflects cosmic rays, and that this may influence the generation of cloud condensation nuclei, and thereby have an effect on the climate. The website ScienceDaily reported on a 2009 study that looked at how past changes in climate have been affected by the Earth's magnetic field. Geophysicist Mads Faurschou Knudsen, who co-authored the study, stated that the study's results supported Svensmark's theory. The authors of the study also acknowledged that plays an important role in climate change.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The view that cosmic rays could provide the mechanism by which changes in solar activity affect climate is not supported by the literature. Solomon \"et al.\" (2007) state:[..] the cosmic ray time series does not appear to correspond to global total cloud cover after 1991 or to global low-level cloud cover after 1994. Together with the lack of a proven physical mechanism and the plausibility of other causal factors affecting changes in cloud cover, this makes the association between galactic cosmic ray-induced changes in aerosol and cloud formation controversial", "qas": []}, {"context": "Studies by Lockwood and Fr\u00f6hlich (2007) and Sloan and Wolfendale (2008) found no relation between warming in recent decades and cosmic rays. Pierce and Adams (2009) used a model to simulate the effect of cosmic rays on cloud properties. They concluded that the hypothesized effect of cosmic rays was too small to explain recent climate change. Pierce and Adams (2009) noted that their findings did not rule out a possible connection between cosmic rays and climate change, and recommended further research.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Erlykin \"et al.\" (2009) found that the evidence showed that connections between solar variation and climate were more likely to be mediated by direct variation of insolation rather than cosmic rays, and concluded: \"Hence within our assumptions, the effect of varying solar activity, either by direct solar irradiance or by varying cosmic ray rates, must be less than 0.07 \u00b0C since 1956, i.e. less than 14% of the observed global warming.\" Carslaw (2009) and Pittock (2009) review the recent and historical literature in this field and continue to find that the link between cosmic rays and climate is tenuous, though they encourage continued research. US EPA (2009) commented on research by Duplissy \"et al.\" (2009):The CLOUD experiments at CERN are interesting research but do not provide conclusive evidence that cosmic rays can serve as a major source of cloud seeding. Preliminary results from the experiment (Duplissy et al., 2009) suggest that though there was some evidence of ion mediated nucleation, for most of the nucleation events observed the contribution of ion processes appeared to be minor. These experiments also showed the difficulty in maintaining sufficiently clean conditions and stable temperatures to prevent spurious aerosol bursts. There is no indication that the earlier Svensmark experiments could even have matched the controlled conditions of the CERN experiment. We find that the Svensmark results on cloud seeding have not yet been shown to be robust or sufficient to materially alter the conclusions of the assessment literature, especially given the abundance of recent literature that is skeptical of the cosmic ray-climate linkage", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "Public-domain sources", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Achiltibuie", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Achiltibuie (; or \"Field of the yellow-haired boy\") is a long linear village in Ross and Cromarty, Highland, on the Coigach coast of northwestern Scotland, overlooking Badentarbet Bay to the west. Loch Broom and the Summer Isles lie to the south. Located 10 miles (16\u00a0km) northwest of Ullapool as the crow flies. Achiltibuie is the central community of a series of townships and communities stretching from Culnacraig, through Badenscallie and Polglass (where the community hall, the primary school and the Piping School are located), Polbain, and Reiff to Achnahaird.", "qas": [{"question": "where is the yellow-haired boy located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(21, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first post office in the village opened on 28 July 1884.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a time the \"Summer Isles Smokehouse\" attracted visitors. In 2013 the community had hopes to re-establish the business.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hydroponicum, a facility for growing fresh fruit and vegetables indoors using hydroponics, was built in the village in the 1980s by Robert Irvine, then owner of the Summer Isles Hotel. The Hydroponicum was known for growing exotic fruit such as bananas all year round. It attracted up to 10,000 visitors a year until it was sold in 2007 to a company based in the Isle of Man. New greenhouses have since been built apart from the original hydroponicum buildings, and the new owners continue to grow fruit and vegetables for local businesses and residents. A community buyout attempt in 2011 by the Coigach Community Development Company fell through when the site's sellers pulled out. The building has now been demolished. Some of the former staff of the Hydroponicum run a small-scale activity known as The Achiltibuie Garden, situated nearby.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n'Coigach Community Rowing' the crew members of which coastal rowing club are all local, won the World St. Ayles Skiff Rowing Championships in July 2013 and a mixed crew from the club won the Alan Spong Trophy for 1st Mixed crew 4-oar rowing at the Thames Great River Race in September 2013. Coigach Community Rowing hand-built their two St Ayles rowing skiffs, the 'Coigach Lass' and the 'Lily~Rose' and race under the auspices of the Scottish Coastal Rowing Association, which is the governing body of St Ayles class coastal rowing around the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Roman epic The Eagle, based on the 1954 novel \"The Eagle of the Ninth\" by Rosemary Sutcliff, was filmed on location in Achiltibuie for a week in October 2009. The main location was Fox Point, Old Dornie. The Pictish village which was constructed at Fox Point was used on most days of the filming. Other sites included Achnahaird beach where a horse chase was filmed and Loch Lurgainn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The village and its residents featured in \"The Wee Mad Road\" (2008) by Jack and Barbara Maloney.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Achiltibuie is also the setting of a humorous German book about Scotland by Reiner Luyken, \"Schotten dicht\" (2015) published by \"Ullstein Verlag\", Berlin. Luyken was a multiple award-winning foreign correspondent of the German weekly paper \"Die Zeit\" until his retirement in 2017. He lives near Achiltibuie since 1978.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Adaptive expectations", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In economics, adaptive expectations is a hypothesized process by which people form their expectations about what will happen in the future based on what has happened in the past. For example, if inflation has been higher than expected in the past, people would revise expectations for the future.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One simple version of adaptive expectations is stated in the following equation, where formula_1 is the next year's rate of inflation that is currently expected; formula_2is this year's rate of inflation that was expected last year; and formula_3 is this year's actual rate of inflation:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_5 is between 0 and 1. This says that current expectations of future inflation reflect past expectations and an \"error-adjustment\" term, in which current expectations are raised (or lowered) according to the gap between actual inflation and previous expectations. This error-adjustment is also called \"\"partial adjustment\".\"", "qas": [{"question": "what is formula_5 between ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The theory of adaptive expectations can be applied to all previous periods so that current inflationary expectations equal:", "qas": []}, {"context": "where formula_7 equals actual inflation formula_8 years in the past. Thus, current expected inflation reflects a weighted average of all past inflation, where the weights get smaller and smaller as we move further in the past.", "qas": [{"question": "what does equal inflation mean in the past ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 4, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the expected inflation in the past ?", "answers": [], "id": "(22, 4, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Once a forecasting error is made by agents, due to a stochastic shock, they will be unable to correctly forecast the price level again even if the price level experiences no further shocks since they only ever incorporate part of their errors. The backward nature of expectation formulation and the resultant systematic errors made by agents (see Cobweb model) was unsatisfactory to economists such as John Muth, who was pivotal in the development of an alternative model of how expectations are formed, called rational expectations. This has largely replaced adaptive expectations in macroeconomic theory since its assumption of optimality of expectations is consistent with economic theory. However, it must be stressed that confronting adaptivity and rationality is not necessarily justified, in other words, there are situations in which following the adaptive scheme is a rational response.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adaptive expectations were instrumental in the Phillips curve outlined by Milton Friedman. For Friedman, workers form adaptive expectations, so the government can easily surprise them through unexpected monetary policy changes. As agents are trapped by the money illusion, they are unable to correctly perceive price and wage dynamics, so, for Friedman, unemployment can always be reduced through monetary expansions. The result is an increasing level of inflation if the government chooses to fix unemployment at a low rate for an extended period of time. However, in this framework it is clear why and how adaptive expectations are problematic. Agents are arbitrarily supposed to ignore sources of information which, otherwise, would affect their expectations. For example, government announcements are such sources: agents are expected to modify their expectations and break with the former trends when changes in economic policy necessitate it. This is the reason why the theory of adaptive expectations is often regarded as a deviation from the rational tradition of economics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Mexican tetra", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Mexican tetra or blind cave fish (\"Astyanax mexicanus\") is a freshwater fish of the family Characidae of the order Characiformes. The type species of its genus, it is native to the Nearctic ecozone, originating in the lower Rio Grande and the Neueces and Pecos Rivers in Texas, as well as the central and eastern parts of Mexico.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the mexican ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Growing to a maximum total length of , the Mexican tetra is of typical characin shape, with unremarkable, drab coloration. Its blind cave form, however, is notable for having no eyes or pigment; it has a pinkish-white color to its body (resembling an albino).", "qas": [{"question": "what does albino mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "This fish, especially the blind variant, is reasonably popular among aquarists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A. mexicanus\" is a peaceful species that spends most of its time in midlevel water above the rocky and sandy bottoms of pools and backwaters of creeks and rivers of its native environment. Coming from a subtropical climate, it prefers water with 6.5\u20138 pH, a hardness of up to 30 dGH, and a temperature range of . In the winter, some populations migrates to warmer waters. Its natural diet consists of crustaceans, insects, and annelids, although in captivity it is omnivorous.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Mexican tetra has been treated as a subspecies of \"A. fasciatus\", but this is not widely accepted. Additionally, the blind cave form is sometimes recognized as a separate species, \"A. jordani\", but this directly contradicts phylogenetic evidence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"A. mexicanus\" is famous for its blind cave form, which is known by such names as blind cave tetra, blind tetra (leading to easy confusion with the Brazilian \"Stygichthys typhlops\"), blind cave characin and blind cavefish. Depending on the exact population, cave forms can have degenerated sight or have total loss of sight and even their eyes. The fish in the Pach\u00f3n caves have lost their eyes completely whilst the fish from the Micos cave only have limited sight. \nCave fish and surface fish are able to produce fertile offspring.", "qas": [{"question": "what is mexicanus ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 5, 0)"}, {"question": "what animals are able to produce fertile offspring ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 5, 3)"}]}, {"context": "These fish can still, however, find their way around by means of their lateral lines, which are highly sensitive to fluctuating water pressure. Currently, about 30 cave populations are known, dispersed over three geographically distinct areas in a karst region of San Luis Potos\u00ed and far southern Tamaulipas, northeastern Mexico. Among the various cave population are at least three with only full cave forms (blind and without pigment), at least eleven with cave, \"normal\" and intermediate forms, and at least one with both cave and \"normal\" forms but no intermediates. Studies suggest at least two distinct genetic lineages occur among the blind populations, and the current distribution of populations arose by at least five independent invasions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The eyed and eyeless forms of \"A. mexicanus\", being members of the same species, are closely related and can interbreed making this species an excellent model organism for examining convergent and parallel evolution, regressive evolution in cave animals, and the genetic basis of regressive traits. This, combined with the ease of maintaining the species in captivity, has made it the most studied cavefish and likely also the most studied cave organism overall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The blind and colorless cave form of \"A. mexicanus\" is sometimes recognized as a separate species, \"A. jordani\", but this leaves the remaining \"A. mexicanus\" as a paraphyletic species and \"A. jordani\" as polyphyletic. The Cueva Chica Cave in the southern part of the Sierra del Abra system is the type locality for \"A. jordani\". Other blind populations were initially also recognized as separate species, including \"antrobius\" described in 1946 from the Pach\u00f3n Cave and \"hubbsi\" described in 1947 from the Los Sabinos Cave (both subsequently merged into \"jordani\"/\"mexicanus\"). The most divergent cave population is the one in Los Sabinos.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the most common cave found in los sabinos ?", "answers": [], "id": "(23, 8, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Another cave-adapted population of \"Astyanax\", varying from blind and depigmented to individuals showing intermediate features, is known from the Granadas Cave, part of the Balsas River drainage in Guerrero, southern Mexico, but it is a part of \"A. aeneus\" (itself sometimes included in \"A. mexicanus\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "The surface and cave forms of the Mexican tetra have proven powerful subjects for scientists studying evolution. When the surface-dwelling ancestors of current cave populations entered the subterranean environment, the change in ecological conditions rendered their phenotype\u2014which included many biological functions dependent on the presence of light\u2014subject to natural selection and genetic drift. One of the most striking changes to evolve was the loss of eyes. This is referred to as a \"regressive trait\" because the surface fish that originally colonized caves possessed eyes. In addition to regressive traits, cave forms evolved \"constructive traits\". In contrast to regressive traits, the purpose or benefit of constructive traits is generally accepted. Active research focuses on the mechanisms driving the evolution of regressive traits, such as the loss of eyes, in \"A. mexicanus\". Recent studies have produced evidence that the mechanism may be direct selection, or indirect selection through antagonistic pleiotropy, rather than genetic drift and neutral mutation, the traditionally favored hypothesis for regressive evolution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The blind form of the Mexican tetra is different from the surface-dwelling form in a number of ways, including having unpigmented skin, having a better olfactory sense by having taste buds all over its head, and by being able to store four times more energy as fat, allowing it to deal with irregular food supplies more effectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Darwin said of sightless fish:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern genetics has made clear that the lack of use does not, in itself, necessitate a feature's disappearance. In this context, the positive genetic benefits have to be considered, i.e., what advantages are obtained by cave-dwelling tetras by losing their eyes? Possible explanations include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another likely explanation for the loss of its eyes is that of selective neutrality and genetic drift; in the dark environment of the cave, the eyes are neither advantageous nor disadvantageous and thus any genetic factors that might impair the eyes (or their development) can take hold with no consequence on the individual or species. Because there is no selection pressure for sight in this environment, any number of genetic abnormalities that give rise to the damage or loss of eyes could proliferate among the population with no effect on the fitness of the population.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Among some creationists, the cave tetra is seen as evidence 'against' evolution. One argument claims this is an instance of \"devolution\"\u2014showing an evolutionary trend of decreasing complexity. But evolution is a non-directional process, and while increased complexity is a common effect, there is no reason why evolution cannot tend towards simplicity if that makes an organism better suited to its environment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Inhibition of the HSP90 protein has a dramatic effect in the development of the blind tetra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The blind cave tetras seen in the aquarium trade are all based on stock collected in the Cueva Chica Cave in the southern part of the Sierra del Abra system in 1936. These were sent to an aquarium company in Texas, who soon started to distribute them to aquarists. Since then, these have been selectively bred for their troglomorphic traits. Today large numbers are bred at commercial facilities, especially in Asia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The blind cave tetra is a hardy species. Their lack of sight does not hinder their ability to get food. They prefer subdued lighting with a rocky substrate, like gravel, mimicking their natural environment. They become semi-aggressive as they age, and are by nature schooling fish. Experiments have shown that keeping these fish in bright aquarium set-ups has no effect on the development of the skin flap that forms over their eyes as they grow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Atom probe", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The atom probe was introduced at the 14th Field Emission Symposium in 1967 by Erwin Wilhelm M\u00fcller and J. A. Panitz. It combined a field ion microscope with a mass spectrometer having a single particle detection capability and, for the first time, an instrument could \u201c... determine the nature of one single atom seen on a metal surface and selected from neighboring atoms at the discretion of the observer\u201d.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the atom reactor introduced ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Atom probes are unlike conventional optical or electron microscopes, in that the magnification effect comes from the magnification provided by a highly curved electric field, rather than by the manipulation of radiation paths. The method is destructive in nature removing ions from a sample surface in order to image and identify them, generating magnifications sufficient to observe individual atoms as they are removed from the sample surface. Through coupling of this magnification method with time of flight mass spectrometry, ions evaporated by application of electric pulses can have their mass-to-charge ratio computed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Through successive evaporation of material, layers of atoms are removed from a specimen, allowing for probing not only of the surface, but also through the material itself. Computer methods are used to rebuild a three-dimensional view of the sample, prior to it being evaporated, providing atomic scale information on the structure of a sample, as well as providing the type atomic species information. The instrument allows the three-dimensional reconstruction of up to billions of atoms from a sharp tip (corresponding to specimen volumes of 10,000-10,000,000\u00a0nm).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atom probe samples are shaped to implicitly provide a highly curved electric potential to induce the resultant magnification, as opposed to direct use of lensing, such as via magnetic lenses. Furthermore, in normal operation (as opposed to a field ionization modes) the atom probe does not utilize a secondary source to probe the sample. Rather, the sample is evaporated in a controlled manner (field evaporation) and the evaporated ions are impacted onto a detector, which is typically 10 to 100\u00a0cm away.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The samples are required to have a needle geometry and are produced by similar techniques as TEM sample preparation electropolishing, or focused ion beam methods. Since 2006, commercial systems with laser pulsing have become available and this has expanded applications from metallic only specimens into semiconducting, insulating such as ceramics, and even geological materials.\nPreparation is done, often by hand, to manufacture a tip radius sufficient to induce a high electric field, with radii on the order of 100\u00a0nm.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To conduct an atom probe experiment a very sharp needle shaped specimen is placed in an ultra high vacuum chamber. After introduction into the vacuum system, the sample is reduced to cryogenic temperatures (typically 20-100\u00a0K) and manipulated such that the needle's point is aimed towards an ion detector. A high voltage is applied to the specimen, and either a laser pulse is applied to the specimen or a voltage pulse (typically 1-2\u00a0kV) with pulse repetition rates in the hundreds of kilohertz range is applied to a counter electrode. The application of the pulse to the sample allows for individual atoms at the sample surface to be ejected as an ion from the sample surface at a known time. Typically the pulse amplitude and the high voltage on the specimen are computer controlled to encourage only one atom to ionize at a time, but multiple ionizations are possible. The delay between application of the pulse and detection of the ion(s) at the detector allow for the computation of a mass-to-charge ratio.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Whilst the uncertainty in the atomic mass computed by time-of-flight methods in atom probe is sufficiently small to allow for detection of individual isotopes within a material this uncertainty may still, in some cases, confound definitive identification of atomic species. Effects such as superposition of differing ions with multiple electrons removed, or through the presence of complex species formation during evaporation may cause two or more species to have sufficiently close time-of-flights to make definitive identification impossible.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Field ion microscopy is a modification of field emission microscopy where a stream of tunneling electrons is emitted from the apex of a sharp needle-like \"tip\" cathode when subjected to a sufficiently high electric field (~3-6\u00a0V/nm). The needle is oriented towards a phosphor screen to create a projected image of the work function at the tip apex. The image resolution is limited to (2-2.5\u00a0nm), due to quantum mechanical effects and lateral variations in the electron velocity.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the process of field emission microscopy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In field ion microscopy the tip is cooled by a cryogen and its polarity is reversed. When an \"imaging gas\" (usually hydrogen or helium) is introduced at low pressures (< 0.1 Pascal) gas ions in the high electric field at the tip apex are \"field ionized\" and produce a projected image of protruding atoms at the tip apex. The image resolution is determined primarily by the temperature of the tip but even at 78 Kelvin atomic resolution is achieved.", "qas": [{"question": "in field electron microscopy , what is a polarity ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The 10-cm Atom Probe, invented in 1973 by J. A. Panitz was a \u201cnew and simple atom probe which permits rapid, in depth species identification or the more usual atom-by atom analysis provided by its predecessors ... in an instrument having a volume of less than two liters in which tip movement is unnecessary and the problems of evaporation pulse stability and alignment common to previous designs have been eliminated.\u201d This was accomplished by combining a time of flight (TOF) mass spectrometer with a proximity focussed, dual channel plate detector, an 11.8\u00a0cm drift region and a 38\u00b0 field of view. An FIM image or a desorption image of the atoms removed from the apex of a field emitter tip could be obtained. The 10-cm Atom Probe has been called the \"progenitor\" of later atom probes including the commercial instruments.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the 10-cm atom reactor invented ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what has been called the `` progenitor '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 9, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Imaging Atom-Probe (IAP) was introduced in 1974 by J. A. Panitz. It incorporated the features of the 10-cm Atom-Probe yet \u201c... departs completely from [previous] atom probe philosophy. Rather than attempt to determine the identity of a surface species producing a preselected ion-image spot, we wish to determine the complete crystallographic distribution of a surface species of preselected mass-to-charge ratio. Now suppose that instead of operating the [detector] continuously, it is turned on for a short time coincidentally with the arrival of a preselected species of interest by applying a \"gate pulse\" a time T after the evaporation pulse has reached the specimen. If the duration of the gate pulse is shorter than the travel time between adjacent species, only that surface species having the unique travel time T will be detected and its complete crystallographic distribution displayed.\u201d It was patented in 1975 as the Field Desorption Spectrometer. The Imaging Atom-Probe moniker was coined by A. J. Waugh in 1978 and the instrument was described in detail by J. A. Panitz in the same year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern day atom probe tomography (APT) uses a position-sensitive detector to deduce the lateral location of atoms. The idea of the APT, inspired by J. A. Panitz's \"Field Desorption Spectrometer\" patent, was developed by Mike Miller starting in 1983 and culminated with the first prototype in 1986. Various refinements were made to the instrument, including the use of a so-called position-sensitive (PoS) detector by Alfred Cerezo, Terence Godfrey, and George D. W. Smith at Oxford University in 1988. The Tomographic Atom Probe (TAP), developed by researchers at the University of Rouen in France in 1993, introduced a multichannel timing system and multianode array. Both instruments (PoSAP and TAP) were commercialized by Oxford Nanoscience and CAMECA respectively. Since then, there have been many refinements to increase the field of view, mass and position resolution, and data acquisition rate of the instrument. The Local Electrode Atom Probe was first introduced in 2003 by Imago Scientific Instruments. In 2005, the commercialization of the pulsed laser atom probe (PLAP) expanded the avenues of research from highly conductive materials (metals) to poor conductors (semiconductors like silicon) and even insulating materials. AMETEK acquired CAMECA in 2007 and Imago Scientific Instruments (Madison, WI) in 2010, making the company the sole commercial developer of APTs with more than 90 instruments installed around the world in 2016.", "qas": [{"question": "what does apt stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(24, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The first few decades of work with APT focused on metals. However, more recent work has been done on semiconductors, ceramic and geologic materials, with some work on biomaterials. The most advanced study of biological material to date using APT involved analyzing the chemical structure of teeth of the radula of chiton \"Chaetopleura apiculata\". In this study, the use of APT showed chemical maps of organic fibers in the surrounding nano-crystalline magnetite in the chiton teeth, fibers which were often co-located with sodium or magnesium. This has been furthered to study elephant tusks, dentin and human enamel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Field evaporation is an effect that can occur when an atom bonded at the surface of a material is in the presence of a sufficiently high and appropriately directed electric field, where the electric field is the differential of electric potential (voltage) with respect to distance. Once this condition is met, it is sufficient that local bonding at the specimen surface is capable of being overcome by the field, allowing for evaporation of an atom from the surface to which it is otherwise bonded.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Whether evaporated from the material itself, or ionised from the gas, the ions that are evaporated are accelerated by electrostatic force, acquiring most of their energy within a few tip-radii of the sample.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Subsequently, the accelerative force on any given ion is controlled by the electrostatic equation, where \"n\" is the ionisation state of the ion, and \"e\" is the fundamental electric charge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This can be equated with the mass of the ion, \"m\", via Newton's law (F=ma):", "qas": []}, {"context": "Relativistic effects in the ion flight are usually ignored, as realisable ion speeds are only a very small fraction of the speed of light.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assuming that the ion is accelerated during a very short interval, the ion can be assumed to be travelling at constant velocity. As the ion will travel from the tip at voltage V to some nominal ground potential, the speed at which the ion is travelling can be estimated by the energy transferred into the ion during (or near) ionisation. Therefore, the ion speed can be computed with the following equation, which relates kinetic energy to energy gain due to the electric field, the negative arising from the loss of electrons forming a net positive charge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where \"U\" is the ion velocity. Solving for \"U\", the following relation is found:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let's say that for at a certain ionization voltage, a singly charged hydrogen ion acquires a resulting velocity of X\u00a0ms. A singly charged deuterium ion under the sample conditions would have acquired roughly X/1.41\u00a0ms. If a detector was placed at a distance of 1\u00a0m, the ion flight times would be 1/X and 1.41/X\u00a0s. Thus, the time of the ion arrival can be used to infer the ion type itself, if the evaporation time is known.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the above equation, it can be re-arranged to show that", "qas": []}, {"context": "given a known flight distance. F, for the ion, and a known flight time, t,", "qas": []}, {"context": "and thus one can substitute these values to obtain the mass-to-charge for the ion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thus for an ion which traverses a 1\u00a0m flight path, across a time of 2000\u00a0ns, given an initial accelerating voltage of 5000\u00a0V (V in Si units is kg.m^2.s^-3.A^-1) and noting that one amu is 1\u00d710\u00a0kg, the mass-to-charge ratio (more correctly the mass-to-ionisation value ratio) becomes ~3.86 amu/charge. The number of electrons removed, and thus net positive charge on the ion is not known directly, but can be inferred from the histogram (spectrum) of observed ions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The magnification in an atom is due to the projection of ions radially away from the small, sharp tip. Subsequently, in the far field, the ions will be greatly magnified. This magnification is sufficient to observe field variations due to individual atoms, thus allowing in field ion and field evaporation modes for the imaging of single atoms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The standard projection model for the atom probe is an emitter geometry that is based upon a revolution of a conic section, such as a sphere, hyperboloid or paraboloid. For these tip models, solutions to the field may be approximated or obtained analytically. The magnification for a spherical emitter is inversely proportional to the radius of the tip, given a projection directly onto a spherical screen, the following equation can be obtained geometrically.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Where r is the radius of the detection screen from the tip centre, and r the tip radius. Practical tip to screen distances may range from several centimeters to several meters, with increased detector area required at larger to subtend the same field of view.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Practically speaking, the usable magnification will be limited by several effects, such as lateral vibration of the atoms prior to evaporation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Whilst the magnification of both the field ion and atom probe microscopes is extremely high, the exact magnification is dependent upon conditions specific to the examined specimen, so unlike for conventional electron microscopes, there is often little direct control on magnification, and furthermore, obtained images may have strongly variable magnifications due to fluctuations in the shape of the electric field at the surface.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The computational conversion of the ion sequence data, as obtained from a position sensitive detector, to a three-dimensional visualisation of atomic types, is termed \"reconstruction\". Reconstruction algorithms are typically geometrically based, and have several literature formulations. Most models for reconstruction assume that the tip is a spherical object, and use empirical corrections to stereographic projection to convert detector positions back to a 2D surface embedded in 3D space, R. By sweeping this surface through R as a function of the ion sequence input data, such as via ion-ordering, a volume is generated onto which positions the 2D detector positions can be computed and placed three-dimensional space.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Typically the sweep takes the simple form of an advancement of the surface, such that the surface is expanded in a symmetric manner about its advancement axis, with the advancement rate set by a volume attributed to each ion detected and identified. This causes the final reconstructed volume to assume a rounded-conical shape, similar to a badminton shuttlecock. The detected events thus become a point cloud data with attributed experimentally measured values, such as ion time of flight or experimentally derived quantities, e.g. time of flight or detector data.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This form of data manipulation allows for rapid computer visualisation and analysis, with data presented as point cloud data with additional information, such as each ion's mass to charge (as computed from the velocity equation above), voltage or other auxiliary measured quantity or computation therefrom.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The canonical feature of atom probe data, is its high spatial resolution in the direction through the material, which has been attributed to an ordered evaporation sequence. This data can therefore image near atomically sharp buried interfaces with the associated chemical information.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The data obtained from the evaporative process is however not without artefacts that form the physical evaporation or ionisation process. A key feature of the evaporation or field ion images is that the data density is highly inhomogeneous, due to the corrugation of the specimen surface at the atomic scale. This corrugation gives rise to strong electric field gradients in the near-tip zone (on the order of an atomic radii or less from the tip), which during ionisation deflects ions away from the electric field normal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The resultant deflection means that in these regions of high curvature, atomic terraces are belied by a strong anisotropy in the detection density. Where this occurs due to a few atoms on a surface is usually referred to as a \"pole\", as these are coincident with the crystallographic axes of the specimen (FCC, BCC, HCP) etc. Where the edges of an atomic terrace causes deflection, a low density line is formed and is termed a \"zone line\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "These poles and zone-lines, whilst inducing fluctuations in data density in the reconstructed datasets, which can prove problematic during post-analysis, are critical for determining information such as angular magnification, as the crystallographic relationships between features are typically well known.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When reconstructing the data, owing to the evaporation of successive layers of material from the sample, the lateral and in-depth reconstruction values are highly anisotropic. Determination of the exact resolution of the instrument is of limited use, as the resolution of the device is set by the physical properties of the material under analysis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many designs have been constructed since the method's inception. Initial field ion microscopes, precursors to modern atom probes, were usually glass blown devices developed by individual research laboratories.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At a minimum, an atom probe will consist of several key pieces of equipment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nOptionally, an atom probe may also include laser-optical systems for laser beam targeting and pulsing, if using laser-evaporation methods. In-situ reaction systems, heaters, or plasma treatment may also be employed for some studies as well as pure noble gas introduction for FIM.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Collectable ion volumes were previously limited to several thousand, or tens of thousands of ionic events. Subsequent electronics and instrumentation development has increased the rate of data accumulation, with datasets of hundreds of million atoms (dataset volumes of 10\u00a0nm). Data collection times vary considerably depending upon the experimental conditions and the number of ions collected. Experiments take from a few minutes, to many hours to complete.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Atom probe has typically been employed in the chemical analysis of alloy systems at the atomic level. This has arisen as a result of voltage pulsed atom probes providing good chemical and sufficient spatial information in these materials. Metal samples from large grained alloys may be simple to fabricate, particularly from wire samples, with hand-electropolishing techniques giving good results.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Subsequently, atom probe has been used in the analysis of the chemical composition of a wide range of alloys.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Such data is critical in determining the effect of alloy constituents in a bulk material, identification of solid-state reaction features, such as solid phase precipitates. Such information may not be amenable to analysis by other means (e.g. TEM) owing to the difficulty in generating a three-dimensional dataset with composition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Semi-conductor materials are often analysable in atom probe, however sample preparation may be more difficult, and interpretation of results may be more complex, particularly if the semi-conductor contains phases which evaporate at differing electric field strengths.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Applications such as ion implantation may be used to identify the distribution of dopants inside a semi-conducting material, which is increasingly critical in the correct design of modern nanometre scale electronics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Al Capone", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Alphonse Gabriel Capone (; ; January 17, 1899\u00a0\u2013 January 25, 1947), sometimes known by the nickname \"Scarface\", was an American gangster and businessman who attained notoriety during the Prohibition era as the co-founder and boss of the Chicago Outfit. His seven-year reign as crime boss ended when he was 33.", "qas": [{"question": "what happened to eisenhower 's death ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Capone was born in New York City, to Italian immigrants. He was a Five Points Gang member who became a bouncer in organized crime premises such as brothels. In his early twenties, he moved to Chicago and became a bodyguard and trusted factotum for Johnny Torrio, head of a criminal syndicate that illegally supplied alcohol\u2014the forerunner of the Outfit\u2014and was politically protected through the Unione Siciliana. A conflict with the North Side Gang was instrumental in Capone's rise and fall. Torrio went into retirement after North Side gunmen almost killed him, handing control to Capone. Capone expanded the bootlegging business through increasingly violent means, but his mutually profitable relationships with mayor William Hale Thompson and the city's police meant he seemed safe from law enforcement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone apparently reveled in attention, such as the cheers from spectators when he appeared at ball games. He made donations to various charities and was viewed by many as \"modern-day Robin Hood\". However, the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre, in which seven gang rivals were murdered in broad daylight, damaged Chicago's and Capone's image, leading influential citizens to demand government action and newspapers to dub Capone \"Public Enemy No. 1\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The federal authorities became intent on jailing Capone and prosecuted him in 1931 for tax evasion. During a highly publicized case, the judge admitted as evidence Capone's admissions of his income and unpaid taxes during prior (and ultimately abortive) negotiations to pay the government taxes he owed. He was convicted and sentenced to 11 years in federal prison. After conviction, he replaced his defense team with experts in tax law, and his grounds for appeal were strengthened by a Supreme Court ruling, but his appeal ultimately failed. Capone showed signs of syphilitic dementia early in his sentence and became increasingly debilitated before being released after eight years of incarceration. On January 25, 1947, Capone died of cardiac arrest after suffering a stroke.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Al Capone was born in the Brooklyn borough of New York City on January 17, 1899. His parents were Italian immigrants Gabriele Capone (1865\u20131920) and Teresa Capone (n\u00e9e Raiola; 1867\u20131952). His father was a barber and his mother was a seamstress, both born in Angri, a town in the Province of Salerno.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gabriele and Teresa had nine children: Alphonse \"Al\" Capone; Vincenzo Capone, who later changed his name to Richard Hart and became a Prohibition agent in Homer, Nebraska; Raffaele James Capone, AKA Ralph \"Bottles\" Capone, who took charge of his brother's beverage industry; Salvatore \"Frank\" Capone, Ermina Capone, who died at the age of one, Ermino \"John\" Capone, Albert Capone, Matthew Capone, and Mafalda Capone (who married John J. Maritote). Ralph and Frank worked with him in his criminal empire. Frank did so until his death on April 1, 1924. Ralph ran the bottling companies (both legal and illegal) early on, and was also the front man for the Chicago Outfit for some time until he was imprisoned for tax evasion in 1932.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the front man for some time ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 5, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Capone family immigrated to the United States, after first moving to nearby Fiume in Austria-Hungary in 1893. From that port city they traveled on a ship to the U.S., where they settled at 95 Navy Street, in the Navy Yard section of downtown Brooklyn. Gabriele Capone worked at a nearby barber shop at 29 Park Avenue. When Al was 11, the Capone family moved to 38 Garfield Place in Park Slope, Brooklyn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone showed promise as a student, but had trouble with the rules at his strict parochial Catholic school. His schooling ended at the age of 14, after he was expelled for hitting a female teacher in the face. He worked at odd jobs around Brooklyn, including a candy store and a bowling alley. During this time, Capone was influenced by gangster Johnny Torrio, whom he came to regard as a mentor.", "qas": [{"question": "who influenced capone ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 7, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Capone initially became involved with small-time gangs that included the Junior Forty Thieves and the Bowery Boys. He then joined the Brooklyn Rippers, and then the powerful Five Points Gang based in Lower Manhattan. During this time, he was employed and mentored by fellow racketeer Frankie Yale, a bartender in a Coney Island dance hall and saloon called the Harvard Inn. Capone inadvertently insulted a woman while working the door at a Brooklyn night club and was slashed by her brother Frank Gallucio. The wounds led to the nickname \"Scarface\" which Capone loathed. When he was photographed, he hid the scarred left side of his face, saying that the injuries were war wounds. He was called \"Snorky\" by his closest friends, a term for a sharp dresser.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone married Mae Josephine Coughlin at age 19 on December 30, 1918. She was Irish Catholic and earlier that month had given birth to their son Albert Francis \"Sonny\" Capone. Capone was under the age of 21, and his parents had to consent in writing to the marriage. By all accounts, the two had a happy marriage despite his gang life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At about 20 years of age, Capone left New York for Chicago at the invitation of Johnny Torrio, who was imported by crime boss James \"Big Jim\" Colosimo as an enforcer. Capone began in Chicago as a bouncer in a brothel, where he contracted syphilis. Timely use of Salvarsan probably could have cured the infection, but he apparently never sought treatment. In 1923, he purchased a small house at 7244 South Prairie Avenue in the Park Manor neighborhood on the city's south side for . In the early years of the decade, his name began appearing in newspaper sports pages where he was described as a boxing promoter. Torrio took over Colosimo's crime empire after Colosimo's murder on May 11, 1920, in which Capone was suspected of being involved.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the group who imported new york for chicago ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 10, 0)"}, {"question": "who took over colosimo's crime ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 10, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Torrio headed an essentially Italian organized crime group that was the biggest in the city, with Capone as his right-hand man. He was wary of being drawn into gang wars and tried to negotiate agreements over territory between rival crime groups. The smaller North Side Gang led by Dean O'Banion (also known as Dion O'Banion) was of mixed ethnicity, and it came under pressure from the Genna brothers who were allied with Torrio. O'Banion found that Torrio was unhelpful with the encroachment of the Gennas into the North Side, despite his pretensions to be a settler of disputes. In a fateful step, Torrio either arranged for or acquiesced to the murder of O'Banion at his flower shop in October 1924. This placed Hymie Weiss at the head of the gang, backed by Vincent Drucci and Bugs Moran. Weiss had been a close friend of O'Banion, and the North Siders made it a priority to get revenge on his killers.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the concern of weiss ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 11, 6)"}, {"question": "what was the biggest italian organized crime group ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Al Capone was a frequent visitor to RyeMabee in Monteagle, Tennessee \"when he was traveling between Chicago and his Florida estate in Miami.\"", "qas": [{"question": "where was al capone born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In January 1925, Capone was ambushed, leaving him shaken but unhurt. Twelve days later, Torrio was returning from a shopping trip when he was shot several times. After recovering, he effectively resigned and handed control to Capone, age 26, who became the new boss of an organization that took in illegal breweries and a transportation network that reached to Canada, with political and law-enforcement protection. In turn, he was able to use more violence to increase revenue. An establishment that refused to purchase liquor from him often got blown up, and as many as 100 people were killed in such bombings during the 1920s. Rivals saw Capone as responsible for the proliferation of brothels in the city.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone indulged in custom suits, cigars, gourmet food and drink (his preferred liquor was Templeton Rye from Iowa), and female companionship. He was particularly known for his flamboyant and costly jewelry. His favorite responses to questions about his activities were: \"I am just a businessman, giving the people what they want\"; and, \"All I do is satisfy a public demand.\" Capone had become a national celebrity and talking point.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He based himself in Cicero, Illinois after using bribery and widespread intimidation to take over town council elections, and this made it difficult for the North Siders to target him. His driver was found tortured and murdered, and there was an attempt on Weiss's life in the Chicago Loop. On September 20, 1926, the North Side Gang used a ploy outside the Capone headquarters at the Hawthorne Inn, aimed at drawing him to the windows. Gunmen in several cars then opened fire with Thompson submachine guns and shotguns at the windows of the first-floor restaurant. Capone was unhurt and called for a truce, but the negotiations fell through. Three weeks later, Weiss was killed outside the former O'Banion flower shop North Side headquarters. The owner of Hawthorne's restaurant was a friend of Capone's, and he was kidnapped and killed by Moran and Drucci in January 1927.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone became increasingly security-minded and desirous of getting away from Chicago. As a precaution, he and his entourage would often show up suddenly at one of Chicago's train depots and buy up an entire Pullman sleeper car on a night train to Cleveland, Omaha, Kansas City, Little Rock, or Hot Springs, where they would spend a week in luxury hotel suites under assumed names. In 1928, Capone paid $40,000 to beer magnate August Busch for a 14-room retreat at 93 Palm Avenue on Palm Island, Florida in Biscayne Bay between Miami and Miami Beach. He never registered any property under his name. He did not even have a bank account, but always used Western Union for cash delivery, not more than $1,000. In an effort to clean up his image, Capone sponsored a soup kitchen in Chicago during the Depression.", "qas": [{"question": "where did capone get away from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 16, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the name of the food factory in chicago ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 16, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The protagonists of Chicago's politics had long been associated with questionable methods, and even newspaper circulation \"wars\", but the need for bootleggers to have protection in city hall introduced a far more serious level of violence and graft. Capone is generally seen as having an appreciable effect in bringing about the victories of Republican William Hale Thompson, especially in the 1927 mayoral race when Thompson campaigned for a wide open town, at one time hinting that he'd reopen illegal saloons. Such a proclamation helped his campaign gain the support of Capone, and he allegedly accepted a contribution of $250,000 from the gangster. In the 1927 mayoral race, Thompson beat William Emmett Dever by a relatively slim margin. Thompson's powerful Cook County political machine had drawn on the often-parochial Italian community, but this was in tension with his highly successful courting of African Americans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone continued to back Thompson. Voting booths were targeted by Capone's bomber James Belcastro in the wards where Thompson's opponents were thought to have support, on the polling day of April 10, 1928, in the so-called Pineapple Primary, causing the deaths of at least 15 people. Belcastro was accused of the murder of lawyer Octavius Granady, an African American who challenged Thompson's candidate for the African American vote, and was chased through the streets on polling day by cars of gunmen before being shot dead. Four policemen were among those charged along with Belcastro, but all charges were dropped after key witnesses recanted their statements. An indication of the attitude of local law enforcement to Capone's organization came in 1931 when Belcastro was wounded in a shooting; police suggested to skeptical journalists that Belcastro was an independent operator.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 1929 Saint Valentine's Day Massacre led to public disquiet about Thompson's alliance with Capone and was a factor in Anton J. Cermak winning the mayoral election on April 6, 1931.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone was widely assumed to have been responsible for ordering the 1929 Saint Valentine's Day Massacre in an attempt to eliminate Bugs Moran, head of the North Side Gang. Moran was the last survivor of the North Side gunmen; his succession had come about because his similarly aggressive predecessors Vincent Drucci and Hymie Weiss had been killed in the violence that followed the murder of original leader Dean O'Banion.", "qas": [{"question": "what year was saint valentine's day massacre ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "To monitor their targets' habits and movements, Capone's men rented an apartment across from the trucking warehouse and garage at 2122 North Clark Street, which served as Moran's headquarters. On the morning of Thursday, February 14, 1929, Capone's lookouts signaled gunmen disguised as police officers to initiate a \"police raid\". The \"faux\" police lined the seven victims along a wall and signaled for accomplices armed with machine guns and shotguns. Photos of the slain victims shocked the public and damaged Capone's reputation. Within days, Capone received a summons to testify before a Chicago grand jury on charges of federal Prohibition violations, but he claimed to be too unwell to attend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone was primarily known for ordering other men to do his dirty work for him. One story, however, has Capone, having discovered that three of his men\u2014Scalise, Anselmi, and Giunta\u2014were conspiring against him with a rival gangster, Joe Aiello, reportedly arranging for the conspirators to dine with him and his bodyguards. After a night of drinking, Capone beat the men with a baseball bat and then ordered his bodyguards to shoot them, a scene that was included in the 1987 film \"The Untouchables\". Deirdre Bair, along with writers and historians such as William Elliot Hazelgrove, have questioned the veracity of the claim. Bair questioned why \"three trained killers could sit quietly and let this happen\", while Hazelgrove stated that Capone would have been \"hard pressed to beat three men to death with a baseball bat\" and that he would have instead let an enforcer perform the murders. But despite claims that the story was first reported by author Walter Noble Burns in his 1931 book \"The One-way Ride: The red trail of Chicago gangland from prohibition to Jake Lingle\", Capone biographers Max Allan Collins and A. Brad Schwartz have found versions of the story in press coverage shortly after the crime. Collins and Schwartz suggest that similarities among reported versions of the story indicate a basis in truth and that the Outfit deliberately spread the tale to enhance Capone's fearsome reputation. George Meyer, an associate of Capone's, also claimed to have witnessed both the planning of the murders and the event itself.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On March 27, 1929, Capone was arrested by FBI agents as he left a Chicago courtroom after testifying to a grand jury that was investigating violations of federal prohibition laws. He was charged with contempt of court for feigning illness to avoid an earlier appearance. In May 1929, Capone was sentenced to a prison term in Philadelphia's Eastern State Penitentiary; he was convicted within 16 hours of being arrested for carrying a gun during a trip there. A week after his release in March 1930, Capone was listed as the number one \"Public Enemy\" on the unofficial Chicago Crime Commission's widely publicized list.", "qas": [{"question": "who was listed as the number one public enemy ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 23, 3)"}, {"question": "who arrested the complaints of federal statutory laws ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In April 1930, Capone was arrested on vagrancy charges when visiting Miami Beach; the governor had ordered sheriffs to run him out of the state. Capone claimed that Miami police had refused him food and water and threatened to arrest his family. He was charged with perjury for making these statements, but was acquitted after a three-day trial in July. In September, a Chicago judge issued a warrant for Capone's arrest on charges of vagrancy, and then used the publicity to run against Thompson in the Republican primary. In February 1931, Capone was tried on the contempt of court charge. In court, Judge James Herbert Wilkerson intervened to reinforce questioning of Capone's doctor by the prosecutor. Wilkerson sentenced Capone to six months, but he remained free while on appeal of the contempt conviction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Assistant Attorney General Mabel Walker Willebrandt recognized that mob figures publicly led lavish lifestyles yet never filed tax returns, and thus could be convicted of tax evasion without requiring hard evidence to get testimony about their other crimes. She tested this approach by prosecuting a South Carolina bootlegger. In 1927, the Supreme Court ruled in \"United States v. Sullivan\" that illegally earned income was subject to income tax; Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. rejected the argument that the Fifth Amendment protected criminals from reporting illegal income.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The IRS special investigation unit chose Frank J. Wilson to investigate Capone, with the focus on his spending. The key to Capone's conviction on tax charges was proving his income, and the most valuable evidence in that regard originated in his offer to pay tax. Ralph, his brother and a gangster in his own right, was tried for tax evasion in 1930. Ralph spent the next three years in prison after being convicted in a two-week trial over which Wilkerson presided. Capone ordered his lawyer to regularize his tax position. Crucially, during the ultimately abortive negotiations that followed, his lawyer stated the income that Capone was willing to pay tax on for various years, admitting income of $100,000 for 1928 and 1929, for instance. Hence, without any investigation, the government had been given a letter from a lawyer acting for Capone conceding his large taxable income for certain years. In 1931, Capone was charged with income tax evasion, as well as with various violations of the Volstead Act (Prohibition) at the Chicago Federal Building in the courtroom of Judge James Herbert Wilkerson. U. S. Attorney George E. Q. Johnson agreed to a deal that he hoped might result in the judge giving Capone a couple of years, but Judge Wilkerson had been aware of the deal all along and refused to allow Capone to plead guilty for a reduced sentence. On the second day of the trial, Judge Wilkerson overruled objections that a lawyer could not confess for his client, saying that anyone making a statement to the government did so at his own risk. Wilkerson deemed that the 1930 letter to federal authorities could be admitted into evidence from a lawyer acting for Capone.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much was later made of other evidence, such as witnesses and ledgers, but these strongly implied Capone's control rather than stating it. The ledgers were inadmissible on grounds of statute of limitations, but Capone's lawyers incompetently failed to make the necessary timely objection; they ran a basically irrelevant defense of gambling losses. Judge Wilkerson allowed Capone's spending to be presented at very great length. There was no doubt that Capone \"spent\" vast sums but, legally speaking, the case against him centered on the size of his \"income\". Capone was convicted on October 17, and was sentenced a week later to eleven years in federal prison, fined $50,000 plus $7,692 for court costs, and was held liable for $215,000 plus interest due on his back taxes. The contempt of court sentence was served concurrently. New lawyers hired to represent Capone were Washington-based tax experts. They filed a writ of habeas corpus based on a Supreme Court ruling that tax evasion was not fraud, which apparently meant that Capone had been convicted on charges relating to years that were actually outside the time limit for prosecution. However, a judge interpreted the law so that the time that Capone had spent in Miami was subtracted from the age of the offences, thereby denying the appeal of both Capone's conviction and sentence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capone was sent to Atlanta U.S. Penitentiary in May 1932, aged 33. Upon his arrival at Atlanta, the Capone was officially diagnosed with syphilis and gonorrhoea. He was also suffering from withdrawal symptoms from cocaine addiction, the use of which had perforated his nasal septum. Capone was competent at his prison job of stitching soles on shoes for eight hours a day, but his letters were barely coherent. He was seen as a weak personality, and so out of his depth dealing with bullying fellow inmates that his cellmate, seasoned convict Red Rudensky, feared that Capone would have a breakdown. Rudensky was formerly a small-time criminal associated with the Capone gang, and found himself becoming a protector for Capone. The conspicuous protection of Rudensky and other prisoners drew accusations from less friendly inmates, and fueled suspicion that Capone was receiving special treatment. No solid evidence ever emerged, but it formed part of the rationale for moving Capone to the recently opened Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary off the coast of San Francisco. On June 23, 1936, Capone was stabbed and superficially wounded by James C. Lucas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At Alcatraz, Capone's decline became increasingly evident as neurosyphilis progressively eroded his mental faculties. He spent the last year of his sentence in the prison hospital, confused and disoriented. Capone completed his term in Alcatraz on January 6, 1939, and was transferred to the Federal Correctional Institution at Terminal Island in California to serve out his sentence for contempt of court. He was paroled on November 16, 1939.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main effect of Capone's conviction was that he ceased to be boss immediately on his imprisonment, but those involved in the jailing of Capone portrayed it as considerably undermining the city's organized crime syndicate. Far from being smashed, the Chicago Outfit continued without being troubled by the Chicago police, but at a lower level and without the open violence that had marked Capone's rule. Organized crime in the city had a lower profile once Prohibition was repealed, already wary of attention after seeing Capone's notoriety bring him down, to the extent that there is a lack of consensus among writers about who was actually in control and who was a figurehead \"front boss\". Prostitution, labor union racketeering, and gambling became moneymakers for organized crime in the city without incurring serious investigation. In the late 1950s, FBI agents discovered an organization led by Capone's former lieutenants reigning supreme over the Chicago underworld.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the leader of the fbi ?", "answers": [], "id": "(25, 30, 4)"}]}, {"context": "After Capone was released from prison, he was referred to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore for the treatment of paresis (caused by late-stage syphilis). Hopkins refused to admit him based solely on his reputation, but Union Memorial Hospital accepted him. Capone was grateful for the compassionate care that he received and donated two Japanese weeping cherry trees to Union Memorial Hospital in 1939. A very sickly Capone left Baltimore on March 20, 1940, after a few weeks inpatient and a few weeks outpatient, for Palm Island, Florida.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1946, his physician and a Baltimore psychiatrist performed examinations and concluded that Capone had the mentality of a 12-year-old child. Capone spent the last years of his life at his mansion in Palm Island, Florida, spending time with his wife and grandchildren. On January 21, 1947, Capone had a stroke. He regained consciousness and started to improve, but contracted pneumonia. He suffered a cardiac arrest on January 22. On January 25, Capone died in his home, surrounded by his family. He w\u0430s originally buried at Mount Olivet Cemetery (Chicago). In 1950, Capone's remains, along with those of his father and brother Salvatore, were moved to Mount Carmel Cemetery in Hillside, Illinois.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Guy Murchie Jr, from the \"Chicago Daily Tribune\", 33 people died as a consequence of Al Capone.\nCapone is one of the most notorious American gangsters of the 20th century and has been the major subject of numerous articles, books, and films. Particularly, from 1925 to 1929, shortly after Capone relocated to Chicago, he enjoyed status as the most notorious mobster in the country. Capone cultivated a certain image of himself in the media, that made him a subject of fascination. His personality and character have been used in fiction as a model for crime lords and criminal masterminds ever since his death. The stereotypical image of a mobster wearing a blue pinstriped suit and tilted fedora is based on photos of Capone. His accent, mannerisms, facial construction, physical stature, and parodies of his name have been used for numerous gangsters in comics, movies, music, and literature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nCapone has been portrayed on screen by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Actors playing characters based on Capone include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Amplifier figures of merit", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In electronics, the figures of merit of an amplifier are numerical measures that characterize its properties and performance. Figures of merit can be given as a list of specifications that include properties such as gain, bandwidth, noise and linearity, among others listed in this article. Figures of merit are important for determining the suitability of a particular amplifier for an intended use.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The gain of an amplifier is the ratio of output to input power or amplitude, and is usually measured in decibels. When measured in decibels it is logarithmically related to the power ratio: \"G\"(dB)=10 log(\"P\" /\"P\"). RF amplifiers are often specified in terms of the maximum \"power gain\" obtainable, while the voltage gain of audio amplifiers and instrumentation amplifiers will be more often specified. For example, an audio amplifier with a gain given as 20\u00a0dB will have a \"voltage gain\" of ten.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the ability of an transistor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 1, 0)"}, {"question": "what is an audio gain of an audio ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The use of voltage gain figure is appropriate when the amplifier's input impedance is much higher than the source impedance, and the load impedance higher than the amplifier's output impedance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "If two equivalent amplifiers are being compared, the amplifier with higher gain settings would be more sensitive as it would take less input signal to produce a given amount of power.", "qas": [{"question": "what is less sensitive than a higher gain ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The bandwidth of an amplifier is the range of frequencies for which the amplifier gives \"satisfactory performance\". The definition of \"satisfactory performance\" may be different for different applications. However, a common and well-accepted metric is the half-power points (i.e. frequency where the power goes down by half its peak value) on the output vs. frequency curve. Therefore, bandwidth can be defined as the difference between the lower and upper half power points. This is therefore also known as the bandwidth. Bandwidths (otherwise called \"frequency responses\") for other response tolerances are sometimes quoted (, etc.) or \"plus or minus 1dB\" (roughly the sound level difference people usually can detect).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The gain of a good quality full-range audio amplifier will be essentially flat between 20\u00a0Hz to about 20\u00a0kHz (the range of normal human hearing). In ultra-high-fidelity amplifier design, the amplifier's frequency response should extend considerably beyond this (one or more octaves either side) and might have points < 10\u00a0Hz and > . Professional touring amplifiers often have input and/or output filtering to sharply limit frequency response beyond ; too much of the amplifier's potential output power would otherwise be wasted on infrasonic and ultrasonic frequencies, and the danger of AM radio interference would increase. Modern switching amplifiers need steep low pass filtering at the output to get rid of high-frequency switching noise and harmonics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The range of frequency over which the gain is equal to or greater than 70.7% of its maximum gain is termed as bandwidth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the range of frequency over which the gain is equal to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Efficiency is a measure of how much of the power source is usefully applied to the amplifier's output. Class A amplifiers are very inefficient, in the range of 10\u201320% with a max efficiency of 25% for direct coupling of the output. Inductive coupling of the output can raise their efficiency to a maximum of 50%.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the measure of the power source ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Drain efficiency is the ratio of output RF power to input DC power when primary input DC power has been fed to the drain of a field-effect transistor. Based on this definition, the drain efficiency cannot exceed 25% for a class A amplifier that is supplied drain bias current through resistors (because RF signal has its zero level at about 50% of the input DC). Manufacturers specify much higher drain efficiencies, and designers are able to obtain higher efficiencies by providing current to the drain of the transistor through an inductor or a transformer winding. In this case the RF zero level is near the DC rail and will swing both above and below the rail during operation. While the voltage level is above the DC rail current is supplied by the inductor.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the ratio of output power ?", "answers": [], "id": "(26, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Class B amplifiers have a very high efficiency but are impractical for audio work because of high levels of distortion (See: Crossover distortion). In practical design, the result of a tradeoff is the class AB design. Modern Class AB amplifiers commonly have peak efficiencies between 30\u201355% in audio systems and 50-70% in radio frequency systems with a theoretical maximum of 78.5%.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Commercially available Class D switching amplifiers have reported efficiencies as high as 90%. Amplifiers of Class C-F are usually known to be very high-efficiency amplifiers. RCA manufactured an AM broadcast transmitter employing a single class-C low-mu triode with an RF efficiency in the 90% range.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More efficient amplifiers run cooler, and often do not need any cooling fans even in multi-kilowatt designs. The reason for this is that the loss of efficiency produces heat as a by-product of the energy lost during the conversion of power. In more efficient amplifiers there is less loss of energy so in turn less heat.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In RF linear Power Amplifiers, such as cellular base stations and broadcast transmitters, special design techniques can be used to improve efficiency. Doherty designs, which use a second output stage as a \"peak\" amplifier, can lift efficiency from the typical 15% up to 30-35% in a narrow bandwidth. Envelope Tracking designs are able to achieve efficiencies of up to 60%, by modulating the supply voltage to the amplifier in line with the envelope of the signal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An ideal amplifier would be a totally linear device, but real amplifiers are only linear within limits.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When the signal drive to the amplifier is increased, the output also increases until a point is reached where some part of the amplifier becomes saturated and cannot produce any more output; this is called clipping, and results in distortion.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In most amplifiers a reduction in gain takes place before hard clipping occurs; the result is a \"compression\" effect, which (if the amplifier is an audio amplifier) sounds much less unpleasant to the ear. For these amplifiers, the 1\u00a0dB compression point is defined as the input power (or output power) where the gain is 1\u00a0dB less than the small signal gain. Sometimes this non linearity is deliberately designed in to reduce the audible unpleasantness of hard clipping under overload.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ill effects of non-linearity can be reduced with negative feedback.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Linearization is an emergent field, and there are many techniques, such as feed forward, predistortion, postdistortion, in order to avoid the undesired effects of the non-linearities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This is a measure of how much noise is introduced in the amplification process. Noise is an undesirable but inevitable product of the electronic devices and components; also, much noise results from intentional economies of manufacture and design time. The metric for noise performance of a circuit is noise figure or noise factor. Noise figure is a comparison between the output signal to noise ratio and the thermal noise of the input signal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Output dynamic range is the range, usually given in dB, between the smallest and largest useful output levels. The lowest useful level is limited by output noise, while the largest is limited most often by distortion. The ratio of these two is quoted as the amplifier dynamic range. More precisely, if \"S\" = maximal allowed signal power and \"N\" = noise power, the dynamic range \"DR\" is \"DR = (S + N ) /N\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In many switched mode amplifiers, dynamic range is limited by the minimum output step size.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Slew rate is the maximum rate of change of the output, usually quoted in volts per second (or microsecond). Many amplifiers are ultimately slew rate limited (typically by the impedance of a drive current having to overcome capacitive effects at some point in the circuit), which sometimes limits the full power bandwidth to frequencies well below the amplifier's small-signal frequency response.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rise time, t, of an amplifier is the time taken for the output to change from 10% to 90% of its final level when driven by a step input.\nFor a Gaussian response system (or a simple RC roll off), the rise time is approximated by:", "qas": []}, {"context": "t * BW = 0.35, where t is rise time in seconds and BW is bandwidth in Hz.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The time taken for the output to settle to within a certain percentage of the final value (for instance 0.1%) is called the settling time, and is usually specified for oscilloscope vertical amplifiers and high-accuracy measurement systems. Ringing refers to an output variation that cycles above and below an amplifier's final value and leads to a delay in reaching a stable output. Ringing is the result of overshoot caused by an underdamped circuit.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In response to a step input, the overshoot is the amount the output exceeds its final, steady-state value.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stability is an issue in all amplifiers with feedback, whether that feedback is added intentionally or results unintentionally. It is especially an issue when applied over multiple amplifying stages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stability is a major concern in RF and microwave amplifiers. The degree of an amplifier's stability can be quantified by a so-called stability factor. There are several different stability factors, such as the Stern stability factor and the Linvil stability factor, which specify a condition that must be met for the absolute stability of an amplifier in terms of its two-port parameters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Army of Darkness", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Army of Darkness (referred to as Bruce Campbell vs. Army of Darkness on its title card) is a 1992 American dark fantasy comedy film directed and co-written by Sam Raimi, co-produced by Robert Tapert and Bruce Campbell and co-written by Ivan Raimi. It stars Campbell and Embeth Davidtz. It is the third installment in the \"Evil Dead\" franchise, and continuing from \"Evil Dead II,\" Ash Williams (Campbell) is trapped in the Middle Ages and battles the undead in his quest to return to the present.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the third installment in the `` evil dead '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 0, 2)"}]}, {"context": "The film was produced as part of a production deal with Universal Studios after the financial success of \"Darkman\". Filming took place in California in 1991. The makeup and creature effects for the film were handled by two different companies: Tony Gardner and his company Alterian, Inc. were responsible for the Ash & Sheila makeup effects, while Kurtzman, Nicotero & Berger EFX Group was credited for the remaining special makeup effects characters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Army of Darkness\" premiered at the Sitges Film Festival on October 9, 1992, and was released in the United States on February 19, 1993. It grossed $21.5 million total over a $11 million budget, and received positive reviews, though notably less than the first two films. Since its video release it has acquired a cult following, along with the other two films in the trilogy. The film was dedicated to Irvin Shapiro, who died during the film's production in 1989 on New Year's Day.", "qas": [{"question": "when was ` robopocalypse ' released ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 2, 3)"}]}, {"context": "After being transported to the Middle Ages, Ash Williams is captured by Lord Arthur's men, who suspect him an agent for Duke Henry, with whom Arthur is at war. He is enslaved along with the captured Henry, his gun and chainsaw confiscated, and is taken to a castle. Ash is thrown in a pit where he kills a Deadite and regains his weapons from Arthur's Wise Man. After demanding Henry and his men be set free, as he knew it was a witch hunt, and killing a Deadite publicly, Ash is celebrated as a hero. He grows attracted to Sheila, the sister of one of Arthur's fallen knights.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the Wise Man, the only way Ash can return to his time is through the magical \"Necronomicon Ex-Mortis.\" Ash then starts his search for the \"Necronomicon\". As he enters a haunted forest, an unseen force pursues Ash into a windmill, crashing into a mirror. Small reflections of Ash in the mirror shards come to life, with one becoming a life-sized clone, after which Ash kills and buries it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When he arrives at the \"Necronomicon\"s location, he finds three books instead of one and determines which is the actual book. Attempting to say the phrase that will allow him to remove the book safely \"Klaatu barada nikto\" he forgets and tries to unsuccessfully mumble and cough \"nikto\". He then grabs it and rushes back, while the dead and his evil copy resurrect, uniting into the Army of Darkness.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Upon return, Ash demands to be returned to his own time. However, Sheila is abducted by a Flying Deadite, and later transformed into one. Ash becomes determined to lead the humans against the Army and the people reluctantly agree. Using knowledge from textbooks in his 1973 Oldsmobile Delta 88, and enlisting the help of Duke Henry, Ash successfully leads the medieval soldiers to victory over the Deadites and Evil Ash, saving Sheila and bringing peace between Arthur and Henry. The Wise Men tells him how to return to the present by giving him a potion after reciting the phrase.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the time to return to his own time ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Back in his present time, Ash recounts his story to a fellow employee at an S-Mart department store. As he talks to a woman who is interested in his story, a surviving Deadite, allowed to come to the present due to Ash again forgetting the last word, attacks the customers. Ash kills it using a Winchester rifle from the Sporting Goods department, and exclaims \"hail to the king, baby\" before passionately kissing the woman.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the film's original ending, Ash miscounts the amount of potion needed to be able to correctly return to his own time. As a result, he wakes up in a post-apocalyptic future where human civilization is destroyed, and he screams in dismay at having overslept. Universal Pictures objected to this climax, feeling that it was too negative in tone, and a more optimistic ending was filmed and ultimately incorporated into the theatrical cut.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the amount of needed to return to his own time ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nPlans to make a third \"Evil Dead\" film had been circulating for a number of years, even prior to the production of \"Darkman\". \"Evil Dead II\" made enough money internationally that Dino De Laurentiis was willing to finance a sequel. Director and script writer Sam Raimi drew from a variety of sources, including literature with \"A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court\" and Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\" and films like \"The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad\", \"Jason and the Argonauts\", The Three Stooges, and \"Conan The Barbarian\". \"Evil Dead II\", according to Bruce Campbell, \"was originally designed to go back into the past to 1300, but we couldn't muster it at the time, so we decided to make an interim version, not knowing if the 1300 story would ever get made\". Promotional drawings were created and published in \"Variety\" during the casting process before the budget was deemed too little for the plot. The working title for the project was \"Medieval Dead\",before it was later known as \"Evil Dead III: Army of Darkness\". The title \"Army of Darkness\" came from an idea by Irvin Shapiro, during the production of \"Evil Dead II\".", "qas": [{"question": "what was the third `` evil dead '' film ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Initially, Raimi invited Scott Spiegel to co-write \"Army of Darkness\" because he had done a good job on \"Evil Dead II\", but he was busy on rewrites for the Clint Eastwood film \"The Rookie\". After the good experience of writing the screenplay for a film called \"Easy Wheels\", Sam and his brother Ivan decided to co-write the film together. They worked on the script throughout the pre-production and production of \"Darkman\". After filming \"Darkman\", they took the script out and worked on it in more detail. Raimi says that Ivan \"has a good sense of character\" and that he brought more comedy into the script. Campbell remembers, \"We all decided, 'Get him out of the cabin.' There were earlier drafts where part three still took place there, but we thought, 'Well, we all know that cabin, it's time to move on.' The three of us decided to keep it in 1300, because it's more interesting\". Campbell and Tapert would read the script drafts, give Raimi their notes and he would decide which suggestions to keep and which ones to discard.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The initial budget was $8 million but during pre-production, it became obvious that this was not going to be enough. \"Darkman\" was also a financial success and De Laurentiis had a multi-picture deal with Universal and so \"Army of Darkness\" became one of the films. The studio decided to contribute half of the film's $12 million budget. However, the film's ambitious scope and its extensive effects work forced Campbell, Raimi and producer Robert Tapert to put up $1 million of their collective salaries to shoot a new ending and not film a scene where a possessed woman pushes down some giant pillars. Visual effects supervisor William Mesa showed Raimi storyboards he had from Victor Fleming's film \"Joan of Arc\" that depicted huge battle scenes and he picked out 25 shots to use in \"Army of Darkness\". A storyboard artist worked closely with the director in order to blend the shots from the \"Joan of Arc\" storyboards with the battle scenes in his film.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Traci Lords was among the actresses auditioning for the film, saying in 2001, \"I didn't get the part but I clicked with Bruce [Campbell],\" with whom she would later work as a guest star in the TV series \"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Principal photography took place between soundstage and on-location work. \"Army of Darkness\" was filmed in Bronson Canyon and Vasquez Rocks Natural Area Park. The interior shots were filmed on an Introvision stage in Hollywood. Raimi's use of the Introvision process was a tribute to the stop-motion animation work of Ray Harryhausen. Introvision uses front-projected images with live actors instead of the traditional rear projection that Harryhausen and others used. Introvision blended components with more realistic-looking results. To achieve this effect, Raimi used 60-foot-tall Scotchlite front-projection screens, miniatures and background plates. According to the director, the advantage of using this technique was \"the incredible amount of interaction between the background, which doesn't exist, and the foreground, which is usually your character\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shooting began in mid-1991, and it lasted for about 100 days. It was a mid-summer shoot and while on location on a huge castle set that was built near Acton, California on the edge of the Mojave Desert, the cast and crew endured very hot conditions during the day and very cold temperatures at night. Most of the film took place at night and the filmmakers shot most of the film during the summer when the days were longest and the nights were the shortest. It would take an hour and a half to light an area leaving the filmmakers only six hours left to shoot a scene. Money problems forced cinematographer Bill Pope to shoot only for certain hours Monday through Friday because he could not be paid his standard fee. Mesa shot many of the action sequences on the weekend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It was a difficult shoot for Campbell who had to learn elaborate choreography for the battle scenes, which involved him remembering a number system because the actor was often fighting opponents that were not really there. Mesa remembers, \"Bruce was cussing and swearing some of the time because you had to work on the number system. Sam would tell us to make it as complicated and hard for Bruce as possible. 'Make him go through torture!' So we'd come up with these shots that were really, really difficult, and sometimes they would take thirty-seven takes\". Some scenes, like Evil Ash walking along the graveyard while his skeleton minions come to life, blended stop-motion animation with live skeletons that were mechanically rigged, with prosthetics and visual effects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While Dino De Laurentiis gave Raimi and his crew freedom to shoot the film the way they wanted, Universal took over during post-production. Universal was not happy with Raimi's cut because it did not like his original ending, feeling it was negative. In this ending, the potion Ash is given causes him to oversleep, and when he wakes up he is a futuristic, post-apocalyptic wasteland. A more upbeat ending was shot a month later in a lumber store in Malibu, California. Then, two months after principal filming was finished, a round of re-shoots began in Santa Monica and involved Ash in the windmill and the scenes with Bridget Fonda. Raimi recalls, \"Actually, I kind of like the fact that there are two endings, that in one alternate universe Bruce is screwed, and in another universe he's some cheesy hero\".", "qas": [{"question": "who took over the movie the way ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Raimi needed $3 million to finish his film, but Universal was not willing to give him the money and delayed its release due to a dispute with De Laurentiis over the rights to the Hannibal Lecter character which Universal needed so that they could film a sequel to \"The Silence of the Lambs\". The matter was finally resolved, but the release date for \"Army of Darkness\"' was pushed back from summer of 1992 to February 1993.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the film's poster, Universal brought Campbell in to take several reference head shots and asked him to strike a sly look on his face. They showed him a rough of the Frank Frazetta-like painting. The actor had a day to approve it or, as he was told, there would be no ad campaign for the film. Raimi ran into further troubles when the Motion Picture Association of America gave it an NC-17 rating for a shot of a female Deadite being decapitated early on in the film. Universal wanted a PG-13 rating, so Raimi made a few cuts and was still stuck with an R rating. In response, Universal turned the film over to outside film editors who cut the film to 81 minutes and another version running 87 minutes that was eventually released in theaters, still with an R rating.", "qas": [{"question": "how long did universal film last ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 18, 5)"}]}, {"context": "Danny Elfman, who composed the score for \"Darkman\", wrote the \"March of the Dead\" theme for \"Army of Darkness\". After the re-shoots were completed, Joseph LoDuca, who composed the music for \"The Evil Dead\" and \"Evil Dead II\", returned to score the film. The composer used his knowledge of synthesizers and was able to present many cues in a mock-up form before he recorded them with the Seattle Symphony. The score was released during the MondoCon in Austin, Texas on October 3 and 4, 2015, on Vinyl, over Mondo Records.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Army of Darkness\" was released by Universal on February 19, 1993 in 1,387 theaters in the United States, grossing $4.4 million (38.5% of total gross) on its first weekend. In total, the film earned $11.5 million in the US.", "qas": [{"question": "how much money did film win in the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 20, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The film currently holds a 72% \"Fresh\" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 46 reviews, which made its critical reception above average but much lower than \"The Evil Dead\" and \"Evil Dead II\", which received 96% and 98% respectively. On Metacritic, the film holds a score of 57 out of 100, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars and wrote, \"The movie isn't as funny or entertaining as \"Evil Dead II\", however, maybe because the comic approach seems recycled.\" In her review for \"The New York Times\", Janet Maslin praised, \"Mr. Campbell's manly, mock-heroic posturing is perfectly in keeping with the director's droll outlook.\" Desson Howe, in this review for \"The Washington Post\" praised the film's style: \"Bill Pope's cinematography is gymnastic and appropriately frenetic. The visual and make-up effects (from artist-technicians William Mesa, Tony Gardner and others) are incredibly imaginative.\" However, \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave the film a \"C+\" rating and wrote, \"This spoofy cast of thousands looks a little too much like a crew of bland Hollywood extras. By the time \"Army of Darkness\" turns into a retread of \"Jason and the Argonauts\", featuring an army of fighting skeletons, the film has fallen into a ditch between parody and spectacle.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Army of Darkness\" won the Saturn Award for Best Horror Film (1994). It was also nominated for Best Make-Up. \"Army of Darkness\" was nominated for the Grand Prize at Avoriaz Fantastic Film Festival, and won the Golden Raven at the Brussels International Festival of Fantasy Film in 1993. The film also won the Critics' Award at Fantasporto, and was nominated for the International Fantasy Film Award in the category of Best Film in 1993. It was also nominated for Best Film at Sitges, the Spanish International Film Festival.", "qas": [{"question": "what film festival was nominated for best film at sitges ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 22, 4)"}, {"question": "what award did the saturn win ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In March 2013, shortly before the release of \"Evil Dead\", a reboot and loose continuation of the franchise, Raimi confirmed that the next \"Evil Dead\" film will be \"Army of Darkness 2\". Campbell confirmed that he would star as an older, but not necessarily wiser, Ash. At a WonderCon panel in March 2013, Campbell and Fede Alvarez, director of the reboot, stated that their ultimate plan was for Alvarez's \"Evil Dead 2\" and Raimi's \"Army of Darkness 2\" to be followed by a seventh film which would merge the narratives of Ash and Mia. On October 18, 2013, Campbell once again confirmed in an interview with ComicBook.com that he will be reprising his role as Ash in the sequel. Fede Alvarez posted a status update on his Twitter account that Raimi will direct the sequel. Campbell later commented that the rumor about him returning is false.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the `` evil dead '' film ?", "answers": [], "id": "(27, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In July 2014, Campbell stated it was likely the planned sequel would instead be a TV series with him as the star. The ten-episode season of \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" premiered on Starz on October 31, 2015, with the pilot co-written and directed by Sam Raimi. Due to legal issues with Universal, the events from \"Army of Darkness\" could not specifically be mentioned in the first season. In addition to Campbell, the series stars Dana DeLorenzo, Ray Santiago, and Lucy Lawless.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Army of Darkness\" had a comic book adaptation and several comic book sequels. The movie adaptation, from publisher Dark Horse Comics, was actually published before the film's theatrical release.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eden Studios, Inc. published the \"Army of Darkness Roleplaying Game\" in 2005.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "RUR-5 ASROC", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The RUR-5 ASROC (for \"Anti-Submarine ROCket\") is an all-weather, all sea-conditions anti-submarine missile system. Developed by the United States Navy in the 1950s, it was deployed in the 1960s, updated in the 1990s, and eventually installed on over 200 USN surface ships, specifically cruisers, destroyers, and frigates. The ASROC has been deployed on scores of warships of many other navies, including Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Republic of China, Greece, Pakistan and others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "ASROC started development as the Rocket Assisted Torpedo (RAT) program by the Naval Ordnance Test Station at China Lake in the early 1950s to develop a surface warship ASW weapon counter to the new post-World War II submarines which ran quieter, at much higher speed and could attack from much longer range with high speed homing torpedoes. In addition, the goal was to take advantage of modern sonars with a much larger detection range. An extended range torpedo delivered by parachute from the air would allow warships the stand-off capability to attack hostile submarines with very little advance notice to the hostile submarine. The RAT program came in three phases: RAT-A, RAT-B and RAT-C. RAT-A (and its follow-on, RAT-B) were efforts to develop a compact and economical stand-off ASW for smaller warships, but were found to be either unreliable or had too short a range. RAT-C was a program to develop a stand-off ASW weapon that used a nuclear depth charge. This would require a range of at least 8,000 yards to escape potential damage from the underwater blast. Unlike the original RAT program rockets, the RAT-C was considerably larger to accomplish the extended range needed and was to be fitted to larger warships. With the failure of both the RAT-A and RAT-B programs, RAT-C was redesigned from a stand-off nuclear ASW weapon to one that could use not only a nuclear depth charge but also a homing ASW torpedo. To obtain the accuracy needed, the RAT-C rocket launcher had to be redesigned with larger side fins. This program finally combined reliability and accuracy, along with the necessary stand-off range. However, before RAT-C reached initial operational status in 1960 aboard the large US Navy destroyer leader , its name was changed to the present ASROC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first ASROC system using the MK-112 \"Matchbox\" launcher was developed in the 1950s and installed in the 1960s. This system was phased out in the 1990s and replaced with the RUM-139 Vertical Launch ASROC, or \"VLA\".", "qas": [{"question": "when was the first beidou system developed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After a surface ship, patrol plane or anti-submarine helicopter detects an enemy submarine by using sonar or other sensors, it could relay the sub's position to an ASROC-equipped ship for attack. The attacking ship would then fire an ASROC missile carrying an acoustic homing torpedo or a W44 Nuclear Depth Bomb onto an unguided ballistic trajectory toward the target. At a pre-determined point on the missile's trajectory, the payload separates from the missile and deploys a parachute to permit splashdown and water entry at a low speed and with minimum detectable noise. Water entry activates the torpedo, which is guided by its own sonar system, and homes in on the target using either active sonar or passive sonar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The W44 nuclear depth charge entered service in 1961, but was never used beyond one or two tests before the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty banning underwater nuclear tests went into effect. A total of 575 weapons were produced. The W44 weighed with a diameter of and length of . Following payload separation, the unguided W44 sank quickly to a predetermined depth where the 10-kiloton warhead detonated. The nuclear-armed ASROC was never used in combat. W44-armed ASROC missiles were retired by 1989, when all types of nuclear depth bombs were removed from deployment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 31 U.S. Navy s were all built with the Mark 16 Mod 7 ASROC Launching Group and MK 4 ASROC Weapons Handling System (AWHS) reload system. These had one standard Mark 112 octuple ASROC launcher, located immediately above a reload system holding an additional 16 assembled rounds (two complete reloads of eight missiles apiece). Thus, each \"Spruance\"-class destroyer originally carried a maximum total of 24 ASROC.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the original name of the ps3 navy 's navy system ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most other US Navy and allied navy destroyers, destroyer escorts, frigates, and several different classes of cruisers only carried the one ASROC \"matchbox\" MK 112 launcher with eight ASROC missiles (although later in service, some of those missiles could be replaced by the Harpoon anti-ship missile). The \"matchbox\" Mk 112 launchers were capable of carrying a mixture of the two types. Reloads were carried in many classes, either on first level of the superstructure immediately abaft the launcher, or in a separate deckhouse just forward or abaft the Mk 112.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The MK 16 Launching Group also had configurations that supported RGM-84 Harpoon (onboard destroyer escorts (frigates)) or a variation of the Tartar missile in limited distribution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ships with the Mk 26 GMLS, and late marks of the Mk 10 GMLS aboard the s, could accommodate ASROC in these power-loaded launchers (the Mk 13 GMLS was not able to fire the weapon, as the launcher rail was too short).", "qas": [{"question": "what was not able to fire the weapon ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most \"Spruance\"-class destroyers were later modified to include the Mk 41 VLS, these launchers are capable of carrying a mixture of the RUM-139 VL-ASROC, the Tomahawk TLAM, and other missiles. All of the \"Spruance\" destroyers carried two separate quad Harpoon launchers. Other US ships with the Mk 41 can also accommodate VL-ASROC.", "qas": [{"question": "how many u.s. ships can be added ?", "answers": [], "id": "(28, 9, 2)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Ahmed al-Nami", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Ahmed bin Abdullah al-Nami (Arabic: \u0623\u062d\u0645\u062f \u0628\u0646 \u0639\u0628\u062f \u0627\u0644\u0644\u0647 \u0627\u0644\u0646\u0639\u0645\u064a, ; also transliterated as Alnami; August 17, 1977 \u2013 September 11, 2001) was one of four hijackers of United Airlines Flight 93 as part of the September 11 attacks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Born in Saudi Arabia, Nami had served as a muezzin and was a college student. He left his family in 2000 to complete the Hajj, but later went to Afghanistan bound for an al-Qaeda training camp where he befriended other future hijackers and would soon be chosen to participate in the attacks.", "qas": [{"question": "in what country was nami born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He arrived in the United States in May 2001, on a tourist visa, where he would settle in Florida up until the attacks. On September 11, 2001, Nami boarded United 93 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane, which crashed into a field in rural Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after a passenger uprising, due to the passengers receiving information from their families of the three other hijacked planes that hit the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nami, much like Abdulaziz al-Omari, Wail al-Shehri, Waleed al-Shehri and Mohand al-Shehri, was born in the 'Asir Province in Saudi Arabia. Born to the Quraish tribe of Saudi Arabia, Nami served as a muezzin at the Seqeley mosque after having reportedly become very religious sometime in early 1999. That autumn he left his family home in Khamis Mushayt in the summer of 2000 to complete the Hajj, but never returned \u2013 instead travelling to the Al Farouq training camp in Afghanistan where he met and befriended Waleed and Wail al-Shehri, two brothers from Khamis Mushayt, and Saeed al-Ghamdi. The four reportedly pledged themselves to Jihad in the Spring of 2000, in a ceremony presided over by Wail \u2013 who had dubbed himself \"Abu Mossaeb al-Janubi\" after one of Muhammad's companions. Dubbed \"Abu Hashim\", Nami was considered \"gentle in manner\" by his colleagues, and reported that he had a dream in which he rode a mare along with Muhammad, and that the prophet told him to dismount and fight his enemies to liberate his land.", "qas": [{"question": "where was born born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During his time at al-Farooq, there is a curious mention under Mushabib al-Hamlan's details that Nami had recently had laser eye surgery, an uncited fact that does not reappear.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By October he had taken a prospective hijacker Mushabib al-Hamlan from Afghanistan to Saudi Arabia where they both procured B-1/B-2 tourist/business visas on October 28 \u2013 but Hamlan then decided not to proceed and is thought to have returned to his family. Nami's visa application has since been reviewed, and while he mentioned that Mushabib will be travelling with him, he listed his occupation as \"student\" but failed to provide an address for his school, and listed his intended address in the United States merely as Los Angeles \u2013 in the end he never used this visa to enter the United States, and reported his passport (C115007, which showed evidence of travel to Afghanistan) as \"lost\", and procured a new one from Jeddah (C505363). He used the new passport to acquire a new B-1/B-2 visa in Jeddah on April 23, again recopying his answers from previously although crossing out the lines regarding Mushabib and previous attempts to acquire a visa. He was interviewed by a consular officer, who again approved his application. Records at the time only recorded past failures to procure a visa, so the officer had no way of realising that Nami had successfully received an earlier visa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In mid-November 2000, the 9/11 Commission believes that Nami, Wail and Waleed al-Shehri, all of whom had obtained their U.S. visas in late October, traveled in a group from Saudi Arabia to Beirut and then onward to Iran where they could travel through to Afghanistan without getting their passports stamped. This probably followed their return to Saudi Arabia to get \"clean\" passports. An associate of a senior Hezbollah operative is thought to have been on the same flight, although this may have been a coincidence.", "qas": [{"question": "what country did the us believe was the first to travel to beirut ?", "answers": [], "id": "(29, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While in the United Arab Emirates, Nami purchased traveler's cheques presumed to have been paid for by Mustafa al-Hawsawi. Five other hijackers also passed through the UAE and purchased travellers cheques, including Majed Moqed, Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, Ahmed al-Haznawi and Wail al-Shehri.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In March 2001, Ahmed al-Nami appeared in an al-Qaeda farewell video showing 13 of the \"muscle hijackers\" before they left their training centre in Kandahar; while he does not speak, he is seen studying maps and flight manuals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On April 23, Nami was recorded obtaining a new US visa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On May 28, Nami arrived in the United States from Dubai with fellow-hijackers Mohand al-Shehri and Hamza al-Ghamdi. By early June, Nami was living in apartment 1504 at the Delray Racquet Club condominiums with Saeed al-Ghamdi in Delray Beach, Florida. He telephoned his family in 'Asir shortly after arriving in the country.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In June, he phoned his family for the last time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was one of 9 hijackers to open a SunTrust bank account with a cash deposit around June 2001, and on June 29 received either a Florida State Identification Card or Drivers License.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He may have been one of three hijackers that listed the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Florida as their permanent address on drivers' licenses, though other sources claim he listed the Delray condominium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On August 28, Nami and Ahmed al-Haznawi reportedly bothered a Delray Beach resident, Maria Siscar Simpson, to let them through her apartment to retrieve a towel that had fallen off their balcony onto hers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 5, Nami and Saeed al-Ghamdi purchased tickets for a September 7 flight to Newark at Mile High Travel on Commercial Boulevard\u2014paying cash for their tickets. Ziad Jarrah and Ahmed al-Haznawi also purchased tickets for the same flight from Passage Tours.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 7, all four Flight 93 hijackers flew from Fort Lauderdale to Newark International Airport aboard Spirit Airlines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 11, 2001, Nami arrived in Newark to board United Airlines Flight 93 along with Saeed al-Ghamdi, Ahmed al-Haznawi and Ziad Jarrah. Some reports suggest Haznawi was pulled aside for screening while others claim there is no record of whether any of the four were screened; the lack of CCTV cameras at the time has compounded the problem. Nami boarded the plane between 7:39\u00a0am and 7:48\u00a0am; seated in First Class 3C, next to Saeed al-Ghamdi.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Due to the flight's routine delay, the pilot and crew were notified of the previous hijackings and were told to be on the alert, though within two minutes Jarrah had stormed the cockpit leaving the pilots dead or injured.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At least two of the cellphone calls made by passengers indicate that all the hijackers they saw were wearing red bandanas, which some have questioned may have signified an allegiance to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. The calls also indicated that one of the men had tied a box around his torso, and claimed there was a bomb inside; it is not known which hijacker this was.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Passengers on the plane heard through phone calls the fates of the other hijacked planes, and organized a brief assault to retake the cockpit. The hijackers crashed the plane into the Pennsylvanian countryside rather than cede control of the plane. All aboard died.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the attacks, an employee of Saudi Arabian Airlines named Ahmed al-Nami came forward to say that he feared his identity had been stolen, although he had never lost his passport.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He has been portrayed by British actor Jamie Harding in the 2006 film \"United 93\" and Asim Wali in the film \"Flight 93\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Ahmed al-Haznawi", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Ahmed Ibrahim al-Haznawi (, ) (October 11, 1980 \u2013 September 11, 2001) was one of four hijackers of United Airlines Flight 93 as part of the September 11 attacks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He left his family to fight in Chechnya in 2000 but was probably sent to training camps in Afghanistan. It was there he was chosen to participate in the 9/11 attacks. He arrived in the United States in June 2001 under the direction of Al-Qaeda for terrorist attacks, on a tourist visa. Once he was in the U.S., he settled in Florida and helped plan out how the attacks would take place.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On September 11, 2001, Haznawi boarded United Airlines Flight 93 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane, which crashed into a field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, after a passenger uprising.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the united that attacked america airlines ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Ahmed al-Haznawi was the son of a Saudi imam from the Al-Bahah province, a province in the south west of Saudi Arabia. Haznawi grew up in the village of Hazna, where his father was a cleric at the mosque in the central marketplace section of the village. Haznawi belonged to a family that was part of the larger, al-Ghamdi tribe, sharing the same tribal affiliation with fellow hijackers Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, and Ahmed al-Ghamdi. He memorised the Quran, giving him the title Hafiz.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This group is noted as being some of the more religiously observant of the hijackers, and they are thought to have met one another some time in 1999.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Haznawi announced he was leaving his family in 1999 to fight in Chechnya, although his father forbade him. His father and brother, Abdul Rahman al-Haznawi, reportedly last heard from him in late 2000, after he made references to training in Afghanistan.", "qas": [{"question": "who was eisenhower 's father ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On November 12, 2000, Haznawi applied for and received a two-year U.S. B-1/B-2\n(tourist/business) visa in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the saudi arabia applied apply to the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From November 27, 2000, through December 27, 2000, Haznawi was in Saudi Arabia for Ramadan. It is theorized that during this trip, he may have initially told Saeed and Hamza al-Ghamdi about the operation.", "qas": [{"question": "when was saudi haznawi born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 7, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the trip that avicenna may tell about the operation ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 7, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Some time late in 2000, Haznawi traveled to the United Arab Emirates, where he purchased traveler's cheques presumed to have been paid for by Mustafa al-Hawsawi. Five other hijackers also passed through the UAE and purchased travellers cheques, including Majed Moqed, Saeed al-Ghamdi, Hamza al-Ghamdi, Wail al-Shehri and Ahmed al-Nami.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He was one of four hijackers believed to be staying at a Kandahar guest house in March 2001, where they were seen by Mohammed Jabarah. Jabarah remembered Haznawi specifically, saying that he was \"very devout and could recite the entire Koran from memory.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "On June 8, he arrived in Miami, Florida, with fellow hijacker Wail al-Shehri. He was one of 9 hijackers to open a SunTrust bank account with a cash deposit around June 2001. He is believed to have moved in with Ziad Jarrah, who got a new apartment on Bougainvilla Dr. in Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, after both men gave the landlord photocopies of their German passports, which he later turned over to the FBI.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On June 25, Jarrah took Haznawi to Holy Cross Hospital in Fort Lauderdale on advice of his landlord Charles Lisa. Haznawi was treated by Dr. Christos Tsonas, who gave him antibiotics for a small gash on his left calf. While he told staff that he had bumped into a suitcase, the media briefly reported it as a sign of cutaneous anthrax and a possible link to the 2001 anthrax attacks, although FBI later addressed the rumors stating that \"Exhaustive testing did not support that anthrax was present anywhere the hijackers had been.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who took over to holy cross hospital ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On July 10, Haznawi obtained a Florida driver's license, later obtaining another copy on September 7, 2001, by filling out a change-of-address form. Five other hijackers also received duplicate Florida licenses in 2001, and others had licenses from different states. Some have speculated that this was to allow multiple persons to use the same identity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jarrah and Haznawi both received their one-way tickets for United Airlines Flight 93, on September 5. On September 7, all four Flight 93 hijackers flew from Fort Lauderdale to Newark International Airport aboard Spirit Airlines.", "qas": [{"question": "on what date did the airlines receive their flights on september 5. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "On September 11, 2001, Haznawi arrived at Newark International Airport to board Flight 93. Although he was selected for additional security by CAPPS and screened, he was able to board the flight without incident, with only his checked bags requiring extra screening for explosives.", "qas": [{"question": "at what airport did the airport arrive at the airport ?", "answers": [], "id": "(30, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Due to the flight's delay, the pilot and crew were notified of the previous hijackings that day and were told to be on the alert. Within minutes, Flight 93 was hijacked as well.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At least two of the cellphone calls made by passengers indicate that all the hijackers they saw were wearing red bandanas, which some believe may have signified an allegiance to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. The calls also indicated that one of the men had tied a box around his torso, and claimed there was a bomb inside \u2013 it is not known which hijacker this was. Some passengers expressed doubt that the bomb was real.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Passengers on the plane heard through phone calls the fates of the other hijacked planes. A passenger uprising soon took place. Hijacker-pilot, Ziad Jarrah, crashed the plane into an empty field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, in order to prevent the passengers from gaining control of the plane. The crash killed everyone on board.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the attacks, before the release of the FBI pictures of the hijackers, Arab News reported that Haznawi's brother Abdul Rahman had told al-Madinah newspaper that a photograph published by local newspapers bore no resemblance to his brother.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A videotape titled \"The Wills of the New York and Washington Battle Martyrs\" was aired on Al Jazeera on April 16, 2002. While the name beneath the speaker read \"al-Ghamdi\", the image is of Haznawi speaking. Officials suggested that the name was merely a reference to his tribal affiliation. The film was thought to have been made in March 2001. In it, he talked about his plans to bring the \"bloodied message\" to America. In September 2002, a similar tape made by Abdulaziz al-Omari appeared.", "qas": []}, {"context": "He has been portrayed by actors Omar Berdouni in \"United 93\", and Zak Santiago in \"Flight 93\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Athanasius of Alexandria", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Athanasius of Alexandria (; ; ; c. 296\u2013298 \u2013 2 May 373), also called Athanasius the Great, Athanasius the Confessor or, primarily in the Coptic Orthodox Church, Athanasius the Apostolic, was the 20th bishop of Alexandria (as Athanasius I). His on-again-off-again episcopate spanned 45 years (c. 8 June 328 \u2013 2 May 373), of which over 17 encompassed five exiles, when his episcopate was replaced on the order of four different Roman emperors. Athanasius was a Christian theologian, a Church Father, the chief defender of Trinitarianism against Arianism, and a noted Egyptian leader of the fourth century.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another name for athanasius ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Conflict with Arius and Arianism as well as successive Roman emperors shaped Athanasius' career. In 325, at the age of 27, Athanasius began his leading role against the Arians as a deacon and assistant to Bishop Alexander of Alexandria during the First Council of Nicaea. Roman emperor Constantine the Great had convened the council in May\u2013August 325 to address the Arian position that the Son of God, Jesus of Nazareth, is of a distinct substance from the Father. Three years after that council, Athanasius succeeded his mentor as archbishop of Alexandria. In addition to the conflict with the Arians (including powerful and influential Arian churchmen led by Eusebius of Nicomedia), he struggled against the Emperors Constantine, Constantius II, Julian the Apostate and Valens. He was known as Athanasius Contra Mundum (Latin for \"Athanasius Against the World\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nonetheless, within a few years after his death, Gregory of Nazianzus called him the \"Pillar of the Church\". His writings were well regarded by all following Church fathers in the West and the East, who noted their rich devotion to the Word-become-man, great pastoral concern and profound interest in monasticism. Athanasius is counted as one of the four great Eastern Doctors of the Church in the Catholic Church. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, he is labeled as the \"Father of Orthodoxy\". Some Protestants label him as \"Father of the Canon\". Athanasius is venerated as a Christian saint, whose feast day is 2 May in Western Christianity, 15 May in the Coptic Orthodox Church, and 18 January in the other Eastern Orthodox Churches. He is venerated by the Oriental and Eastern Orthodox Churches, the Catholic Church, the Lutheran churches, and the Anglican Communion.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the anglican communion ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 2, 6)"}]}, {"context": "The Council of Nicaea (325), \"passed twenty disciplinary canons for the better government of the Church. By one, C. 6, of these the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, were declared to possess jurisdiction over the Churches in their respective provinces.\" Hence, the Alexandrian Bishop was declared with the authority of Patriarch.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the council of nicaea elected ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 3, 0)"}, {"question": "who was the patriarch of patriarch ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 3, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Athanasius was born to a Christian family in the city of Alexandria or possibly the nearby Nile Delta town of Damanhur sometime between the years 293 and 298. The earlier date is sometimes assigned due to the maturity revealed in his two earliest treatises \"Contra Gentes\" (\"Against the Heathens\") and \"De Incarnatione\" (\"On the Incarnation\"), which were admittedly written about the year 318 before Arianism had begun to make itself felt, as those writings do not show an awareness of Arianism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However Cornelius Clifford places his birth no earlier than 296 and no later than 298, based on the fact that Athanasius indicates no first hand recollection of the Maximian persecution of 303, which he suggests Athanasius would have remembered if he had been ten years old at the time. Secondly, the \"Festal Epistles\" state that the Arians had accused Athanasius, among other charges, of not having yet attained the canonical age (30) and thus could not have been properly ordained as Patriarch of Alexandria in 328. The accusation must have seemed plausible. The Orthodox Church places his year of birth around 297.", "qas": [{"question": "what is his year of birth ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 5, 3)"}]}, {"context": "His parents were wealthy enough to afford giving him a fine secular education. He was, nevertheless, clearly not a member of the Egyptian aristocracy. Some Western scholars consider his command of Greek, in which he wrote most (if not all) of his surviving works, evidence that he may have been a Greek born in Alexandria. Historical evidence, however, indicates that he was fluent in Coptic as well given the regions of Egypt where he preached. Some surviving copies of his writings are in fact in Coptic, though scholars differ as to whether he himself wrote them in Coptic originally (which would make him the first patriarch to do so), or whether these were translations of writings originally in Greek.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rufinus relates a story that as Bishop Alexander stood by a window, he watched boys playing on the seashore below, imitating the ritual of Christian baptism. He sent for the children and discovered that one of the boys (Athanasius) had acted as bishop. After questioning Athanasius, Bishop Alexander informed him that the baptisms were genuine, as both the form and matter of the sacrament had been performed through the recitation of the correct words and the administration of water, and that he must not continue to do this as those baptized had not been properly catechized. He invited Athanasius and his playfellows to prepare for clerical careers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alexandria was the most important trade center in the whole empire during Athanasius's boyhood. Intellectually, morally, and politically\u2014it epitomized the ethnically diverse Graeco-Roman world, even more than Rome or Constantinople, Antioch or Marseilles. Its famous catechetical school, while sacrificing none of its famous passion for orthodoxy since the days of Pantaenus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen of Alexandria, Dionysius and Theognostus, had begun to take on an almost secular character in the comprehensiveness of its interests, and had counted influential pagans among its serious auditors.", "qas": [{"question": "what was alexandria 's most important trade center ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Peter of Alexandria, the 17th archbishop of Alexandria, was martyred in 311 in the closing days of the persecution, and may have been one of those teachers. His successor as bishop of Alexandria, Alexander of Alexandria (312\u2013328) was an Origenist as well as a documented mentor of Athanasius. . According to Sozomen; \"the Bishop Alexander 'invited Athanasius to be his commensal and secretary. He had been well educated, and was versed in grammar and rhetoric, and had already, while still a young man, and before reaching the episcopate, given proof to those who dwelt with him of his wisdom and acumen' \".(Soz., II, xvii)", "qas": [{"question": "when was peter of alexandria martyred ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Athanasius' earliest work, \"Against the Heathen \u2013 On the Incarnation\" (written before 319), bears traces of Origenist Alexandrian thought (such as repeatedly quoting Plato and using a definition from Aristotle's \"Organon\") but in an orthodox way. Athanasius was also familiar with the theories of various philosophical schools, and in particular with the developments of Neo-Platonism. Ultimately, Athanasius would modify the philosophical thought of the School of Alexandria away from the Origenist principles such as the \"entirely allegorical interpretation of the text\". Still, in later works, Athanasius quotes Homer more than once (\"Hist. Ar. 68, Orat. iv. 29\"). In his letter to Emperor Constantius, he presents a defense of himself bearing unmistakable traces of a study of Demosthenes \"de Corona\".\nAthanasius knew Greek and admitted not knowing Hebrew [see, e.g., the 39th Festal Letter of St. Athan.]. The Old Testament passages he quotes frequently come from the Septuagint Greek translation. Only rarely did he use other Greek versions (to Aquila once in the \"Ecthesis\", to other versions once or twice on the Psalms), and his knowledge of the Old Testament was limited to the Septuagint. The combination of Scriptural study and of Greek learning was characteristic of the famous Alexandrian School.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bishop (or Patriarch, the highest ecclesial rank in the Centre of the Church, in Alexandria) Alexander ordained Athanasius a deacon in 319. In 325, Athanasius served as Alexander's secretary at the First Council of Nicaea. Already a recognized theologian and ascetic, he was the obvious choice to replace his aging mentor Alexander as the Patriarch of Alexandria, despite the opposition of the followers of Arius and Meletius of Lycopolis.", "qas": [{"question": "who was bishop ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At length, in the Council of Nicaea, the term \"consubstantial\" (homo\u1e4fusion) was suggested by Athanasius: it was immediately adopted, and a formulary of faith embodying it was drawn up by Hosius of C\u00f3rdoba. From this time to the end of the Arian controversies the word \"consubstantial\" continued to be the test of Catholic orthodoxy. The formulary of faith drawn up by Hosius is known as the Nicene Creed. However, \"he was not the originator of the famous 'homo\u1e4fusion'. The term had been proposed in a non-obvious and illegitimate sense by Paul of Samosata to the Fathers at Antioch, and had been rejected by them as savouring of materialistic conceptions of the Godhead.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "While still a deacon under Alexander's care (or early in his patriarchate as discussed below) Athanasius may have also become acquainted with some of the solitaries of the Egyptian desert, and in particular Anthony the Great, whose life he is said to have written.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In about 319, when Athanasius was a deacon, a presbyter named Arius came into a direct conflict with Alexander of Alexandria. It appears that Arius reproached Alexander for what he felt were misguided or heretical teachings being taught by the bishop. Arius' theological views appear to have been firmly rooted in Alexandrian Christianity. He embraced a subordinationist Christology which taught that Christ was the divine Son (Logos) of God, made, not begotten, heavily influenced by Alexandrian thinkers like Origen, and which was a common Christological view in Alexandria at the time. Arius had support from a powerful bishop named Eusebius of Nicomedia (not to be confused with Eusebius of Caesarea), illustrating how Arius's subordinationist Christology was shared by other Christians in the Empire. Arius was subsequently excommunicated by Alexander, and he would begin to elicit the support of many bishops who agreed with his position.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Frances A. M. Forbes writes that when the Patriarch Alexander was on his death-bed he called Athanasius, who fled fearing he would be constrained to be made Bishop. \"When the Bishops of the Church assembled to elect their new Patriarch, the whole Catholic population surrounded the church, holding up their hands to Heaven and crying; \"Give us Athanasius!\" The Bishops had nothing better. Athanasius was thus elected, as Gregory tells us...\" (Pope Gregory I, would have full access to the Vatican Archives).", "qas": []}, {"context": "T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII: \"On the death of Alexander, five months after the termination of the Council of Nicaea, Athanasius was unanimously elected to fill the vacant see. He was most unwilling to accept the dignity, for he clearly foresaw the difficulties in which it would involve him. The clergy and people were determined to have him as their bishop, Patriarch of Alexandria, and refused to accept any excuses. He at length consented to accept a responsibility that he sought in vain to escape, and was consecrated in 326, when he was about thirty years of age.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' episcopate began on 9 May 328 as the Alexandrian Council elected Athanasius to succeed after the death of Alexander, and was consecrated in A.D. 326.\" . Patriarch Athanasius spent over 17 years in five exiles ordered by four different Roman Emperors, not counting approximately six more incidents in which Athanasius fled Alexandria to escape people seeking to take his life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During his first years as bishop, Athanasius visited the churches of his territory, which at that time included all of Egypt and Libya. He established contacts with the hermits and monks of the desert, including Pachomius, which proved very valuable to him over the years.", "qas": [{"question": "who did athanasius visit as bishop ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"During the forty-eight years of his episcopate, his history is told in the history of the controversies in which he was constantly engaged with the Arians, and of the sufferings he had to endure in defence of the Nicene faith. \nWe have seen that when Arius was allowed to return from exile in 328, Athanasius refused to remove the sentence of excommunication.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' first problem lay with Meletius of Lycopolis and his followers, who had failed to abide by the First Council of Nicaea. That council also anathematized Arius. Accused of mistreating Arians and Meletians, Athanasius answered those charges at a gathering of bishops in Tyre, the First Synod of Tyre, in 335. There, Eusebius of Nicomedia and other supporters of Arius deposed Athanasius. On 6 November, both sides of the dispute met with Emperor Constantine I in Constantinople. At that meeting, the Arians claimed Athanasius would try to cut off essential Egyptian grain supplies to Constantinople. He was found guilty, and sent into exile to Augusta Treverorum in Gaul (now Trier in Germany).", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Athanasius reached his destination in exile in 336, Maximinus of Trier received him, but not as a disgraced person. Athanasius stayed with him for two years. Paul I of Constantinople, who was banished by the Emperor Constantius, also stayed with him. Maximinus cautioned the Emperor Constans against the Arians, revealing their plots.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Emperor Constantine I died, Athanasius was allowed to return to his See of Alexandria. Shortly thereafter, however, Constantine's son, the new Roman Emperor Constantius II, renewed the order for Athanasius's banishment in 338. 'Within a few weeks he set out for Rome to lay his case before the Church at large. He had made his appeal to Pope Julius, who took up his cause with whole-heartedness that never wavered down to the day of that holy pontiff's death. The pope summoned a synod of bishops to meet in Rome. After a careful and detailed examination of the entire case, the primate's innocence was proclaimed to the Christian world.' . During this time, Gregory of Cappadocia was installed as the Patriarch of Alexandria, usurping the absent Athanasius. Athanasius did, however, remain in contact with his people through his annual \"Festal Letters\", in which he also announced on which date Easter would be celebrated that year.", "qas": [{"question": "who returned to alexandria after he died ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 339 or 340, nearly one hundred bishops met at Alexandria, declared in favor of Athanasius, and vigorously rejected the criticisms of the Eusebian faction at Tyre. Plus, Pope Julius I wrote to the supporters of Arius strongly urging Athanasius's reinstatement, but that effort proved in vain. Pope Julius I called a synod in Rome in 340 to address the matter, which proclaimed Athanasius the rightful bishop of Alexandria.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did pope julius i address a synod ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 23, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Early in the year 343 we find Athanasius had travelled, via Rome, from Alexandria, North Africa, to Gaul; nowadays Belgium / Holland and surrounding areas, where Hosius of C\u00f3rdoba was Bishop, the great champion of orthodoxy in the West. Together they set out for Serdica, Sofia. A full Council of the Church was convened / summoned there in deference to the Roman pontiff's wishes. The travel was a mammoth task in itself. At this great gathering of prelates, leaders of the Church, the case of Athanasius was taken up once more, that is, Athanasius was formally questioned over misdemeanours and even murder, (a man called Arsenius and using his body for magic \u2013 an absurd charge. They even produced Arsenius' severed hand.).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Council was convoked for the purpose of inquiring into the charges against Athanasius and other bishops, on account of which they were deposed from their sees by the Semi-Arian Synod of Antioch (341), and went into exile. It was called according to Socrates, (E. H. ii. 20) by the two Emperors, Constans and Constantius; but, according to Baronius by Pope Julius (337\u2013352), (Ad an. 343). One hundred and seventy six attended. Eusebian bishops objected to the admission of Athanasius and other deposed bishops to the Council, except as accused persons to answer the charges brought against them. Their objections were overridden by the orthodox bishops, about a hundred were orthodox, who were the majority. The Eusebians, seeing they had no chance of having their views carried, retired to Philoppopolis in Thrace, Philippopolis (Thracia), where they held an opposition council, under the presidency of the Patriarch of Antioch, and confirmed the decrees of the Synod of Antioch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' innocence was reaffirmed at the Council of Serdica. Two conciliar letters were prepared, one to the clergy and faithful of Alexandria, the other to the bishops of Egypt and Libya, in which the will of the Council was made known. Meanwhile, the Eusebian party had gone to Philippopolis, where they issued an anathema against Athanasius and his supporters. The persecution against the orthodox party broke out with renewed vigour, and Constantius was induced to prepare drastic measures against Athanasius and the priests who were devoted to him. Orders were given that if the Saint attempt to re-enter his see, he should be put to death. Athanasius, accordingly, withdrew from Serdica to Naissus in Mysia, where he celebrated the Easter festival of the year 344. It was Hosius who presided over the Council of Serdica, as he did for the First Council of Nicaea, which like the 341 synod, found Athanasius innocent. &. He celebrated his last Easter in exile in Aquileia in April 345, received by bishop Fortunatianus.", "qas": [{"question": "what was reaffirmed innocence at the council of serdica ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Eastern Bishop Gregory of Cappadocia died, probably of violence in June of 345. (Gregory, an Arian bishop, had taken over the See of Alexandria.) The emissary to the Emperor Constantius sent by the bishops of the Sardica Council to report the finding of the Council, who had been met at first with most insulting treatment, now received a favourable hearing. Constantius was forced to reconsider his decision, owing to a threatening letter from his brother Constans and the uncertain conditions of affairs on the Persian border, and he accordingly made up his mind to yield. But three separate letters were needed to overcome the natural hesitation of Athanasius. He passed rapidly from Aquileia to Treves, from Treves to Rome and from Rome by way of the northern route to Adrianople, Edirne, and Antioch, Ankara, where he met Constantius. He was accorded a gracious interview by the Emperor, and sent back to his See in triumph, and began his memorable ten years of peace, which lasted to the third exile, 356.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pope Julius died in April 352, and was succeeded by Liberius. For two years Liberius had been favourable to the cause of Athanasius; but driven at last into exile, he was induced to sign an ambiguous formula, from which the great Nicene text, the \"homoousion\", had been studiously omitted. In 355 a council was held at Milan, where in spite of the vigorous opposition of a handful of loyal prelates among the Western bishops, a fourth condemnation of Athanasius was announced to the world. With his friends scattered, the saintly Hosius in exile, and Pope Liberius denounced as acquiescing in Arian formularies, Athanasius could hardly hope to escape. On the night of 8 February 356, while engaged in services in the Church of St. Thomas, a band of armed men burst in to secure his arrest. It was the beginning of his third exile.", "qas": []}, {"context": "T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII: By Constantius' order, the sole ruler of The Roman Empire at the death of his brother Constans, the Council of Arles in 353, was held, which was presided over by Vincent, Bishop of Capua, in the name of Pope Liberius. The fathers terrified of the threats of the Emperor, an avowed Arian, they consented to the condemnation of Athanasius. The Pope refused to accept their decision, and requested the Emperor to hold another Council, in which the charges against Athanasius could be freely investigated. To this Constantius consented, for he felt able to control the Council in Milan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Three hundred bishops assembled in Milan, most from the West, only a few from the East, in 355. They met in the Church of Milan. Shortly, the Emperor ordered them to a hall in the Imperial Palace, thus ending any free debate. He presented an Arian formula of faith for their acceptance. He threatened any who refused with exile and death. All, with the exception of Dionysius (bishop of Milan), and the two Papal Legates, viz., Eusebius of Vercelli and Lucifer of Cagliari, consented to the Arian Creed and the condemnation of Athanasius. Those who refused were sent into exile. The decrees were forwarded to the Pope for approval, but were rejected, because of the violence to which the bishops were subjected.", "qas": [{"question": "how many bishops are in milan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 30, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Through the influence of the Eusebian faction at Constantinople, an Arian bishop, George of Cappadocia, was now appointed to rule the see of Alexandria. Athanasius, after remaining some days in the neighbourhood of the city, finally withdrew into the desert of Upper Egypt, where he remained for a period of six years, living the life of the monks, devoting himself to the composition of a group of writings; \"Apology to Constantius\", the \"Apology for his Flight\", the \"Letter to the Monks\", and the \"History of the Arians\".", "qas": [{"question": "who was appointed to rule the see of alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Constantius, renewing his previous policies favoring the Arians, banished Athanasius from Alexandria once again. This was followed, in 356, by an attempt to arrest Athanasius during a vigil service. Athanasius fled to Upper Egypt, where he stayed in several monasteries and other houses. During this period, Athanasius completed his work \"Four Orations against the Arians\" and defended his own recent conduct in the \"Apology to Constantius\" and \"Apology for His Flight\". Constantius' persistence in his opposition to Athanasius, combined with reports Athanasius received about the persecution of non-Arians by the new Arian bishop George of Laodicea, prompted Athanasius to write his more emotional \"History of the Arians\", in which he described Constantius as a precursor of the Antichrist.", "qas": [{"question": "what did he call athanasius ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 32, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Constantius ordered Liberius into exile in 356 giving him three days to comply. He was ordered into banishment to Beroea, in Thrace. He sent expensive presents if he were to accept the Arian position, which Liberius refused. He sent him five hundred pieces of gold \"to bear his charges\" which Liberius refused, saying he might bestow them on his flatters; as he did also a like present from the empress, bidding the messenger learn to believe in Christ, and not to persecute the Church of God. Attempts were made to leave the presents in The Church, but Liberius threw them out. Constantius hereupon sent for him under a strict guard to Milan, where in a conference recorded by Theodore, he boldly told Constantius that Athanasius had been acquitted at Sardica, and his enemies proved calumniators (see: \"calumny\") and impostors, and that it was unjust to condemn a person who could not be legally convicted of any crime. The emperor was reduced to silence on every article, but being the more out of patience, ordered him into banishment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liberius went into exile. Constantius, after two years went to Rome to celebrate the twentieth year of his reign. The ladies joined in a petition to him that he would restore Liberius. He assented, upon condition that he should comply with the bishops, then, at court. He subscribed the condemnation of Athanasius, and a confession or creed which had been framed by the Arians at Sirmium. And he no sooner had recovered his see that he declared himself for the Creed of Niceae, as Theodoret testifies. (Theodoret, Hist. lib. ii. c. 17.). The Emperor knew what he wanted people to believe. So did the bishops at his court. Athanasius stuck by the orthodox creed. Constantius was an avowed Arian, became sole ruler in 350, at the death of his brother, Constans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII:\nThe Arians sought the approval of an Ecumenical Council. They sought to hold two councils. Constantius, summoned the bishops of the East to meet at Seleucia in Isauria, and those of the West to Rimini in Italy. A preliminary conference was held by the Arians at Sirmium, to agree a formula of faith. A \"Homoeon\" creed was adopted, declaring The Son to be \"like the Father\". The two met in autumn of 359. At Seleucia, one hundred and fifty bishops, of which one hundred and five were semi-Arian. The semi-Arians refused to accept anything less than the \"Homoiousion\", (see: Homoiousian), formulary of faith. The Imperial Prefect was obliged to disband, without agreeing on any creed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acacius, the leader of the \"Homoean\" party went to Constantinople, where the Sirmian formulary of faith was approved by the \"Home Synod\", (consisted of those bishops who happened to be present at the Court for the time), and a decree of deposition issued against the leaders of the semi-Arians. At Rimini were over four hundred of which eighty were Arian, the rest were orthodox. The orthodox fathers refused to accept any creed but the Nicene, while the others were equally in favour of the Sirmian. Each party sent a deputation to the Emperor to say there was no probability to agreement, and asked for the bishops to return to their dioceses. For the purpose of wearing-down the orthodox bishops; (Sulpitius Severius says), Constantius delayed his answer for several months, and finally prevailed on them to accept the Sirmian creed. It was after this Council that Jerome said: \" ...the whole world groaned in astonishment to find itself Arian.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the council that said the world groaned was ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 36, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The Arians no longer presented an unbroken front to their orthodox opponents. The Emperor Constantius, who had been the cause of so much trouble, died on 4 November 361 and was succeeded by Julian. The proclamation of the new prince's accession was the signal for a pagan outbreak against the still dominant Arian faction in Alexandria. George, the usurping Bishop, was flung into prison and murdered. An obscure presbyter of the name of Pistus was immediately chosen by the Arians to succeed him, when fresh news arrived that filled the orthodox party with hope. An edict had been put forth by Julian permitting the exiled bishops of the \"Galileans\" to return to their \"towns and provinces\". Athanasius received a summons from his own flock, and he accordingly re-entered his episcopal capitol on 22 February 362.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 362 he convened a council at Alexandria, and presided over it with Eusebius of Vercelli. Athanasius appealed for unity among all those who had faith in Christianity, even if they differed on matters of terminology. This prepared the groundwork for his definition of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity. However, the council also was directed against those who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit, the human soul of Christ, and Christ's divinity. Mild measures were agreed on for those heretic bishops who repented, but severe penance was decreed for the chief leaders of the major heresies.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the leader of the council of nicaea ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 38, 0)"}]}, {"context": "With characteristic energy he set to work to re-establish the somewhat shattered fortunes of the orthodox party and to purge the theological atmosphere of uncertainty. To clear up the misunderstandings that had arisen in the course of the previous years, an attempt was made to determine still further the significance of the Nicene formularies. In the meanwhile, Julian, who seems to have become suddenly jealous of the influence that Athanasius was exercising at Alexandria, addressed an order to Ecdicius, the Prefect of Egypt, peremptorily commanding the expulsion of the restored primate, on the ground that he had never been included in the imperial act of clemency. The edict was communicated to the bishop by Pythicodorus Trico, who, though described in the \"Chronicon Athanasianum\" (XXXV) as a \"philosopher\", seems to have behaved with brutal insolence. On 23 October the people gathered about the proscribed bishop to protest against the emperor's decree; but Athanasius urged them to submit, consoling them with the promise that his absence would be of short duration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 362, the new Emperor Julian, noted for his opposition to Christianity, ordered Athanasius to leave Alexandria once again. Athanasius left for Upper Egypt, remaining there with the Desert Fathers until Julian's death on 26 June 363. Athanasius returned in secret to Alexandria, where he soon received a document from the new emperor, Jovian, reinstating him once more in his episcopal functions.", "qas": [{"question": "who ordered athanasius to leave alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 40, 0)"}, {"question": "where did athanasius return to alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 40, 2)"}]}, {"context": "His first act was to convene a council which reaffirmed the terms of the Nicene Creed. Early in September 363 he set out for Antioch on the Orontes, bearing a synodal letter, in which the pronouncements of this council had been embodied. At Antioch he had an interview with the new emperor, who received him graciously and even asked him to prepare an exposition of the orthodox faith. The following February Jovian died; and in October, 364, Athanasius was once more an exile.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the first act to convene a council ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 41, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Two years later, the Emperor Valens, who favored the Arian position, in his turn exiled Athanasius. This time Athanasius simply left for the outskirts of Alexandria, where he stayed for only a few months before the local authorities convinced Valens to retract his order of exile. Some early reports state that Athanasius spent this period of exile at his family's ancestral tomb in a Christian cemetery. It was during this period, the final exile, that he is said to have spent four months in hiding in his father's tomb. (Soz., \"Hist. Eccl.\", VI, xii; Soc., \"Hist. Eccl.\", IV, xii).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The accession of Valens gave a fresh lease of life to the Arian party. He issued a decree banishing the bishops who had been deposed by Constantius, but who had been permitted by Jovian to return to their sees. The news created the greatest consternation in the city of Alexandria itself, and the prefect, in order to prevent a serious outbreak, gave public assurance that the very special case of Athanasius would be laid before the emperor. But Athanasius seems to have divined what was preparing in secret against him. He quietly withdrew from Alexandria, 5 October, and took up his abode in a country house outside the city. Valens, who seems to have sincerely dreaded the possible consequences of another popular outbreak, within a few weeks issued orders allowing Athanasius to return to his episcopal see.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 366 Pope Liberius died and was succeeded by Pope Damasus, a man of strong character and holy life. Two years later, in a council of the Church, it was decreed that no Bishop should be consecrated unless he held the Creed of Nicea. (F. A. Forbes).", "qas": []}, {"context": "After returning to Alexandria in early 366, Athanasius spent his final years repairing all the damage done during the earlier years of violence, dissent, and exile. He resumed writing and preaching undisturbed, and characteristically re-emphasized the view of the Incarnation which had been defined at Nicaea. On 2 May 373, having consecrated Peter II, one of his presbyters as his successor, Athanasius died peacefully in his own bed, surrounded by his clergy and faithful supporters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Coptic literature, Athanasius is the first patriarch of Alexandria to use Coptic as well as Greek in his writings.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the first patriarch of alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 46, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Athanasius was not a speculative theologian. As he stated in his \"First Letters to Serapion\", he held on to \"the tradition, teaching, and faith proclaimed by the apostles and guarded by the fathers.\" He held that not only was the Son of God consubstantial with the Father, but so was the Holy Spirit, which had a great deal of influence in the development of later doctrines regarding the Trinity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' \"\"Letter Concerning the Decrees of the Council of Nicaea\"\" (\"De Decretis\"), is an important historical as well as theological account of the proceedings of that council, and another letter from 367 is the first known listing of all those books now accepted as the New Testament. (Earlier similar lists vary by the omission or addition of a few books.)", "qas": [{"question": "what is an important historical account of the council of nicaea ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 48, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Examples of Athanasius' polemical writings against his theological opponents include \"Orations Against the Arians\", his defence of the divinity of the Holy Spirit (\"Letters to Serapion\" in the 360s, and \"On the Holy Spirit\"), against Macedonianism and \"On the Incarnation\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius also wrote a two-part \"Against the Heathen\" and \"The Incarnation of the Word of God\". Completed probably early in his life, before the Arian controversy, they constitute the first classic work of developed Orthodox theology. In the first part, Athanasius attacks several pagan practices and beliefs. The second part presents teachings on the redemption. Also in these books, Athanasius put forward the belief, referencing , that the Son of God, the eternal Word (Logos) through whom God created the world, entered that world in human form to lead men back into the harmony from which they had earlier fallen away.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His other important works include his \"Letters to Serapion\", which defends the divinity of the Holy Spirit. In a letter to Epictetus of Corinth, Athanasius anticipates future controversies in his defense of the humanity of Christ. Another of his letters, to Dracontius, urges that monk to leave the desert for the more active duties of a bishop.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius also wrote several works of Biblical exegesis, primarily on Old Testament materials. The most important of these is his \"Epistle to Marcellinus\" (PG 27:12\u201345) on how to incorporate Psalm saying into one's spiritual practice. Excerpts remain of his discussions concerning the Book of Genesis, the Song of Solomon, and Psalms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Perhaps his most notable letter was his Festal Letter, written to his Church in Alexandria when he was in exile, as he could not be in their presence. This letter clearly shows his stand that accepting Jesus as the Divine Son of God is not optional but necessary:", "qas": [{"question": "what letter was written by paul vi in alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 53, 0)"}]}, {"context": "His biography of Anthony the Great entitled \"Life of Antony\"(\u0392\u03af\u03bf\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03a0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1 \u03a0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u1f08\u03bd\u03c4\u03c9\u03bd\u03af\u03bf\u03c5, \"Vita Antonii\") became his most widely read work. Translated into several languages, it became something of a best seller in its day and played an important role in the spreading of the ascetic ideal in Eastern and Western Christianity. It depicted Anthony as an illiterate yet holy man who continuously engaged in spiritual exercises in the Egyptian desert and struggled against demonic powers. It later served as an inspiration to Christian monastics in both the East and the West.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' works on ascetism also include a \"Discourse on Virginity\", a short work on \"Love and Self-Control\", and a treatise \"On Sickness and Health\" (of which only fragments remain).", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several other works ascribed to him, although not necessarily generally accepted as being his own. These include the so-called Athanasian creed (which is today generally seen as being of 5th-century Galician origin), and a complete \"Expositions on the Psalms\" (PG 27: 60\u2013545).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius was originally buried in Alexandria, Egypt, but his remains were later transferred to the Chiesa di San Zaccaria in Venice, Italy. During Pope Shenouda III's visit to Rome from 4 to 10 May 1973, Pope Paul VI gave the Coptic Patriarch a relic of Athanasius, which he brought back to Egypt on 15 May. The relic is currently preserved under the new Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo, Egypt. However, the majority of Athanasius's corpse remains in the Venetian church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "All major Christian denominations which officially recognize saints venerate Athanasius. Western Christians observe his feast day on 2 May, the anniversary of his death. The Catholic Church considers Athanasius a Doctor of the Church. For Coptic Christians, his feast day is Pashons 7 (now circa 15 May). Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendars remember Athanasius on 18 January.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gregory of Nazianzus (330\u2013390, also a Doctor of the Church), said: \"When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the Church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the rule of the orthodox faith ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 59, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Historian Cornelius Clifford said in his account: \"Athanasius was the greatest champion of Catholic belief on the subject of the Incarnation that the Church has ever known and in his lifetime earned the characteristic title of \"Father of Orthodoxy\", by which he has been distinguished ever since.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bl. John Henry Newman described him as a \"principal instrument, after the Apostles, by which the sacred truths of Christianity have been conveyed and secured to the world\". [Letters..]", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the letter that is used in the letters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 61, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Historian Cornelius Clifford says: \"His career almost personifies a crisis in the history of Christianity; and he may be said rather to have shaped the events in which he took part than to have been shaped by them.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The greater majority of Church leaders and the emperors fell into support for Arianism, so much so that Jerome, 340\u2013420, wrote of the period: \"The whole world groaned and was amazed to find itself Arian\". He, Athanasius, even suffered an unjust excommunication from Pope Liberius (325\u2013366) who was exiled and leant towards compromise, until he was allowed back to the See of Rome. Athanasius stood virtually alone against the world. (..see: \"Third Exile\", above.)", "qas": [{"question": "who wrote the period: ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 63, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It was the custom of the bishops of Alexandria to circulate a letter after Epiphany each year establishing the date of Easter, and therefore other moveable feasts. They also took the occasion to discuss other matters. Athanasius wrote forty-five festal letters. Athanasius' \"39th Festal Letter\", written in 367, is widely regarded as a milestone in the evolution of the canon of New Testament books.", "qas": [{"question": "the custom of the bishops of alexandria to do what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 64, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Athanasius is the first person to identify the same 27 books of the New Testament that are in use today. Up until then, various similar lists of works to be read in churches were in use. Athanasius compiled the list to resolve questions about such texts as \"The Epistle of Barnabas\". Athanasius includes the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah and places the Book of Esther among the \"7 books not in the canon but to be read\" along with the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Judith, Tobit, the Didache, and the Shepherd of Hermas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Athanasius' list is similar to the Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican Library, probably written in Rome, in 340 by Alexandrian scribes for Emperor Constans, during the period of Athanasius' seven-year exile in the city. The establishment of the canon was not a unilateral decision by a bishop in Alexandria, but the result of a process of careful investigation and deliberation, as documented in a codex of the Greek Bible and, twenty-seven years later, in his festal letter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pope Damasus I, the Bishop of Rome in 382, promulgated a list of books which contained a New Testament canon identical to that of Athanasius. A synod in Hippo in 393 repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' New Testament list (without the Epistle to the Hebrews), and the Council of Carthage (397) repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' complete New Testament list.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the bishop of rome ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 67, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Scholars debate whether Athanasius' list in 367 formed the basis for later lists. Because Athanasius' Canon is the closest canon of any of the Church Fathers to the one used by Protestant churches today, many Protestants point to Athanasius as the Father of the Canon.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the closest to mary ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 68, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In the light of Mother F. A. Forbes' research and reference to Pope Saint Gregory's writings, it would appear that Athanasius was constrained to be Bishop: She writes that when the Patriarch Alexander was on his death-bed he called Athanasius, who fled fearing he would be constrained to be made Bishop. \"When the Bishops of the Church assembled to elect their new Patriarch, the whole Catholic population surrounded the church, holding up their hands to Heaven and crying; \"Give us Athanasius!\" The Bishops had nothing better. Athanasius was thus elected, as Gregory tells us...\" (Pope Gregory I, would have full access to the Vatican Archives).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alban Butler, writes on the subject: \"Five months after this great Council, Nicae, St Alexander lying on his death-bed, recommended to his clergy and people the choice of Athanasius for his successor, thrice repeating his name. In consequence of his recommendation, the bishops of all Egypt assembled at Alexandria, and finding the people and clergy unanimous in their choice of Athanasius for patriarch, they confirmed the election about the middle of year 326. He seems, then, to have been about thirty years of age.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Christian denominations worldwide revere Athanasius as a saint, teacher, and father. They cite his defense of the Christology described in the first chapter of the Gospel of St. John and his significant theological works (C. S. Lewis calls \"On the Incarnation of the Word of God\" a \"masterpiece\") as evidence of his righteousness. They also emphasize his close relationship with Anthony the Great, the ancient monk who was one of the founders of the Christian monastic movement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Gospel of St. John and particularly the first chapter demonstrates the Divinity of Jesus. This Gospel in itself is the greatest support of Athanasius' stand. The Gospel of St. John's first chapter began to be said at the end of Mass, we believe as a result of Athanasius, and his life's stand, but quietly, and was later - together with some other originally private devotions - absorbed by the liturgical service proper as so-called \"Last Gospel\". The beginning of John's Gospel was much used as an object of special devotion throughout the Middle Ages; the practice of saying it at the altar grew, and eventually Pius V made this practice universal for the Roman Rite in his edition of the Missal (1570). It became a firm custom with exceptions in using an other Gospel in use from 1920.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gregory of Nazianzus (330\u2013390) begins Or. 21 with: \"When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what was the rule of the orthodox faith ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 73, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Cyril of Alexandria (370\u2013444) in the first letter says: \"Athanasius is one who can be trusted: he would not say anything that is not in accord with sacred scripture.\" (Ep 1).", "qas": [{"question": "who was the first letter of alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(31, 74, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Many modern historians point out that such a hostile attitude towards Athanasius is based on an unfair judgment of historical sources.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Saint Pope Pius X said in a letter to philosopher-friend and correspondent in the closing years of his life, (Epist. lxxi, ad Max.): \"Let what was confessed by the fathers of Nicaea prevail\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Throughout most of his career, Athanasius had many detractors. Classics scholar Timothy Barnes recounts ancient allegations against Athanasius: from defiling an altar, to selling Church grain that had been meant to feed the poor for his own personal gain, and even violence and murder to suppress dissent. Athanasius used \"Arian\" to describe both followers of Arius, and as a derogatory polemical term for Christians who disagreed with his formulation of the Trinity. Athanasius called many of his opponents \"Arian\", except for Meletius (Miletus).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Scholars now believe that the Arian Party was not monolithic, but held drastically different theological views that spanned the early Christian theological spectrum. They supported the tenets of Origenist thought and subordinationist theology, but had little else in common. Moreover, many labelled \"Arian\" did not consider themselves followers of Arius. In addition, non-Homoousian bishops disagreed with being labeled as followers of Arius, since Arius was merely a presbyter, while they were fully ordained bishops.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The old allegations continue to be made against Athanasius however many centuries later. For example, Richard E. Rubenstein suggests that Athanasius ascended to the rank of bishop in Alexandria under questionable circumstances because some questioned whether he had reached the minimum age of 30 years, and further that Athanasius employed force when it suited his cause or personal interests. Thus, he argues that a small number of bishops who supported Athanasius held a private consecration to make him bishop.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Azores", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Azores ( or ; , ), officially the Autonomous Region of the Azores (\"\"), is one of the two autonomous regions of Portugal (along with Madeira (\"Regi\u00e3o Aut\u00f3noma da Madeira\")). It is an archipelago composed of nine volcanic islands in the North Atlantic Ocean about west of continental Portugal, about west of Lisbon, in continental Portugal, about northwest of Morocco, and about southeast of Newfoundland, Canada.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Its main industries are agriculture, dairy farming, livestock, fishing, and tourism, which is becoming the major service activity in the region. In addition, the government of the Azores employs a large percentage of the population directly or indirectly in the service and tertiary sectors. The main capital of the Azores is Ponta Delgada.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are nine major Azorean islands and an islet cluster, in three main groups. These are Flores and Corvo, to the west; Graciosa, Terceira, S\u00e3o Jorge, Pico, and Faial in the centre; and S\u00e3o Miguel, Santa Maria, and the Formigas Reef to the east. They extend for more than and lie in a northwest-southeast direction.", "qas": [{"question": "how many major azorean islands are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "All the islands have volcanic origins, although some, such as Santa Maria, have had no recorded activity since the islands were settled. Mount Pico, on the island of Pico, is the highest point in Portugal, at . If measured from their base at the bottom of the ocean to their peaks, which thrust high above the surface of the Atlantic, the Azores are actually some of the tallest mountains on the planet.", "qas": [{"question": "what have the islands ever had no record ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The climate of the Azores is very mild for such a northerly location, being influenced by its distance from the continents and by the passing Gulf Stream. Due to the marine influence, temperatures remain mild year-round. Daytime temperatures normally fluctuate between and depending on season. Temperatures above or below are unknown in the major population centres. It is also generally wet and cloudy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The culture, dialect, cuisine, and traditions of the Azorean islands vary considerably, because these once-uninhabited and remote islands were settled sporadically over a span of two centuries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A small number of alleged hypogea, earthen structures carved into rocks that were used for burials, have been identified on the islands of Corvo, Santa Maria and Terceira by Portuguese archaeologist Nuno Ribeiro, who speculated that they might date back 2000 years, alluding to a human presence on the island before the Portuguese. These kinds of structures have been used in the Azores to store cereals, however, and suggestions by Ribeiro that they might be burial sites are unconfirmed. Detailed examination and dating to authenticate the validity of these speculations is lacking. It is unclear whether these structures are natural or man-made and whether they predate the 15th-century Portuguese colonization of the Azores. Solid confirmation of a pre-Portuguese human presence in the archipelago has not yet been published.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The islands were known in the fourteenth century, and parts of them appear in the Atlas Catalan. In 1427, a captain sailing for Henry the Navigator, possibly Gon\u00e7alo Velho, may have rediscovered the Azores, but this is not certain. In Thomas Ashe's 1813 work, \"A History of the Azores\", the author identified a Fleming, Joshua Vander Berg of Bruges, who made landfall in the archipelago during a storm on his way to Lisbon. He stated that the Portuguese explored the area and claimed it for Portugal. Other stories note the discovery of the first islands (S\u00e3o Miguel Island, Santa Maria Island and Terceira Island) by sailors in the service of Henry the Navigator, although there are few documents to support the claims.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the island that the marshall islands are ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 7, 4)"}, {"question": "in what century were the islands of the marshall islands known ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Although it is commonly said that the archipelago received its name from the goshawk ( in Portuguese), a common bird at the time of discovery, it is unlikely that the bird nested or hunted in the islands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There were no large animals on Santa Maria, so after its discovery and before settlement began, sheep were let loose on the island to supply future settlers with food. Settlement did not take place right away, however. There was not much interest among the Portuguese people in an isolated archipelago so far from civilization. Gon\u00e7alo Velho Cabral patiently gathered resources and settlers for the next three years (1433\u20131436), however, and sailed to establish colonies first on Santa Maria and then on S\u00e3o Miguel.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the large animals that were no large animals on the island ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Settlers cleared bush and rocks to plant crops\u2014grain, grape vines, sugar cane, and other plants suitable for local use and of commercial value. They brought domesticated animals, such as chickens, rabbits, cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs and built houses and established villages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The archipelago was largely settled from mainland Portugal. Portuguese settlers came from the provinces of Algarve, Minho, Alentejo and Ribatejo as well as Madeira. S\u00e3o Miguel was first settled in 1449, the settlers \u2013 mainly from the Estremadura, Alto Alentejo and Algarve areas of mainland Portugal, under the command of Gon\u00e7alo Velho Cabral \u2013 landed at the site of modern-day Povoa\u00e7\u00e3o. Many early settlers were Portuguese Sephardic Jews who fled the pressures of inquisition in mainland Portugal. In 1522, Vila Franca do Campo, then the capital of the island, was devastated by an earthquake and landslide that killed about 5,000 people, and the capital was moved to Ponta Delgada. The town of Vila Franca do Campo was rebuilt on the original site and today is a thriving fishing and yachting port. Ponta Delgada received its city status in 1546. From the first settlement, the pioneers applied themselves to agriculture and by the 15th century Graciosa exported wheat, barley, wine and brandy. The goods were sent to Terceira largely because of the proximity of the island.", "qas": [{"question": "why were the goods sent to terceira ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 11, 8)"}]}, {"context": "During the 18th and 19th centuries, Graciosa was host to many prominent figures, including Chateaubriand, the French writer who passed through upon his escape to America during the French revolution; Almeida Garrett, the Portuguese poet who visited an uncle and wrote some poetry while there; and Prince Albert of Monaco, the 19th century oceanographer who led several expeditions in the waters of the Azores. He arrived on his yacht \"Hirondelle\", and visited the \"furna da caldeira\", the noted hot springs grotto. In 1869, the author Mark Twain published \"The Innocents Abroad\", a travel book, where he described his time in the Azores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first reference to the island of S\u00e3o Jorge was made in 1439 but the actual date of discovery is unknown. In 1443 the island was already inhabited but active settlement only began with the arrival of the noble Flemish native \"Wilhelm Van der Haegen\". Arriving at Topo, where he lived and died, he became known as \"Guilherme da Silveira\" to the islanders. Jo\u00e3o Vaz Corte-Real received the captaincy of the island in 1483. Velas became a town before the end of the 15th century. By 1490, there were 2,000 Flemings living in the islands of Terceira, Pico, Faial, S\u00e3o Jorge and Flores. Because there was such a large Flemish settlement, the Azores became known as the Flemish Islands or the Isles of Flanders. Prince Henry the Navigator was responsible for this settlement. His sister, Isabel, was married to Duke Philip of Burgundy of which Flanders was a part. There was a revolt against Philip's rule and disease and hunger became rampant. Isabel appealed to Henry to allow some of the unruly Flemings to settle in the Azores. He granted this and supplied them with the necessary transportation and goods.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the first reference to the island of s\u00e3o jorge ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The settlement of the then-unoccupied islands started in 1439 with people mainly from the continental provinces of Algarve and Alentejo. In 1583, Philip II of Spain, as king of Portugal, sent his fleet to clear the Azores of a combined multinational force of adventurers, mercenaries, volunteers and soldiers who were attempting to establish the Azores as a staging post for a rival pretender to the Portuguese throne. Following the success of his fleet at the Battle of Ponta Delgada captured enemies were hanged from yardarms, as they were considered pirates by Philip II. Opponents receiving the news variously portrayed Philip II as a despot or \"Black Legend\"; the sort of insult widely made against contemporary monarchs engaged in aggressive empire building and the European Wars of Religion. An English raid of the Azores in 1589 successfully plundered some harbouring ships and islands; a repeat eight years later, the Islands Voyage, failed. Spain held the Azores under the \"Babylonian captivity\" of 1580\u20131642. In the late 16th century, the Azores and Madeira began to face problems of overpopulation. Spawning from that particular economic problem, some of the people began to emigrate to Brazil.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the death of Henry, the Cardinal-King of Portugal the nation fell into a dynastic crisis with various pretenders to the Crown of Portugal. Following his proclamation in Santar\u00e9m, Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato was acclaimed in the Azores in 1580 (through his envoy Ant\u00f3nio da Costa), but was expelled from the continent following the Battle of Alc\u00e2ntara. Yet, through the administration of Cipriano de Figueiredo, governor of Terceira (who continued to govern Terceira in the name of ill-fated, former-king Sebastian of Portugal), the Azoreans resisted attempts to conquer the islands (including specifically at the Battle of Salga). It was Figueiredo and Violante do Canto who helped organize a resistance on Terceira that influenced some of the response of the other islands, even as internal politics and support for Philip's faction increased on the other islands (including specifically on S\u00e3o Miguel, where the Gon\u00e7alvez da C\u00e2mara family supported the Spanish pretender).", "qas": [{"question": "who supported the spanish ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 15, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Azores were the last part of the Portuguese Empire to resist Philip's reign over Portugal (Macau resisted any official recognition) and were returned to Portuguese control with the end of the Iberian Union in 1640, not by the professional military, who were used in the Restoration War in the mainland, but by local people attacking a fortified Castilian garrison.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Portuguese Civil War (1828\u20131834) had strong repercussions in the Azores. In 1829, in Praia da Vit\u00f3ria, the Liberals won over the absolutists, making Terceira Island the main headquarters of the new Portuguese regime and also where the Council of Regency () of Maria II of Portugal was established.", "qas": [{"question": "who won the main ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Beginning in 1868, Portugal issued its stamps overprinted with \"\" for use in the islands. Between 1892 and 1906, it also issued separate stamps for the three administrative districts of the time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1836 to 1976, the archipelago was divided into three districts, equivalent (except in area) to those in the Portuguese mainland. The division was arbitrary, and did not follow the natural island groups, rather reflecting the location of each district capital on the three main cities (none of which were on the western group).", "qas": [{"question": "how many districts were in the archipelago ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nIn 1931 the Azores (together with Madeira and Portuguese Guinea) revolted against the Ditadura Nacional and were held briefly by military rebels.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1943, during World War II, the Portuguese ruler Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar leased air and naval bases in the Azores to Great Britain. The occupation of these facilities in October 1943 was codenamed \"Operation Alacrity\" by the British.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This was a key turning point in the Battle of the Atlantic, enabling the Royal Air Force, the U.S. Army Air Forces, and the U.S. Navy to provide aerial coverage in the Mid-Atlantic gap. This helped them to protect convoys and to hunt hostile German U-boats.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1944, the U.S. constructed a small and short-lived air base on the island of Santa Maria. In 1945, a new base was constructed on the island of Terceira, and it is named Lajes Field. This air base is in an area called Lajes, a broad, flat sea terrace that had been a large farm. Lajes Field is a plateau rising out of the sea on the northeast corner of the island. This air base is a joint American and Portuguese venture. Lajes Field continues to support the American and Portuguese Armed Forces. During the Cold War, U.S. Navy P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare squadrons patrolled the North Atlantic Ocean for Soviet Navy submarines and surface warships. Since its opening, Lajes Field has been used for refuelling American cargo planes bound for Europe, Africa, and the Middle East. The U.S. Navy keeps a small squadron of its ships at the harbor of Praia da Vit\u00f3ria, southeast of Lajes Field.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the island that is located on the island of santa maria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The airfield also has a small commercial terminal handling scheduled and chartered passenger flights from the other islands in the Azores, Europe, Africa, and North America.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1976, the Azores became the Autonomous Region of the Azores (), one of the autonomous regions of Portugal, and the subdistricts of the Azores were eliminated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2003, the Azores saw international attention when United States President George W. Bush, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Spanish Prime Minister Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar and Portuguese Prime Minister Jos\u00e9 Manuel Dur\u00e3o Barroso held a summit there days before the commencement of the Iraq War.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The archipelago of the Azores is located in the middle of the northern hemisphere of the Atlantic Ocean and extends along a west-northwest to east-southeast orientation (between 36.5\u00b0\u201340\u00b0 North latitudes and 24.5\u00b0\u201331.5\u00b0 West longitudes) in an area approximately wide. The islands of the Azores emerged from what is called the Azores Plateau, a 5.8 million km region that is morphologically accented by a depth of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "From a geostructural perspective the Azores is located above an active triple junction between three of the world's large tectonic plates (the North American Plate, the Eurasian Plate and the African Plate), a condition that has translated into the existence of many faults and fractures in this region of the Atlantic. The westernmost islands of the archipelago (Corvo and Flores) are located in the North American Plate, while the remaining islands are located within the boundary that divides the Eurasian and African Plates.", "qas": [{"question": "where are the islands located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 28, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The principal tectonic structures that exist in the region of the Azores are the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the Terceira Rift, the Azores Fracture Zone and the Gl\u00f3ria Fault. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is the main frontier between the American Plate and the African-Eurasian Plates that crosses the Azores Plateau between the islands of Flores and Faial from north to south then to the southwest; it is an extensive form crossed by many transform faults running perpendicular to its north-south orientation, that is seismically active and susceptible to volcanism. The Terceira Rift is a system of fractures that extends from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the Gl\u00f3ria Fault that represents the main frontier between the Eurasian and African Plates. It is defined by a line of submarine volcanoes and island mounts that extend northwest to southeast for about , from the area west of Graciosa until the islets of the Formigas, that includes the islands of Graciosa, Terceira and S\u00e3o Miguel. Its northwest limit connects to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, while the southeast section intersects the Gloria Fault southeast of the island of Santa Maria. The Azores Fracture Zone extends from the Gl\u00f3ria Fault and encompasses a relatively inactive area to the south of the islands of the Central and Eastern groups north to the Terceira Rift, along a 45\u00b0 angle. The Gl\u00f3ria Fault, for its part, extends along a linear line from the Azores to the Azores\u2013Gibraltar Transform Fault.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The island's volcanism is associated with the rifting along the Azores Triple Junction; the spread of the crust along the existing faults and fractures has produced many of the active volcanic and seismic events, while supported by buoyant upwelling in the deeper mantle, some associate with an Azores hotspot. Most of the volcanic activity has centered, primarily, along the Terceira Rift. From the beginning of the island's settlement, around the 15th century, there have been 28 registered volcanic eruptions (15 terrestrial and 13 submarine). The last significant volcanic eruption, the Capelinhos volcano (), occurred off the coast of the island of Faial in 1957; the most recent volcanic activity occurred in the seamounts and submarine volcanoes off the coast of Serreta and in the Pico-S\u00e3o Jorge Channel. The islands have many examples of volcano-built geomorphology including many of the caves and subterranean lava tubes (such as the Gruta das Torres, Algar do Carv\u00e3o, Gruta do Natal, Gruta das Cinco Ribeiras), the coastal lava fields (like the coast of Feteiras, Faial, the Mist\u00e9rio of Prainha or S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o on Pico Island) in addition to the currently inactive cones in central S\u00e3o Miguel Island, the aforementioned Capelinhos on Faial, the volcanic complexes of Terceira or Plinian caldeira of Corvo Island.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the coast ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 30, 4)"}]}, {"context": "The islands of the archipelago were formed through volcanic and seismic activity during the Neogene Period; the first embryonic surfaces started to appear in the waters of Santa Maria during the Miocene epoch (from circa 8 million years ago). The sequence of the island formation has been generally characterized as: Santa Maria (8.12 Ma), S\u00e3o Miguel (4.1 Ma), Terceira (3.52 Ma), Graciosa (2.5 Ma), Flores (2.16 Ma), Faial (0.7 Ma), S\u00e3o Jorge (0.55 Ma), Corvo (0.7 Ma) and the youngest, Pico (0.27 Ma). Although all islands have experienced volcanism during their geological history, within recorded \"human settlement\" history the islands of Santa Maria, Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo have not experienced any volcanic eruptions; in addition to active fumaroles and hot-springs, the remaining islands have had sporadic eruptions since the 14th century. Apart from the Capelinhos volcano in 1957\u201358, the last recorded instance of \"island formation\" occurred off the coast of S\u00e3o Miguel, when the island of Sabrina was briefly formed.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the last time of sabrina ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 31, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Owing to its geodynamic environment, the region has been center of intense seismic activity, particularly along its tectonic boundaries on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Terceira Rift. Seismic events although frequent, usually tectonic or vulco-tectonic in nature, but in general low to medium intensities, occasionally punctuated by events of level 5 or greater on the Richter magnitude scale. The most severe earthquake was registered in 1757, near Calheta on the island of S\u00e3o Jorge, which exceeded 7 on the Richter magnitude scale. In comparison, the 1522 earthquake that was mentioned by historian Gaspar Frutuoso measured 6.8, but its effects were judged to be X (\"Extreme\") on the Mercalli intensity scale, and was responsible for the destruction of Vila Franca do Campo and landslides that may have killed more than 5,000 of the inhabitants.\nThe nine islands that compose the archipelago occupy a surface area of , that includes both the main islands and many islets located in their vicinities. Each of the islands has its own distinct geomorphological characteristics that make them unique: Corvo (the smallest island) is a crater of a major Plinian eruption; Flores (its neighbor on the North American Plate) is a rugged island carved by many valleys and escarpments; Faial characterized for its shield volcano and caldera (Cabe\u00e7o Gordo); Pico, is the highest point, at , in the Azores and continental Portugal; Graciosa is known for its active Furnas do Enxofre and mixture of volcanic cones and plains; S\u00e3o Jorge is a long slender island, formed from fissural eruptions over thousands of years; Terceira, almost circular, is the location of one of the largest craters in the region; S\u00e3o Miguel is the largest island, and is pitted with many large craters and fields of spatter cones; and Santa Maria, the oldest island, is heavily eroded, being one of the few places to encounter brown sandy beaches in the archipelago. They range in surface area from the largest, S\u00e3o Miguel, at to the smallest, Corvo, at approximately .", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the largest city in mexico city ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 32, 6)"}]}, {"context": "These islands can be divided into three recognizable groups located on the Azores Plateau:\nIn addition, several sub-surface reefs (particularly the Dollabarat on the fringe of the Formigas), banks (specifically the Princess Alice Bank and D. Jo\u00e3o de Castro Bank, as well as many hydrothermal vents and sea-mounts are monitored by the regional authorities, owing to the complex geotectonic and socioeconomic significance within the economic exclusion zone of the archipelago.\nThe archipelago lies in the Palearctic ecozone, forming a unique biome that includes the macaronesian subtropical laurissilva, with many endemic species of plants and animals. In total, there are at least 6112 terrestrial species, of which about 411 are endemic. The majority (75%) of these endemics are animals, mostly arthropods and mollusks. New species are found regularly in the Azores (e.g., 30 different new species of land snails were discovered circa 2013).\nEven though the Azores look very green and sometimes wild, the vegetation has been extremely altered. A great part of it has been wiped out in the past 600 years for its valuable wood (for tools, buildings, boats, fire wood, and so on) and to clear land for agriculture. As a result, it is estimated that more than half of insects on the Graciosa island have disappeared or will become extinct. Many cultivated places (which are traditionally dedicated to pasture or to growing colocasia, potatoes, maize and other crops) have now been abandoned, especially as a result of emigration. Consequently, some invasive plants have filled these deserted and disturbed lands. Hydrangeas are another potential pest, but their threat is less serious. Notwithstanding the fact that hydrangeas were introduced from America or Asia, some locals consider them a symbol of the archipelago and propagate them along roadsides, helping the plants to escape into the wild. \"Cryptomeria\", the Japanese cedar, is a conifer extensively grown for its timber. The two most common of these alien species are \"Pittosporum undulatum\" and \"Acacia melanoxylon\". They are usually restricted to ancient agricultural land and only rarely penetrate into undisturbed native vegetation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Reforestation efforts with native laurissilva vegetation have been done successfully in many parts of the Azores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Azores has at least two endemic bird species. The Azores bullfinch, or \"Priolo\", is restricted to remnant laurisilva forest in the mountains at the eastern end of S\u00e3o Miguel and is classified by BirdLife International as endangered. Monteiro's storm-petrel, described to science as recently as 2008, is known to breed in just two locations in the islands, but may occur more widely. An extinct species of owl, the S\u00e3o Miguel scops owl, has also recently been described, which probably became extinct after human settlement due to habitat destruction and the introduction of alien species. The Azores also has an endemic bat, the Azores noctule, which is unusual in regularly feeding during the day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The islets of the Formigas (the Portuguese word for \"ants\"), including the area known as the Dollabarat Reef, have a rich environment of maritime species, such as black coral and manta rays, different species of sharks, whales, and sea turtles. On S\u00e3o Miguel there are notable micro-habitats formed by hot springs that host extremophile microorganisms.", "qas": []}, {"context": "17 new marine reserves (with special conservation status) were added to the Azorean Marine Park (which covers currently around 900.000 km)", "qas": []}, {"context": "The archipelago is spread out in the area between 37\u00b0 N and the parallels of latitude that pass through the Lisbon area (38\u00b0 43'\u00a0/ 38\u00b0 55' N), giving it a generally tepid, oceanic, subtropical climate, with mild annual oscillations. Daily maximum temperatures usually range between . The average annual rainfall increases from east to west, ranging from 700 to 1600 millimetres (27.6\u201363\u00a0in) in the east, and reaching on Mount Pico, the highest Portuguese mountain at . The Azores High, an area of high atmospheric pressure, is named after the islands. Under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, there are different local climates, one of it is \"dry-summer subtropical\", often referred to as \"Mediterranean\". Rivas Martinez data, presents several different bioclimatic zones for the Azores Seasonal lag is extreme in the low-sun half of the year, with December being milder than April in terms of mean temperatures.\nAzores have the warmest winters in Europe (still within the European continental plate). During summer the lag is somewhat lower, with August being the warmest month. There has never been a frost, snowfall or freeze ever recorded at sea level on any of the islands. The coldest weather in winter usually comes from northwesterly air masses originating from Labrador in Canada. But because those air masses are modified as they pass across the warmer Atlantic Ocean, temperatures by day even then exceed .", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition, the Instituto de Meteorologia has identified the following weather extremes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Azores are known for small hurricanes. A total of 14 tropical or subtropical cyclones have affected the region in history. Most of them were either extratropical or tropical storms when they affected the region, although several Category 1 hurricanes have reached the Azores. Only one major hurricane has ever impacted the Azores; Hurricane Ophelia in 2017, at Category 3 intensity. The following storms have impacted the region while at Category 1 strength: Hurricane Fran in 1973, Hurricane Emmy in 1976, Hurricane Gordon in 2006, Hurricane Gordon in 2012 and Hurricane Alex in 2016. Several tropical storms have hit the region, including Tropical Storm Irma in 1978, Hurricane Bonnie in 1992, Hurricane Charley in 1992, Hurricane Erika in 1997, and Hurricane Gaston in 2016. Storms that were extratropical when they impacted the region include Hurricane Tanya in 1995, Tropical Storm Ana in 2003 and Tropical Storm Grace in 2009. In addition, the 2005 Azores subtropical storm affected the region in October 2005.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Azores are divided into 19 municipalities (); each municipality is further divided into parishes (), of which there is a total of 156 in all of the Azores. The municipalities, by island, are:\nThere are six cities (Portuguese: \"cidades\") in the Azores: Ponta Delgada, Lagoa and Ribeira Grande on the island of S\u00e3o Miguel; Angra do Hero\u00edsmo and Praia da Vit\u00f3ria on the island of Terceira, and Horta on Faial. Three of these, Ponta Delgada, Angra and Horta are considered capital/administrative cities to the regional government: homes to the President (Ponta Delgada), the Judiciary (Angra) and the Regional Assembly (Horta). Angra also serves as the ecclesiastical centre of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Angra, the episcopal see of the Azores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the 2011 Census, population in the Azores was 246,746 at a density of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Azores were uninhabited when Portuguese navigators arrived in the early 15th century; settlement began in 1439 with migrants from several regions of mainland Portugal and from Madeira. The islands were populated mainly by Portuguese immigrants from the Algarve, Alentejo, and Minho; in an effort to escape the dangers of the Portuguese inquisition on mainland Portugal, however, many Portuguese Sephardic Jews settled on the islands in large numbers. Azorean Jews had surnames such as: Rodrigues, Pacheco, Oliveira, Pereira, Pimentel, Nunes, Mendes, Pinto, \u00c1lvares, Henriques, Cardozo, Teixeira, Vasconcelos etc. The islands were also settled by Moorish prisoners, and African slaves from Guinea, Cape Verde and S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9; Flemish, French and Galicians also contributed to the initial settlement. Thus the Azorean population received a significant contribution from people with genetic backgrounds other than Portuguese.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The nature of the economy dictated that African slavery never became common in the Azores because they were sent to Brazil and the Caribbean. Only a few remained in the Azores to help with domestic chores, although the islands sometimes served as a waypoint for ships carrying African slaves.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Africans, Moors, Jews, Scots, Germans, Italians, French, Spanish, Flemish and Portuguese all migrated to the Azores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As in continental Portugal, the most frequent mtDNA haplogroup in the Azores is H (45.2%), followed by U (16.7%), T (10.1%), K (6.5%), pre-HV clades (5.6%) and a smaller African L haplogroups frequency (3.4%) than in Madeira.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Inhabitants of the various islands have DNA of various origins. A minority on the islands has non European ancestry.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a minority on tuvalu ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 47, 1)"}, {"question": "what are inhabitants of various islands ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 47, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since the 17th century, many Azoreans have emigrated, mainly to Brazil, Uruguay, the United States and Canada. Rhode Island and Southeastern Massachusetts, especially the cities of New Bedford, Bristol, Barrington, Pawtucket, Central Falls, West Warwick, Hudson, Marlborough, East Providence, River Point, Somerset, Taunton and Fall River have been, and remain, the primary destination for Azorean emigrants. Emigrants from the East coast returned to their homeland and taught the American dory fishing technique to the Portuguese who began catching cod again on the Grand Bank in the 19th century.\nNorthern California was the final destination for many of the Massachusetts immigrants who then moved on to the San Joaquin Valley, especially the city of Turlock, just south of Modesto. In the late 1800s many Azoreans emigrated to the Hawaiian islands. The tuna fishing industry drew a significant number of Azoreans to the Point Loma neighborhood of San Diego, in Southern California. From 1921 to 1977, about 250,000 Azoreans immigrated to Rhode Island and Massachusetts.", "qas": [{"question": "approximately how many azoreans fled to norfolk island ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 48, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Many Azoreans also moved to Bermuda and Hawaii (Portuguese immigration to Hawaii). Florian\u00f3polis and Porto Alegre in the Southern Region of Brazil were founded by Azoreans, who accounted for over half of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina's population in the late 18th century. As late as 1960 mass immigration currents were registered to Brazil, and many were from the Azores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1976, the Azores is an autonomous region integrated within the framework of the Portuguese Republic. It has its own government and autonomous legislature within its own political-administrative statute and organic law. Its governmental organs include: the Legislative Assembly, a unicameral parliament composed of 52 elected deputies, elected by universal suffrage for a four-year term; the Regional Government and Presidency, with parliamentary legitimacy, composed of a President, a Vice-President and seven Regional Secretaries responsible for day-to-day operations. It is represented in the Council of Ministers by a representative appointed by the President of the Republic, which was created during the revision of the constitution of 2004 (which, among other things, removed the older Portuguese representative that was appointed by the President of the Republic, beholden to the Council of State and coincident with the President).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since becoming a Portuguese autonomous region, the executive branch of the regional authority has been located in Ponta Delgada, the legislative branch in Horta, and the judicial branch in Angra do Hero\u00edsmo.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The islands of the archipelago do not have independent status in law, except in electoral law and are governed by 19 municipalities that subdivide the islands. In addition, until the administrative reform of the 19th century, the following civil parishes had municipal standing: Topo (today integrated into the municipality of Calheta, S\u00e3o Jorge); Praia (today integrated into municipality of Santa Cruz da Graciosa); S\u00e3o Sebasti\u00e3o (today an integral part of the municipality of Angra do Hero\u00edsmo); Capelas (now part of the municipality of Ponta Delgada); and \u00c1gua de Pau (now a civil parish in the municipality of Lagoa). These civil parishes still retain their titles of \"vila\" in name only; the populations of Capelas and neighbouring parish still protest the change and promote the restoration of their status. The municipalities are further subdivided into several civil parishes, with the exception of Corvo (the only municipality by law without a civil parish, owing to its size).", "qas": [{"question": "how many municipalities are in the marshall islands ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 52, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Azorean politics is dominated by the two largest Portuguese political parties, the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Socialist Party (PS), the latter holding a majority in the Regional Legislative Assembly. The Democratic and Social Center / People's Party (CDS/PP), the Left Bloc (BE), the Unitarian Democratic Coalition (CDU) and the People's Monarchist Party (PPM) are also represented in the local parliament. Currently, , the Socialist Party (PS) and its leader, Carlos C\u00e9sar have a plurality of the seats in the Assembly, and operate the Regional Government. Although the PS dominates the regional politics, the PSD is traditionally popular in city and town council elections.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As part of Portugal, the Azores are in the European Union and Schengen Area. They are also in the European Union Customs Union and VAT area, but levy a lower rate of VAT than applies on the mainland. The Azores, like Madeira and the Canary Islands, are among member state territories with special status, as one of the designated \"Outermost Regions\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Each of the nine islands has an airport, although the majority are airfields rather than airports. The commercial terminals in Ponta Delgada, Horta, Vila do Porto and Santa Cruz das Flores are operated by ANA \u2013 Aeroportos de Portugal, a public entity that oversees the operations of airports across Portugal. The remaining, except for Lajes Field, are operated by the Regional Government. Lajes is a military airbase, as well as a commercial airport, and is operated by the Portuguese Armed Forces in conjunction with the United States.", "qas": [{"question": "how many islands have an airport ?", "answers": [], "id": "(32, 55, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The airports are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Azores has had a long history of water transport to overcome distances and establish inter-community contacts and trade. Consequently, the shipbuilding industry developed in many islands, from small fishing boats, to whaling sloops to larger passenger services. Passenger traffic to the main islands (S\u00e3o Miguel, Santa Maria, Terceira and Faial) began in the 17th century, and between the 18th\u201319th century, the \"Pico Yacht\" controlled the lucrative summer traffic season.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After 1871, the \"Insulana Shipping Company\" was the only entity responsible for regular traffic between the islands (except Corvo), Madeira and the United States. Yet, cargo and passenger transportation ceased in the 1970s, and the ships were sold or converted into tuna fishing boats. For the next 20 years, commercial maritime service between the islands ceased (except between Faial-Pico and Lajes das Flores-Vila do Corvo).", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Transma\u00e7or\" (Transportes Mar\u00edtimos A\u00e7orianos, Lda.) was founded on 22 December 1987, resulting from the fusion of \"Empresa das Lanchas do Pico, Ld\", owners of the ships \"Espalamaca\" and \"Calheta\" (ships that had travelled the canal between Faial and Pico for several years); \"Empresa A\u00e7oreana de Transportes Mar\u00edtimos, Lda\", which operated the ship \"Terra Alta\"; and \"Transcanal (Transportes Mar\u00edtimos do Canal, Lda.)\" operator the traditional boats \"Picaroto\" and \"Manuel Jos\u00e9\". In the Central Group, the shipping company operates four to six time daily connections between Horta and Madalena throughout the year, using its small fleet of ships (\"Cruzeiro das Ilhas\", \"Cruzeiro do Canal\", \"Expresso das Ilhas\" and \"Expresso do Tri\u00e2ngulo\"), in addition to inter-island connections between Faial, Pico, S\u00e3o Jorge and Terceira during the summer months.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Meanwhile, new initiatives began in the late 1990s: the catamaran \"Iapetos\" began services, followed by \"Lady of Mann\" and \"Golfinho Azul\" (chartered by A\u00e7orline).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2005, \"Atl\u00e2nticoline\" was established, providing services with the ships \"Ilha Azul\" and , later adding the \"Viking\" in 2009. In 2009, Atlanticoline was involved in a controversial rejection of a 750-passenger, 150-vehicle ship ordered from the \"Estaleiros de Viana do Castelo\" (\"Viana do Castelo Shipyards\"). The \"Atlantida\", a 50 million Euro cruiser (as part of a two-ship deal with the other named \"Anticiclone\") was rejected in 2009 by Atlanticoline for the under-performance of the power-plant. Although it would only result in a five-minute delay between islands, the public company rejected the ship, and the contract was broken over the builder's inability to deliver the required ship on time. While, the ship was being shopped to other interested parties (Hugo Ch\u00e1vez once considered purchasing the ferryboat in 2010), no interested buyers appeared, and ENVC decided to cede the \"Atlantida\" to Atl\u00e2nticoline as part of the latter's open international competition to charter two ships in 2012.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 20 June 2011, the Regional Government announced that it would purchase 60% of Transma\u00e7or, equivalent to 500,000 Euro of the company's capital. With this transaction the Autonomous government of the Azores ceded control, of which it once had 88% of the capital. The signed memorandum of understanding concluded negotiations between the various parties involved, under which the liability of Transma\u00e7or (worth a total of 8 million Euro) was divided equally between the Region and businessman Jos\u00e9 Almeida, who is now the holder of a majority stake in the company.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Similarly, the Regional Government approved the consolidation of the three individual port authorities (Administra\u00e7\u00e3o dos Portos do Tri\u00e2ngulo e Grupo Ocidental, Administra\u00e7\u00e3o dos Portos da Terceira e Graciosa and the Administra\u00e7\u00e3o dos Portos das Ilhas de S\u00e3o Miguel e Santa Maria) and regional Portos dos A\u00e7ores into one entity that resulted in a 2.2 million Euro cost savings, in addition to a reduction from 11 to three administrators.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Azoreans have developed their own distinct regional identity and cultural traits, from a combination of continental Portuguese customs brought by various waves of immigration and local political and environmental factors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Religious festivals, patron saints and traditional holidays mark the Azorean calendar. The most important religious events are tied with the festivals associated with the cult of the Holy Spirit, commonly referred to as the festivals of the Holy Spirit (or \"Esp\u00edrito Santo\"), rooted in millenarian dogma and held on all islands from May to September. These festivals are very important to the Azorean people, who are primarily Roman Catholic, and combine religious rituals with processions celebrating the benevolence and egalitarianism of neighbours. These events are centred around \"treatros\" or \"imp\u00e9rios\", small buildings that host the meals, adoration and charity of the participants, and used to store the artefacts associated with the events. On Terceira, for example, these imp\u00e9rios have grown into ornate buildings painted and cared for by the local brotherhoods in their respective parishes. The events focus on the members of local parishes, not tourists, but all are welcome, as sharing is one of the main principles of the festivals. Some limited events focus on tourists, including a public event that the city government of Ponta Delgada on the island of S\u00e3o Miguel holds, which attracts visitors and locals.\nAnother event, the Festival of the Lord Holy Christ of the Miracles (or \"Senhor Santo Cristo dos Milagres\") in Ponta Delgada on the island of S\u00e3o Miguel, is the largest individual religious event in the Azores, and takes place on Rogation Sunday. Pilgrims from within the Portuguese diaspora normally travel to Ponta Delgada to participate in an afternoon procession behind the image of Christ along the flower-decorated streets of the city. Although the solemn procession is only held on one day, the events of the Festival of Senhor Santo Cristo occur over a period of a week and involve a ritual of moving the image between the main church and convent nightly, ultimately culminating in the procession, which is televised within the Azores and to the Portuguese diaspora.\nThe Sanjoaninas Festivities in Angra do Hero\u00edsmo on Terceira are held in June honoring Saint Anthony, Saint Peter and Saint John the Baptist, in a large religious celebration.\nThe festival of Our Lady of Lourdes (or \"Nossa Senhora de Lourdes\"), patron saint of whalers, begins in Lajes on Pico Island on the last Sunday of August and runs through the week\u2014Whalers Week. It is marked by social and cultural events connected to the tradition of whale hunting. The Wine Harvest Festival (or \"Festa das Vindimas\"), takes place during the first week of September and is a century-old custom of the people of Pico.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On Corvo the people celebrate their patron saint Nossa Senhora dos Milagres (Our Lady of Miracles) on 15 August every year in addition to the festivals of the Divine Holy Spirit. The Festival da Mar\u00e9 de Agosto (August Sea Festival), takes place every year beginning on 15 August in Praia Formosa on Santa Maria. Also, the Semana do Mar (Sea Week), dedicated almost exclusively to water sports, takes place in August in the city of Horta, on Faial.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Carnaval is also celebrated in the Azores. Parades and pageants are the heart of the Carnaval festivities. There is lively music, colorful costumes, hand-made masks, and floats.\nThe traditional bullfights in the bullring are ongoing as is the running of bulls in the streets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Outback", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Outback is the vast, remote interior of Australia. \"The Outback\" is more remote than those areas named \"the bush\" which is any location outside the main urban areas.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the outback ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the area that is more remote than other areas ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "While often envisaged as being arid, the Outback regions extend from the northern to southern Australian coastlines, and encompass a number of climatic zones; including tropical and monsoonal climates in northern areas, arid areas in the \"red centre\" and semi-arid and temperate climates in southerly regions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Geographically, the Outback is unified by a combination of factors, most notably a low human population density, a largely intact natural environment and, in many places, low-intensity land uses such as pastoralism (livestock grazing) in which production is reliant on the natural environment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Culturally, the Outback is deeply ingrained in Australian heritage, history and folklore. In 2009 as part of the Q150 celebrations, the Queensland Outback was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for its role as a \"natural attraction\".\nIndigenous Australians have lived in the Outback for approximately 50,000 years and occupied all Outback regions, including the driest deserts, when Europeans first entered central Australia in the 1800s. Many Indigenous Australians retain strong physical and cultural links to their traditional country and are legally recognised as the Traditional Owners of large parts of the Outback under Commonwealth Native Title legislation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Early European exploration of inland Australia was sporadic. More focus was on the more accessible and fertile coastal areas. The first party to successfully cross the Blue Mountains just outside Sydney was led by Gregory Blaxland in 1813, 25 years after the colony was established. People starting with John Oxley in 1817, 1818 and 1821, followed by Charles Sturt in 1829\u20131830 attempted to follow the westward-flowing rivers to find an \"inland sea\", but these were found to all flow into the Murray River and Darling River which turn south.\nOver the period 1858 to 1861, John McDouall Stuart led six expeditions north from Adelaide into the outback, culminating in successfully reaching the north coast of Australia and returning, without the loss of any of the party's members' lives. This contrasts with the ill-fated Burke and Wills expedition in 1860\u201361 which was much better funded, but resulted in the deaths of three of the members of the transcontinental party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Overland Telegraph line was constructed in the 1870s along the route identified by Stuart.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1865 the surveyor George Goyder, using changes in vegetation patterns, mapped a line in South Australia, north of which he considered rainfall to be too unreliable to support agriculture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Exploration of the outback continued in the 1950s when Len Beadell explored, surveyed and built many roads in support of the nuclear weapons tests at Emu Field and Maralinga and rocket testing on the Woomera Prohibited Area. Mineral exploration continues as new mineral deposits are identified and developed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the early explorers used horses to cross the outback, the first woman to make the journey riding a horse was Anna Hingley, who rode from Broome to Cairns in 2006.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The paucity of industrial land use has led to the Outback being recognised globally as one of the largest remaining, intact natural areas on Earth. Global \"Human Footprint\" and wilderness reviews highlight the importance of Outback Australia as one of the world's large natural areas, along with the Boreal forests and Tundra regions in North America, the Sahara and Gobi deserts and the tropical forests of the Amazon and Congo Basins.\nThe savanna (or grassy woodlands) of northern Australia are the largest, intact savanna regions in the world. In the south, the Great Western Woodlands, which occupy , an area larger than all of England and Wales, are the largest remaining temperate woodland left on Earth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Reflecting the wide climatic and geological variation, the Outback contains a wealth of distinctive and ecologically-rich ecosystems. Major land types include:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Australian Outback is full of very important well-adapted wildlife, although much of it may not be immediately visible to the casual observer. Many animals, such as red kangaroos and dingoes, hide in bushes to rest and keep cool during the heat of the day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Birdlife is prolific, most often seen at waterholes at dawn and dusk. Huge flocks of budgerigars, cockatoos, corellas and galahs are often sighted. On bare ground or roads during the winter, various species of snakes and lizards bask in the sun, but they are rarely seen during the summer months.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Feral animals such as camels thrive in central Australia, brought to Australia by pastoralists and explorers, along with the early Afghan drivers. Feral horses known as 'brumbies' are station horses that have run wild. Feral pigs, foxes, cats and rabbits are other imported animals also degrading the environment, so time and money is spent eradicating them in an attempt to help protect fragile rangelands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Outback is home to a diverse set of animal species, such as the kangaroo, emu and dingo. The Dingo Fence was built to restrict movements of dingoes and wild dogs into agricultural areas towards the south east of the continent. The marginally fertile parts are primarily utilised as rangelands and have been traditionally used for sheep or cattle grazing, on cattle stations which are leased from the Federal Government. While small areas of the outback consist of clay soils the majority has exceedingly infertile palaeosols.", "qas": [{"question": "what kind of soils are clay ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 14, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Riversleigh, in Queensland, is one of Australia's most renowned fossil sites and was recorded as a World Heritage site in 1994. The 100\u00a0km (39 sq mi) area contains fossil remains of ancient mammals, birds and reptiles of Oligocene and Miocene age.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The largest industry across the Outback, in terms of the area occupied, is pastoralism, in which cattle, sheep, and sometimes goats, are grazed in mostly intact, natural ecosystems. Widespread use of bore water, obtained from underground aquifers, including the Great Artesian Basin, has enabled livestock to be grazed across vast areas in which no permanent surface water exists naturally.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Capitalising on the lack of pasture improvement and absence of fertiliser and pesticide use, many Outback pastoral properties are certified as organic livestock producers. In 2014, , most of which is in Outback Australia, was fully certified as organic farm production, making Australia the largest certified organic production area in the world.", "qas": [{"question": "what country has the largest organic organic production area in the world ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "\"Nothing says Australia quite like our Outback,\" states the national tourism web site. Tourism is a major industry across the Outback, and commonwealth and state tourism agencies explicitly target Outback Australia as a desirable destination for domestic and international travellers. There is no breakdown of tourism revenues for the \"Outback\" \"per se\". However, regional tourism is a major component of national tourism incomes. Tourism Australia explicitly markets nature-based and Indigenous-led experiences to tourists. In the 2015\u20132016 financial year, 815,000 visitors spent $988 million while on holidays in the Northern Territory alone.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the national tourist web site called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There are many popular tourist attractions in the Outback. Some of the well known destinations include:", "qas": [{"question": "where are many popular tourist attractions in the outback located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Other than agriculture and tourism, the main economic activity in this vast and sparsely settled area is mining. Owing to the almost complete absence of mountain building and glaciation since the Permian (in many areas since the Cambrian) ages, the outback is extremely rich in iron, aluminium, manganese and uranium ores, and also contains major deposits of gold, nickel, copper, lead and zinc ores. Because of its size, the value of grazing and mining is considerable. Major mines and mining areas in the Outback include opals at Coober Pedy, Lightning Ridge and White Cliffs, metals at Broken Hill, Tennant Creek, Olympic Dam and the remote Challenger Mine. Oil and gas are extracted in the Cooper Basin around Moomba.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Western Australia the Argyle diamond mine in the Kimberley is the world's biggest producer of natural diamonds and contributes approximately one-third of the world's natural supply. The Pilbara region's economy is dominated by mining and petroleum industries. Most of Australia's iron ore is also mined in the Pilbara and it also has one of the world's major manganese mines.\nAboriginal communities in outback regions, such as the Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara lands in northern South Australia, have not been displaced as they have been in areas of intensive agriculture and large cities, in coastal areas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The total population of the Outback in Australia declined from 700,000 in 1996 to 690,000 in 2006. The largest decline was in the Outback Northern Territory, while the Kimberley and Pilbara showed population increases during the same period. The sex ratio is 1040 males for 1000 females and 17% of the total population is indigenous.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year did the total population of the outback in australia decline ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Royal Flying Doctor Service (RFDS) started service in 1928 and helps people who live in the outback of Australia. In former times, serious injuries or illnesses often meant death due to the lack of proper medical facilities and trained personnel.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In most outback communities, the number of children is too small for a conventional school to operate. Children are educated at home by the School of the Air. Originally the teachers communicated with the children via radio, but now satellite telecommunication is used instead.\nSome children attend boarding school, mostly only those in secondary school.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the number of children in outback communities ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The concept of 'back' country, which initially meant land beyond the settled regions, was in existence in 1800. Crossing of the Blue Mountains and other exploration of the inland however gave a different dimension to the perception. The term \"outback\" was first used in print in 1869, when the writer clearly meant west of Wagga Wagga, New South Wales.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is colloquially said that 'the outback' is located \"beyond the Black Stump\". The location of the black stump may be some hypothetical location or may vary depending on local custom and folklore. It has been suggested that the term comes from the \"Black Stump Wine Saloon\" that once stood about out of Coolah, New South Wales on the Gunnedah Road. It is claimed that the saloon, named after the nearby Black Stump Run and Black Stump Creek, was an important staging post for traffic to north-west New South Wales and it became a marker by which people gauged their journeys.", "qas": [{"question": "what is beyond outback' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"The Never-Never\" is a term referring to remoter parts of the Australian outback. The Outback can also be referred to as \"back of beyond\", \"back o' Bourke\" although these terms are more frequently used when referring to something a long way from anywhere, or a long way away. The well-watered north of the continent is often called the \"Top End\" and the arid interior \"The Red Centre\", owing to its vast amounts of red soil and sparse greenery amongst its landscape.", "qas": [{"question": "what is ''the never-never a term of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The outback is criss-crossed by historic tracks. Most of the major highways have an excellent bitumen surface and other major roads are usually well-maintained dirt roads. Tracks in very sandy or exceedingly rocky areas may require high-clearance four wheel drives and spare fuel, tyres, food and water before attempting to travel them, however most outback roads are easily traversed in ordinary vehicles, provided care is taken. Drivers unused to dirt roads should be especially cautious \u2013 it is recommended that drivers reduce their speed, drive with extra care, and avoid driving at night because animals can stray onto roads. Travelling in remote areas in northern Australia is not advisable during the wet season (November to April), as heavy tropical downpours can quickly make dirt roads impassable. In the remotest parts of Australia fuel sellers are located hundreds of kilometres apart, so spare fuel must be carried or refuelling spots calculated carefully in order not to run out of fuel in between towns. In addition, multiple trailer trucks (known as Road Trains) traverse these roads and extreme care must be taken when around these vehicles, due to their weight, length (often three full trailers long) and amount of dust thrown up by over 46 tyres.", "qas": [{"question": "what is . ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Stuart Highway runs from north to south through the centre of the continent, roughly paralleled by the Adelaide\u2013Darwin railway. There is a proposal to develop some of the roads running from the south-west to the north-east to create an all-weather road named the Outback Highway, crossing the continent diagonally from Laverton, Western Australia (north of Kalgoorlie, through the Northern Territory to Winton, in Queensland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Air transport is relied on for mail delivery in some areas, owing to sparse settlement and wet-season road closures. Most outback mines have an airstrip and many have a fly-in fly-out workforce. Most outback sheep stations and cattle stations have an airstrip and quite a few have their own light plane. Medical and ambulance services are provided by the Royal Flying Doctor Service. The School of the Air is a radio-based school using the RFDS radios.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Visitors to the outback often drive their own or rented vehicles, or take organised tours. Travel through remote areas on main roads is easily done and requires no planning. However travel through very remote areas, on isolated tracks, requires planning and a suitable, reliable vehicle (usually a four-wheel drive). On very remote routes considerable supplies and equipment may be required; this can include prearranged caches. It is not advisable to travel into these especially remote areas with a single vehicle, unless fully equipped with good communication technology (e.g. a satellite phone, EPIRB etc.). Many visitors prefer to travel in these areas in a convoy. Deaths of tourists and locals becoming stranded on outback trips occasionally occur, sometimes because insufficient water and food supplies were taken, or because people have walked away from their vehicle in search of help. Travellers through very remote areas should always inform a reliable person of their route and expected destination arrival time, and remember that a vehicle is much easier to locate in an aerial search, than a person, so in the event of a breakdown, they must not leave their vehicle.", "qas": [{"question": "visitors to the outback often drive what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(33, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Absolute Infinite", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Absolute Infinite (\"symbol\": \u03a9) is an extension of the idea of infinity proposed by mathematician Georg Cantor.", "qas": [{"question": "who proposed the idea of infinite ?", "answers": [], "id": "(34, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It can be thought as a number which is bigger than any conceivable or inconceivable quantity, either finite or transfinite.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cantor linked the Absolute Infinite with God, and believed that it had various mathematical properties, including the reflection principle: every property of the Absolute Infinite is also held by some smaller object.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cantor said:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cantor also mentioned the idea in his letters to Richard Dedekind (text in square brackets not present in original):", "qas": []}, {"context": "The idea that the collection of all ordinal numbers cannot logically exist seems paradoxical to many. This is related to Cesare Burali-Forti's \"paradox\" which states that there can be no greatest ordinal number. All of these problems can be traced back to the idea that, for every property that can be logically defined, there exists a set of all objects that have that property. However, as in Cantor's argument (above), this idea leads to difficulties.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More generally, as noted by A. W. Moore, there can be no end to the process of set formation, and thus no such thing as the \"totality of all sets\", or the \"set hierarchy\". Any such totality would itself have to be a set, thus lying somewhere within the hierarchy and thus failing to contain every set.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A standard solution to this problem is found in Zermelo's set theory, which does not allow the unrestricted formation of sets from arbitrary properties. Rather, we may form the set of all objects that have a given property \"and lie in some given set\" (Zermelo's Axiom of Separation). This allows for the formation of sets based on properties, in a limited sense, while (hopefully) preserving the consistency of the theory.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While this solves the logical problem, one could argue that the philosophical problem remains. It seems natural that a set of individuals ought to exist, so long as the individuals exist. Indeed, naive set theory might be said to be based on this notion. Although Zermelo's fix allows a class to describe arbitrary (possibly \"large\") entities, these predicates of the meta-language may have no formal existence (i.e., as a set) within the theory. For example, the class of all sets would be a proper class. This is philosophically unsatisfying to some and has motivated additional work in set theory and other methods of formalizing the foundations of mathematics such as New Foundations by Willard Van Orman Quine.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Acceptance testing", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In engineering and its various subdisciplines, acceptance testing is a test conducted to determine if the requirements of a specification or contract are met. It may involve chemical tests, physical tests, or performance tests.", "qas": [{"question": "along with physical tests , what testing can be used to stage test ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In systems engineering it may involve black-box testing performed on a system (for example: a piece of software, lots of manufactured mechanical parts, or batches of chemical products) prior to its delivery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In software testing the ISTQB defines \"acceptance\" as: formal testing with respect to user needs, requirements, and business processes conducted to determine whether a system satisfies the acceptance criteria and to enable the user, customers or other authorized entity to determine whether or not to accept the system. Acceptance testing is also known as user acceptance testing (UAT), end-user testing, operational acceptance testing (OAT) or field (acceptance) testing.", "qas": [{"question": "what is testing testing also known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 2, 1)"}]}, {"context": "A smoke test may be used as an acceptance test prior to introducing a build of software to the main testing process.", "qas": [{"question": "what may be used as an acceptance test before making a cd test ?", "answers": [], "id": "(35, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Testing is a set of activities conducted to facilitate discovery and/or evaluation of properties of one or more items under test. Each individual test, known as a test case, exercises a set of predefined test activities, developed to drive the execution of the test item to meet test objectives; including correct implementation, error identification, quality verification and other valued detail. The test environment is usually designed to be identical, or as close as possible, to the anticipated production environment. It includes all facilities, hardware, software, firmware, procedures and/or documentation intended for or used to perform the testing of software.", "qas": []}, {"context": "UAT and OAT test cases are ideally derived in collaboration with business customers, business analysts, testers, and developers. It's essential that these tests include both business logic tests as well as operational environment conditions. The business customers (product owners) are the primary stakeholders of these tests. As the test conditions successfully achieve their acceptance criteria, the stakeholders are reassured the development is progressing in the right direction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThe acceptance test suite may need to be performed multiple times, as all of the test cases may not be executed within a single test iteration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The acceptance test suite is run using predefined acceptance test procedures to direct the testers which data to use, the step-by-step processes to follow and the expected result following execution. The actual results are retained for comparison with the expected results. If the actual results match the expected results for each test case, the test case is said to pass. If the quantity of non-passing test cases does not breach the project's predetermined threshold, the test suite is said to pass. If it does, the system may either be rejected or accepted on conditions previously agreed between the sponsor and the manufacturer.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The anticipated result of a successful test execution:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The objective is to provide confidence that the developed product meets both the functional and non-functional requirements. The purpose of conducting acceptance testing is that once completed, and provided the acceptance criteria are met, it is expected the sponsors will sign-off on the product development/enhancement as satisfying the defined requirements (previously agreed between business and product provider/developer).", "qas": []}, {"context": "User acceptance testing (UAT) consists of a process of verifying that a solution works for the user. It is not system testing (ensuring software does not crash and meets documented requirements), but rather ensures that the solution will work for the user (i.e., tests that the user accepts the solution); software vendors often refer to this as \"Beta testing\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "This testing should be undertaken by a subject-matter expert (SME), preferably the owner or client of the solution under test, and provide a summary of the findings for confirmation to proceed after trial or review. In software development, UAT as one of the final stages of a project often occurs before a client or customer accepts the new system. Users of the system perform tests in line with what would occur in real-life scenarios.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is important that the materials given to the tester be similar to the materials that the end user will have. Testers should be given real-life scenarios such as the three most common or difficult tasks that the users they represent will undertake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The UAT acts as a final verification of the required business functionality and proper functioning of the system, emulating real-world conditions on behalf of the paying client or a specific large customer. If the software works as required and without issues during normal use, one can reasonably extrapolate the same level of stability in production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "User tests, usually performed by clients or by end-users, do not normally focus on identifying simple cosmetic problems such as spelling errors, nor on showstopper defects, such as software crashes; testers and developers identify and fix these issues during earlier unit testing, integration testing, and system testing phases.", "qas": []}, {"context": "UAT should be executed against test scenarios. Test scenarios usually differ from System or Functional test cases in that they represent a \"player\" or \"user\" journey. The broad nature of the test scenario ensures that the focus is on the journey and not on technical or system-specific details, staying away from \"click-by-click\" test steps to allow for a variance in users' behaviour. Test scenarios can be broken down into logical \"days\", which are usually where the actor (player/customer/operator) or system (backoffice, front end) changes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In industry, a common UAT is a factory acceptance test (FAT). This test takes place before installation of the equipment. Most of the time testers not only check that the equipment meets the specification, but also that it is fully functional. A FAT usually includes a check of completeness, a verification against contractual requirements, a proof of functionality (either by simulation or a conventional function test) and a final inspection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The results of these tests give clients confidence in how the system will perform in production. There may also be legal or contractual requirements for acceptance of the system.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Operational acceptance testing (OAT) is used to conduct operational readiness (pre-release) of a product, service or system as part of a quality management system. OAT is a common type of non-functional software testing, used mainly in software development and software maintenance projects. This type of testing focuses on the operational readiness of the system to be supported, and/or to become part of the production environment.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acceptance testing is a term used in agile software development methodologies, particularly extreme programming, referring to the functional testing of a user story by the software development team during the implementation phase.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The customer specifies scenarios to test when a user story has been correctly implemented. A story can have one or many acceptance tests, whatever it takes to ensure the functionality works. Acceptance tests are black-box system tests. Each acceptance test represents some expected result from the system. Customers are responsible for verifying the correctness of the acceptance tests and reviewing test scores to decide which failed tests are of highest priority. Acceptance tests are also used as regression tests prior to a production release. A user story is not considered complete until it has passed its acceptance tests. This means that new acceptance tests must be created for each iteration or the development team will report zero progress.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Typical types of acceptance testing include the following", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Archbishopric of Riga", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Archbishopric of Riga (, ) was an archbishopric in Medieval Livonia, a subject to the Holy See. It was established in 1186 as the bishopric of Livonia at Ik\u0161\u0137ile, then after moving to Riga it became the bishopric of Riga in 1202 and was elevated to an archbishopric in 1255.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the bishopric in medieval ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "when was the bishop of riga established ?", "answers": [], "id": "(36, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The archbishops of Riga were also the secular rulers of Riga until 1561 when during the reformation the territory converted from Catholicism to Lutheranism and all church territories were secularized. The see was restored as a diocese of the Catholic Church in 1918 and raised into an archdiocese in 1923.\nA new Bishopric of Livonia was established in Latgalia in 1621 during the Inflanty Voivodeship of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Archbishops of Riga were innovators in the field of minting currency, reviving techniques abandoned since the collapse of Rome. The names of individual archbishops after 1418, as well as the years of their respective reigns, are stamped on Livonian pennies excavated at archaeological sites. In many cases, this is the only biographical data available. No Livonian pennies before 1418 have been found.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Albert Frederick (; ; 7 May 1553 \u2013 28 August 1618) was the Duke of Prussia, from 1568 until his death. He was a son of Albert of Prussia and Anna Marie of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. He was the second and last Prussian duke of the Ansbach branch of the Hohenzollern family.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the duke of prussia ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Albert became Duke of Prussia after paying feudal homage to his cousin, the King of Poland, Zygmunt August, on July 19, 1569 in Lublin. The homage was described by the Polish chronicler Jan Kochanowski in his work \"Proporzec\" (\"Standard\"). During the 1573 Polish election, Albert Frederick attempted to gain acceptance to the Polish senate but was opposed by the powerful Jan Zamoyski (later Grand Hetman of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland) who feared the influence of Protestants in the Polish legislative body. Albert Frederick initially refused to recognize the election of Stefan Bathory and supported the candidacy of Maximilian of Habsburg. However, at the Toru\u0144 sejm of October 1576 he gave his support to the new monarch.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As the great grandson of the Polish king Casimir IV Jagiellon, and as a Duke in Prussia who was fluent in Polish, Albert Frederick was seriously considered for a time as a possible candidate for the Polish throne. He particularly enjoyed the support of Polish Lutherans.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1572 he began to exhibit signs of mental disorder. In early 1578, the regency was taken over by his cousin, George Frederick of Brandenburg-Kulmbach (1539\u20131603). After George Frederick's death in 1603, the Polish king Sigismund III Vasa appointed Joachim Frederick as regent in 1605, and permitted his son, John Sigismund, to succeed him in 1611. The latter became Duke of Prussia after Albert Frederick's death in 1618.", "qas": [{"question": "who died in 1618. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(37, 3, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Albert Frederick was married in 1573 to Marie Eleonore of Cleves, a daughter of Wilhelm, Duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg and Archduchess Maria of Austria (1531\u20131581). Maria was a daughter of Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor and Anna of Bohemia and Hungary.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Albert Frederick and Marie were parents to seven children:", "qas": []}, {"context": "At his death, the duchy passed to his son-in-law John Sigismund, Margrave of Brandenburg, combining the two territories under a single dynasty and forming Brandenburg-Prussia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Ansbach", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Ansbach (; ) is a city in the German state of Bavaria. It is the capital of the administrative region of Middle Franconia. Ansbach is southwest of Nuremberg and north of Munich, on the Fr\u00e4nkische Rezat (Rezat River), a tributary of the Main river. In 2004, its population was 40,723.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the german state of bavaria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Developed in the 8th century as a Benedictine monastery, it became the seat of the Hohenzollern family in 1331. In 1460, the Margraves of Brandenburg-Ansbach lived here. The city has a castle known as Margrafen\u2013Schloss, built between 1704\u20131738. It was not badly damaged during the World Wars and hence retains its original historical baroque sheen. Ansbach is now home to a US military base and to the Ansbach University of Applied Sciences.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city has connections via autobahn A6 and highways B13 and B14. Ansbach station is on the N\u00fcrnberg\u2013Crailsheim and Treuchtlingen\u2013W\u00fcrzburg railways and is the terminus of line S4 of the Nuremberg S-Bahn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ansbach was originally called Onoltesbach (about 790 AD), a term composed of three parts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The individual word elements are \"Onold\" (the city founder's name), the Suffix \"-es\" (a possessive ending, like \"-'s\" in English) and the Old High German expression \"pah\" or \"bach\" (for brook). The name of the city has slightly changed throughout the centuries into Onoltespah (837 AD), Onoldesbach (1141 AD), Onoldsbach (1230 AD), Onelspach (1338 AD), Onsbach (1508 AD) and finally Ansbach (1732 AD).", "qas": [{"question": "when was onoltespah born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(38, 4, 1)"}]}, {"context": "It was also formerly known as Anspach.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to folklore, towards the end of the 7th century a group of Franconian peasants and their families went up into the wilderness to found a new settlement. Their leader Onold led them to an area called the \"Rezattal\" (Rezat valley). This is where they founded the \"Urh\u00f6fe\" (meaning the first farms: Knollenhof, Voggenhof and Rabenhof). Gradually more settlers, such as the \"Winden-Tribe\" came, and the farms grew into a small village. Many villages around Ansbach were founded by the \"Winden\" during that period (even today their settlements can easily identified by their names, like \"Meinhardszwinden\", \"Dautenwinden\" or \"Brodswinden\" for example).\nA Benedictine monastery was established there around 748 by the Frankish noble St\u00a0Gumbertus. The adjoining village of Onoltesbach is first noticed as a proper town in 1221.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The counts of \u00d6ttingen ruled over Ansbach until the Hohenzollern burgrave of N\u00fcrnberg took over in 1331. The Hohenzollerns made Ansbach the seat of their dynasty until their acquisition of the Margraviate of Brandenburg in 1415. After the 1440 death of Frederick\u00a0I, a cadet branch of the family established itself as the margraves of Ansbach. George the Pious introduced the Protestant Reformation to Ansbach in 1528, leading to the secularization of Gumbertus Abbey in 1563.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Markgrafenschlo\u00df was built between 1704\u20131738. Its gardens continued to be a notable attraction into the 19th century. In 1791, the last margrave sold his realm to the Kingdom of Prussia. In 1796, the Duke of Zweibr\u00fccken, Maximilian Joseph \u2014 the future Bavarian king Max I Joseph \u2014 was exiled to Ansbach after Zweibr\u00fccken had been taken by the French. In Ansbach, Maximilian von Montgelas wrote an elaborate concept for the future political organization of Bavaria, which is known as the Ansbacher M\u00e9moire. Napoleon forced Prussia to cede Ansbach and its principality to Bavaria in the Franco-Prussian treaty of alliance signed at Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace on 15 December 1805 at the end of the Third Coalition. The act was confirmed by the 1815 Congress of Vienna; Prussia was compensated with the Bavarian duchy of Berg. Ansbach became the capital of the circle of Middle Franconia following the unification of Germany; at the time, it had a population of 12,635.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jewish families were resident in Ansbach from at least the end of the 18th century. They set up a Jewish Cemetery in the Ruglaender Strasse, which was vandalised and razed under the Nazi regime in the Kristallnacht. It was repaired in 1946, but it was damaged several times more. A plaque on the wall of the cemetery commemorates these events. The Jewish Congregation built its synagogue at No 3 Rosenbadstrasse, but it too was damaged by the SA, though it was not burnt down for fear of damaging the neighbouring buildings. It serves today as a \"Symbolic House of God\". A plaque in the entrance serves as a memorial to the synagogue and to Jewish residents who were murdered during the Holocaust. In 1940, at least 500 patients were deported from the Heil- und Pflegeanstalt Ansbach [\"Ansbach Medical and Nursing Clinic\"] to the extermination facilities Sonnenstein and Hartheim which were disguised as psychiatric institutions, as part of the Action T4 euthanasia action. They were gassed there. At the clinic in Ansbach itself, around 50 intellectually disabled children were injected with the drug Luminal and killed that way. A plaque was erected in their memory in 1988 in the local hospital at No. 38 Feuchtwangerstrasse.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During World War II, a subcamp of Flossenb\u00fcrg concentration camp was located here. Also during the Second World War the Luftwaffe and Wehrmacht had bases here. The nearby airbase was the home station for the Stab & I/KG53 (Staff & 1st Group of Kampfgeschwader 53) operating 38 Heinkel He 111 bombers. On 1 September 1939 this unit was one of the many that participated in the attack on Poland that started the war. All of its bridges were destroyed during the course of the war. During the Western Allied invasion of Germany in April 1945, the airfield was seized by the United States Third Army, and used by the USAAF 354th Fighter Group which flew P-47 Thunderbolts from the aerodrome (designated ALG R-82) from late April until the German capitulation on 7 May 1945. At the end of the war, 19-year-old student Robert Limpert tried to get the town to surrender to the US Forces without a fight. He was betrayed by Hitler Youth and was hung from the portal of the City Hall by the city's military commander, Col. (\"Oberst\") Ernst Meyer. Several memorials to his heroic deed have been erected over the years, despite opposition from some residents \u2014 in the Ludwigskirche, in the Gymnasium Carolinum and at No 6 Kronenstrasse. After the Second World War, Ansbach belonged to the American Zone. The American Military authorities established a displaced persons (DP) camp in what used to be a sanatorium in what is today the Str\u00fcth quarter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bachwoche Ansbach has been held in Ansbach since 1947. Since 1970, Ansbach has enlarged its municipal area by incorporating adjacent communities. Ansbach hosts several units of the U.S. armed forces, associated with German units under NATO. There are five separate U.S. installations: Shipton Kaserne, home to 412th Aviation Support Battalion, Katterbach Kaserne, formerly the home of the 1st Infantry Division's 4th Combat Aviation Brigade, which has been replaced by the 12th Combat Aviation Brigade as of 2006, as part of the 1st Infantry Division's return to Fort Riley, Kansas; Bismarck Kaserne, which functions as a satellite post to Katterbach, hosting their Post Theater, barracks, Von Steuben Community Center, Military Police, and other support agencies, Barton Barracks, home to the USAG Ansbach and Bleidorn Barracks, which has a library and housing, and Urlas, which hosts the Post Exchange as well as a housing area opened in 2010. Ansbach was also home to the headquarters of the 1st Armored Division (United States) from 1972 to the early 1990s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On 24 July 2016 a bomb was detonated in a restaurant in the city, killing only the bomber himself and injuring few people. The perpetrator was reported to be a Syrian refugee whose asylum application had been rejected but who had been given exceptional leave to remain until the security situation in Syria returned to a safe condition. Witnesses reported he had tried to enter a nearby music festival but had been turned away, before detonating his device outside a nearby wine bar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nClimate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The K\u00f6ppen climate classification subtype for this climate is \"\" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).\nAround the time of the unification of Germany in 1871, the chief manufactures of Ansbach were woollen, cotton, and half-silk goods; earthenware; tobacco; cutlery; and playing cards. A considerable trade in grain, wool, and flax was also supported. By the onset of the First World War, it also produced machinery, toys, and embroidery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Today there is a large density of plastics industry in the city and rural districts around Ansbach.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ansbach lies on the Treuchtlingen-W\u00fcrzburg railway.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAnsbach is twinned with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the novel \"The Schirmer Inheritance\" (1953) by Eric Ambler (1909\u20131998), Sergeant Franz Schirmer of the Ansbach Dragoons is wounded in the battle of Preussisch-Eylau in 1807. He returns to Ansbach to settle but changes his name as he has been posted as a deserter. The bulk of the novel concerns efforts by an American law firm to trace his descendants to claim an inheritance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "National Alliance (Italy)", "paragraphs": [{"context": "National Alliance (, AN) was a conservative political party in Italy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "AN was the successor of the post-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI), which had moderated its policies over its last decades and finally distanced itself from its former ideology during a convention in Fiuggi by dissolving into the new party in 1995.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gianfranco Fini was the leader of AN from its foundation through 2008, after being elected President of the Chamber of Deputies. Fini was succeeded by Ignazio La Russa, who managed the merger of the party with Forza Italia (FI) into The People of Freedom (PdL) in 2009. A group of former AN members, led by La Russa, left FI in 2012 in order to launch the Brothers of Italy (FdI), while others remained in the PdL and were among the founding members of the new Forza Italia (FI) in 2013.", "qas": []}, {"context": "National Alliance, launched in 1994, was officially founded in January 1995, when the Italian Social Movement (MSI), the former neo-fascist party, merged with conservative elements of the former Christian Democracy, which had disbanded in 1994 after two years of scandals and various splits due to corruption at its highest levels, exposed by the \"Mani pulite\" investigation, and the Italian Liberal Party, disbanded in the same year. Former MSI members were however still the bulk of the new party and former MSI leader Gianfranco Fini was elected leader of the new party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The AN logo followed a template very similar to that of the Democratic Party of the Left, with the logo of the direct predecessor party in a small circle, as a means of legally preventing others from using it. The name was suggested by an article on the Italian newspaper \"Il Tempo\" written in 1992 by Domenico Fisichella, a prominent conservative academic. Starting in the 1990s, the MSI gradually transformed into a mainstream right-wing party, culminating in its 1995 dissolution into AN.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The party was part of all three House of Freedoms coalition governments led by Silvio Berlusconi. Gianfranco Fini was nominated Deputy Prime Minister after the 2001 general election and was Foreign Minister from November 2004 to May 2006.", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Gianfranco Fini visited Israel in late November 2003 in the function of Italian Deputy Prime Minister, he labeled the racial laws issued by the fascist regime in 1938 as \"infamous\", as also Giorgio Almirante, historic leader of MSI, had done before. He also referred to the Italian Social Republic as belonging to the most shameful pages of the past, and considered fascism part of an era of \"absolute evil\", something which was hardly acceptable to the few remaining hardliners of the party. As a result, Alessandra Mussolini, the granddaughter of the former fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, who had been at odds with the party on a number of issues for a long time, and some hardliners left the party and formed Social Action.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In occasion of the 2006 general election, AN ran within the House of Freedoms, with new allies. The centre-right lost by 24,000 votes in favour of the centre-left coalition The Union. Individually AN received nearly 5 million votes, amounting to 12.3%. In July 2007 a group of splinters led by Francesco Storace formed The Right, which was officially founded on 10 November. Seven MPs of AN, including Teodoro Buontempo and Daniela Santanch\u00e8, joined the new party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In November 2007 Silvio Berlusconi announced that Forza Italia would have soon merged or transformed into The People of Freedom (PdL) party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the sudden fall of the second Prodi government in January 2008, the breakup of The Union and the subsequent political crisis which led to a fresh general election, Berlusconi hinted that Forza Italia would have probably contested its last election and the new party would have been officially founded only after that election. In an atmosphere of reconciliation with Gianfranco Fini, Berlusconi also stated that the new party could see the participation of other parties. Finally, on 8 February, Berlusconi and Fini agreed to form a joint list under the banner of the \"People of Freedom\", allied with Lega Nord. After the victory of the PdL in the 2008 general election, AN was merged into the PdL in early 2009.", "qas": []}, {"context": "National Alliance's political program emphasized:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Distinguishing itself from the MSI, the party distanced itself from Benito Mussolini and Fascism and made efforts to improve relations with Jewish groups. With most hardliners leaving the party, it sought to present itself as a respectable conservative party and to join forces with Forza Italia in the European People's Party and, eventually, in a united party of the centre-right.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although the party approved the market economy and held favourable views on liberalizations and the privatization of state industries, however AN was to the left of Forza Italia on economic issues and sometimes supported statist policies. That is why the party was strong in Rome and Lazio, where most civil servants live. Moreover, AN presented itself as a party promoting national cohesion, national identity and patriotism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regarding institutional reforms, the party was a long-time supporter of presidentialism and a plurality voting system, and came to support also federalism and to fully accept the alliance with Lega Nord, although the relations with that party were tense at times, especially about issues regarding national unity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gianfranco Fini, a moderniser who saw Nicolas Sarkozy and David Cameron as role-models, impressed an ambitious political line to the party, combining the pillars of conservative ideology like security, family values and patriotism with a progressive approach in other areas such as stem cell research and supporting voting rights for legal aliens. Some of these positions were not shared by many members of the party, most of whom staunchly opposed stem cell research and artificial insemination.", "qas": []}, {"context": "National Alliance was a heterogeneous political party and within it members were divided in different factions, some of them very organized:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the party there was also a group named Ethic-Religious Council, whose board members included Gaetano Rebecchini (founder, ex-DC), Riccardo Pedrizzi (president), Franco Tofoni (vice president), Luigi Gagliardi (secretary-general), Alfredo Mantovano, Antonio Mazzocchi and Riccardo Migliori. This was not a faction but an official organism within the party and expressed the official position of the party on ethical and religious matters. Sometimes the group criticized Gianfranco Fini for his liberal views on abortion, artificial insemination and stem-cell research, which led some notable ex-DC members as Publio Fiori to leave the party. Some members of the Council, such as Pedrizzi and Mantovano were described as members of an unofficial Catholic Right faction.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The party had roughly 10\u201315% support across Italy, having its strongholds in Central and Southern Italy (Lazio 18.6%, Umbria 15.2%, Marche 14.3%, Abruzzo 14.3%, Apulia 13.2%, Sardinia 12.9%, Tuscany 12.6% and Campania 12.6% in the last general election), scoring badly in Lombardy (10.2%) and Sicily (10.9%), while competing in the North-East (Friuli-Venezia Giulia 15.5% and Veneto 11.3%).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The party had a good showing in the first general election to which it took part (13.5% in 1994) and reached 15.7% in 1996, when Fini tried for the first time to replace Silvio Berlusconi as leader of the centre-right. From that moment the party suffered an electoral decline, but remained the third force of Italian politics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 2006 general election, the final election to which the party participated with its own list, AN won 12.3% of the vote, securing 71 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 41 in the Senate. In the 2008 general election the party had 90 deputies and 48 senators elected.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The electoral results of National Alliance in the 10 most populated regions of Italy are shown in the table below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Arno", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Arno is a river in the Tuscany region of Italy. It is the most important river of central Italy after the Tiber.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the arno ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The river originates on Mount Falterona in the Casentino area of the Apennines, and initially takes a southward curve. The river turns to the west near Arezzo passing through Florence, Empoli and Pisa, flowing into the Tyrrhenian Sea at Marina di Pisa.", "qas": [{"question": "where does the river go to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "With a length of , it is the largest river in the region. It has many tributaries: Sieve at long, Bisenzio at , and the Era, Elsa, Pesa, and Pescia. The drainage basin amounts to more than and drains the waters of the following subbasins:", "qas": [{"question": "what is the size of the largest river in the region ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nIt crosses Florence, where it passes below the Ponte Vecchio and the Santa Trinita bridge (built by Bartolomeo Ammanati but inspired by Michelangelo). The river flooded this city regularly in historical times, most recently in 1966, with after rainfall of in Badia Agnano and in Florence, in only 24 hours.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Before Pisa, the Arno is crossed by the Imperial Canal at La Botte. This water channel passes under the Arno through a tunnel, and serves to drain the former area of the Lago di Bientina, which was once the largest lake in Tuscany before its reclamation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The flow rate of the Arno is irregular. It is sometimes described as having a torrentlike behaviour, because it can easily go from almost dry to near flood in a few days. At the point where the Arno leaves the Apennines, flow measurements can vary between . New dams built upstream of Florence have greatly alleviated the problem in recent years.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the flow rate of the arno ?", "answers": [], "id": "(40, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The flood on November 4, 1966 collapsed the embankment in Florence, killing at least 40 people and damaging or destroying millions of works of art and rare books. New conservation techniques were inspired by the disaster, but even decades later hundreds of works still await restoration.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From Latin \"Arnus\" (Pliny, \"Natural History\" 3.50). The philologist Hans Krahe related this toponym on a paleo-European basis \"*Ar-n-\", derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *\"er-\", \"flow, move\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Aveiro, Portugal", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Aveiro ( ) is a city and a municipality in Portugal. In 2011, the population was 78,450, in an area of : it is the second most populous city in the Centro Region of Portugal (after Coimbra). Along with the neighbouring city of \u00cdlhavo, Aveiro is part of an urban agglomeration that includes 120,000 inhabitants, making it one of the most important populated regions by density in the Centro Region, and primary centre of the Intermunicipal Community of Aveiro and Baixo Vouga. Administratively, the president of the municipal government is Jos\u00e9 Ribau Esteves, elected by coalition between the Social Democratic Party and the Democratic Social Centre, who governs the ten civil parishes ().", "qas": [{"question": "what is the municipality of portugal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The presence of human settlement in the territory of Aveiro extends to the period associated with the great dolmens of pre-history, which exist in most of the region.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For a long period Aveiro was an important economic link in the production of salt and commercial shipping. It was a centre of salt exploration by the Romans and trade since 26 January 959 (from the testament of Countess Mumadona Dias to the \"cen\u00f3bio\" of Guimar\u00e3es). During this testament, Mumadona Dias also highlighted the ancient name for Aveiro, referring to the monastery's lands in \"Alauario et Salinas\", literally, \"\"a gathering place or preserve of birds and of great salt\"\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Moors invaded and then held it until the 11th century, after which it became popular with Portuguese royalty.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Later, King Jo\u00e3o I, on the advice of his son Pedro, who was the donatary of Aveiro, requested the construction of fortification walls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "King D. Duarte conceded in 1435 the privilege of providing an annual duty-free fair, later referred to as the \"Feira de Mar\u00e7o\" (\"March Fair\"), today still an annual tradition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Princess St. Joana, daughter of Afonso V lived in Aveiro, entering the convent of Jesus, and lived there until her death on 12 May 1490. During her life her presence brought attention to the town, and favoured it with an elevated level of development for the time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first charter (foral) was conceded by Manuel I of Portugal on 4 August 1515, as indicated in the \"Livro de Leituras Novas de Forais da Estremadura\". Its geographic position along the Aveiro River had always helped it to subsist and grow, supported by salt market, fishing and maritime commercial development.\nBy the beginning of the 15th century, there already existed a great wall around the historical centre, intonating the significance of the community and growth of the population. This included the founding of many religious institutions and their supports, which assisted during the 17th and 18th century crises associated with silt in the waterway. In the winter of 1575, a terrible storm closed the entrance to its port, ending a thriving trade in metals and tiles, and creating a reef barrier at the Atlantic Ocean. The walls were subsequently demolished and used to create the docks around the new sand bar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Between the 16th and 17th centuries, the river's instability at the mouth (between the Ria and open ocean) resulted in the closure of the canal, impeding the use of the port of Aveiro, and creating stagnation in the waters of the lagoon. This blow to the economy created a social and economic crisis, and resulted in the decrease in the population and emigration. It was at this time that the Church of the Miser\u00edcordia was constructed, during the Philippine Dynastic union.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1759, King Jos\u00e9 I elevated the town to the status of city, a few months after condemning the Duke of Aveiro (a title established in 1547 by Jo\u00e3o III), Jos\u00e9 Mascarenhas, to death. As a result, Aveiro became known as Nova Bragan\u00e7a: it was later abandoned much later, and returned to Aveiro. In 1774, by request of King Jos\u00e9, Pope Clement XIV instituted the Diocese of Aveiro.", "qas": [{"question": "who administered the diocese of aveiro ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 9, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In the 19th century, the Aveirense were active during the Liberal Wars, and it was Jos\u00e9 Est\u00eav\u00e3o Coelho de Magalh\u00e3es, a parliamentary member who was determinant in resolving the problem of access along the Ria, and development of transport, especially the railway line between Lisbon and Porto. It was the opening of the artificial canals, completed in 1808, that allowed Aveiro to expand economically, marking the beginning in the town's growth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The municipality was elevated to the status of town, centered on the its principal church, consecrated to the Archangel Michael, today the location of the \"Pra\u00e7a da Rep\u00fablica\" (having been demolished in 1835).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Located on the shore of the Atlantic Ocean, Aveiro is an industrial city with an important seaport.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The seat of the municipality is the city of Aveiro, comprising the five urban parishes with about 73,003 inhabitants. The city of Aveiro is also the capital of the District of Aveiro, and the largest city in the Baixo Vouga intermunicipal community subregion.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the capital of aveiro ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 13, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Aveiro is known as \"the Portuguese Venice\", due to its system of canals and boats similar to the Italian city of Venice.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aveiro has a warm-summer mediterranean climate influenced by its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean. The maritime influence causes a narrow temperature range resulting in summers averaging around in daytime temperatures, considerably lower than inland areas on the same parallel on the Iberian Peninsula. As typical of mediterranean climates, summers are dry and winters are wet. A coastal feature is that frosts are rare and never severe. The hottest temperature recorded was set in July. Temperatures above are extremely occasional, and averages only a couple of times per annum.\nAdministratively, the municipality is divided into 10 civil parishes ():", "qas": [{"question": "what type of climate influenced aveiro ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "S\u00e3o Jacinto is located on an eponymous peninsula, between the Atlantic Ocean and Ria de Aveiro. Aveiro had 61,430 eligible voters in 2006.", "qas": [{"question": "how many registered voters voted in 2006. ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 16, 1)"}, {"question": "what is the name of the eponymous peninsula between the atlantic ocean and ria de aveiro ?", "answers": [], "id": "(41, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Aveiro's sister cities are:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aveiro is known for its production of salt and for its seaweed harvest, which is used for fertilizer in the area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The region is also known for the preponderance of ceramics industries and commerce, a reflection of the regions advancements, resulting in a long productive tradition since the late Roman, early Medieval period (reflected in the ceramics kilns).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city of Aveiro has several shopping centers and malls (Pingo Doce Shopping Center, F\u00f3rum Aveiro, Glic\u00ednias Plaza (Jumbo \u2013 Auchan), Aveiro's Shopping Center (Continente & Mediamarkt), Aveiro's Retail Park and the Oita Shopping Center). This city has lots of traditional commerce stores. The most central one being Forum Aveiro with clothes stores, restaurant zone, a book shop and a cinema.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The unemployment rate is very low (about 5%), sustained by a university and commerce.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The local economy is fed by a series of transport networks that cross the municipal boundaries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regional gateways include air service through the Aer\u00f3dromo de Aveiro/S\u00e3o Jacinto (LPAV) and the Porto de Aveiro (\u00cdlhavo/Aveiro).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rail service includes service by Alfa Pendular (between Lisbon and Braga; Lisbon and Oporto; Faro and Oporto) and Intercity (between Lisbon and Oporto as well as Lisbon and Guimar\u00e3es) trains; suburban links through the Urbanos do Porto and, also, the Linha do Vouga, a narrow gauge railway to \u00c1gueda and Sernada do Vouga.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The primary expressways and inter-regional thoroughfares include: A1 (between Porto and Lisbon); and the A25 (which links Viseu, Guarda and Vilar Formoso).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Intercity buses connect Aveiro with Porto and Lisbon several times a day.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Moliceiros\" provide access along the Ria for tourist visits, in addition to traditional fishing or recreational purposes, including regattas.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The architecture of Aveiro is influenced by two phases: the pre-Kingdom era, with a number of historical monuments; and the modernist movements resulting from the expansion of economy during the 19th-20th centuries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city's primary landmark is the 15th century Monastery of Jesus (), containing the tomb of King Afonso V's daughter, St. Joana (who died in 1490). The presence of this royal personage, beatified in 1693, proved to be of great benefit when she bequeathed her valuable estate to the convent. In the 17th and 18th centuries, the convent housed a school of embroidery, but was transformed into the \"Museu de Santa Joana\", or simply, the Museum of Aveiro, housing many of these handicrafts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The abundance of 19th-20th century architectural buildings reflects the effects of the boom during that period, including many of the Art Novo and Art Deco buildings, inspired by modernist trends and Nationalist tendencies of the Estado Novo regime. The best of these in the university campus, where many the nationalist architects were involved in construction projects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several attractions in the city of Aveiro, including cathedrals, canals and the beache, including the \"\u00cdlhavo ceramica de Vista Alegre\" and the beaches of Barra, Costa Nova do Prado, and Gafanha da Nazar\u00e9.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Aveiro is known in Portugal for its traditional sweets, \"Ovos Moles de Aveiro\" (PGI), \"trouxas de ovos\", both made from eggs. \"Raivas\" are also a typical biscuit of Aveiro.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The municipal holiday is 12 May, the day of Joanna, Princess of Portugal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The University of Aveiro was created in 1973 and attracts thousands of students to the city. It is ranked as the 354th best university in the world in the \"Times\" World University Rankings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The University has about 430 professors (with Ph.D. degrees), 11,000 undergraduate students, and 1,300 post-graduate students.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sport Clube Beira-Mar is an association football club. Founded in 1922, it has a sports academy with various youth levels in sports including basketball and futsal. The club used to play at Est\u00e1dio Municipal de Aveiro, designed by Portuguese architect Tom\u00e1s Taveira for Euro 2004, where it held two group matches.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The other long-established club in the city, Os Galitos, was founded in 1904 and houses a wide variety of sports. Its rowers have represented Portugal in international tournaments including the Olympic Games.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Anthony the Great", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Saint Anthony or Antony ( \"Ant\u1e53nios\"; ; ) (January 12, 251 \u2013 January 17, 356), was a Christian monk from Egypt, revered since his death as a saint. He is distinguished from other saints named Anthony such as , by various epithets of his own: , , and For his importance among the Desert Fathers and to all later Christian monasticism, he is also known as the . His feast day is celebrated on January 17 among the Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches and on Tobi\u00a022 in the Egyptian calendar used by the Coptic Church.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the saint monk ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The biography of Anthony's life by Athanasius of Alexandria helped to spread the concept of Christian monasticism, particularly in Western Europe via its Latin translations. He is often erroneously considered the first Christian monk, but as his biography and other sources make clear, there were many ascetics before him. Anthony was, however, the first to go into the wilderness (about \u00a0270), which seems to have contributed to his renown. Accounts of Anthony enduring supernatural temptation during his sojourn in the Eastern Desert of Egypt inspired the often-repeated subject of the temptation of St. Anthony in Western art and literature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony is appealed to against infectious diseases, particularly skin diseases. In the past, many such afflictions, including ergotism, erysipelas, and shingles, were referred to as \"St. Anthony's fire\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony was born in Coma in Lower Egypt in \u00a0251 to wealthy landowner parents. When he was about 18 years old, his parents died and left him with the care of his unmarried sister. Shortly thereafter, he decided to follow the Evangelical counsel of Jesus which reads, \"If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasures in heaven.\" Anthony gave away some of his family's lands to his neighbors, sold the remaining property, and donated the funds thus raised to the poor. He then left to live an ascetic life, placing his sister with a group of Christian virgins, a sort of proto-convent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the next fifteen years, Anthony remained in the area, spending the first years as the disciple of another local hermit. There are various legends associating Anthony with pigs: one is that he worked as a swineherd during this period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony is sometimes considered the first monk, and the first to initiate solitary desertification, but there were others before him. There were already ascetic pagan hermits (the \"Therapeutae\"), and loosely organized cenobitic communities were described by the Hellenized Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria in the 1st century\u00a0 as long established in the harsh environment of Lake Mareotis and in other less accessible regions. Philo opined that \"this class of persons may be met with in many places, for both Greece and barbarian countries want to enjoy whatever is perfectly good.\" Christian ascetics such as Thecla had likewise retreated to isolated locations at the outskirts of cities. Anthony is notable for having decided to surpass this tradition and headed out into the desert proper. He left for the alkaline Nitrian Desert (later the location of the noted monasteries of Nitria, Kellia, and Scetis) on the edge of the Western Desert about west of Alexandria. He remained there for 13 years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Athanasius, the devil fought Anthony by afflicting him with boredom, laziness, and the phantoms of women, which he overcame by the power of prayer, providing a theme for Christian art. After that, he moved to a tomb, where he resided and closed the door on himself, depending on some local villagers who brought him food. When the devil perceived his ascetic life and his intense worship, he was envious and beat him mercilessly, leaving him unconscious. When his friends from the local village came to visit him and found him in this condition, they carried him to a church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After he recovered, he made a second effort and went back into the desert to a father mountain by the Nile called Pispir (now Der-el-Memun), opposite Arsinoe. There he lived strictly enclosed in an old abandoned Roman fort for some 20 years. According to Athanasius, the devil again resumed his war against Anthony, only this time the phantoms were in the form of wild beasts, wolves, lions, snakes, and scorpions. They appeared as if they were about to attack him or cut him into pieces. But the saint would laugh at them scornfully and say, \"If any of you have any authority over me, only one would have been sufficient to fight me.\" At his saying this, they disappeared as though in smoke. While in the fort he only communicated with the outside world by a crevice through which food would be passed and he would say a few words. Anthony would prepare a quantity of bread that would sustain him for six months. He did not allow anyone to enter his cell; whoever came to him stood outside and listened to his advice.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Then one day he emerged from the fort with the help of villagers, who broke down the door. By this time most had expected him to have wasted away or to have gone insane in his solitary confinement. Instead, he emerged healthy, serene, and enlightened. Everyone was amazed that he had been through these trials and emerged spiritually rejuvenated. He was hailed as a hero and from this time forth the legend of Anthony began to spread and grow. Anthony went to Fayyum and confirmed the brethren there in the Christian faith before returning to his fort.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amid the Diocletian Persecutions, Anthony wished to become a martyr and in 311 went to Alexandria. He visited those who were imprisoned for the sake of Christ and comforted them. When the Governor saw that he was confessing his Christianity publicly, not caring what might happen to him, he ordered him not to show up in the city. However, the Saint did not heed his threats. He faced him and argued with him in order that he might arouse his anger so that he might be tortured and martyred, but it did not happen.", "qas": []}, {"context": "At the end of the persecutions, Anthony returned to his old Roman fort. By this time, many more had heard of his sanctity and he had many more visitors than before. He saw these visits as interfering with his worship and went further into the Eastern Desert. He traveled for three days before reaching a small oasis with a spring and some palm trees and chose to settle there. Disciples soon found him out and his number of visitors again continued to grow.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony had not been the first ascetic or hermit, but he may properly be called the \"Father of Monasticism\" in Christianity, as he organized his disciples into a worshipful community and inspired similar withdrawn communities throughout Egypt and, following the spread of Athanasius's hagiography, the Greek and Roman world. His follower Macarius the Great was particularly active in continuing his legacy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony anticipated the rule of Benedict by about 200 years, engaging himself and his disciples in manual labor. Anthony himself cultivated a garden and wove rush mats. He and his disciples were regularly sought for words of enlightenment. These statements were later collected into the book of \"Sayings of the Desert Fathers\". Anthony himself is said to have spoken to those of a spiritual disposition personally, leaving the task of addressing the more worldly visitors to Macarius. On occasions, he would go to the monastery on the outskirts of the desert by the Nile to visit the brethren, then return to his inner monastery.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A background story of one of the surviving epistles, directed to Constantine I, recounts how the fame of Saint Anthony spread abroad and reached Emperor Constantine. The Emperor wrote to him offering praise and requesting prayers. The brethren were pleased with the Emperor's letter, but Anthony did not pay any attention to it, and he said to them, \"The books of God, the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords, commands us every day, but we do not heed what they tell us, and we turn our backs on them.\" Under the persistence of the brethren who told him \"Emperor Constantine loves the church\", he accepted to write him a letter blessing him, and praying for the peace and safety of the empire and the church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Athanasius, Saint Anthony heard a voice telling him \"Go out and see.\" He went out and saw an angel who wore a girdle with a cross, one resembling the holy Eskiem (Tonsure or Schema), and on his head was a head cover (Kolansowa). He was sitting while braiding palm leaves, then he stood up to pray, and again he sat to weave. A voice came to him saying, \"Anthony, do this and you will rest.\" Henceforth, he started to wear this tunic that he saw, and began to weave palm leaves, and never was bored again. Saint Anthony prophesied about the persecution that was about to happen to the church and the control of the heretics over it, the church victory and its return to its former glory, and the end of the age. When Saint Macarius visited Anthony, Anthony clothed him with the monk's garb and foretold him what would happen to him. When the day drew near for the departure of Saint Paul the First Hermit in the desert, Saint Anthony went to him and buried him, after clothing him in a tunic which was a present from St Athanasius the Apostolic, the 20th Patriarch of Alexandria.", "qas": [{"question": "where was saint anthony from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 14, 7)"}, {"question": "according to dominic , saint anthony thought that saint anthony spoke him out and what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 338, he left the desert temporarily to visit Alexandria to help refute the teachings of Arius. Although not particularly learned, Anthony was able to confound the Arians.", "qas": [{"question": "where did he travel to travel to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "When Saint Anthony felt that the day of his departure had approached, he commanded his disciples to give his staff to Saint Macarius, and to give one sheepskin cloak to Saint Athanasius and the other sheepskin cloak to Saint Serapion, his disciple. He further instructed his disciples to bury his body in an unmarked, secret grave.", "qas": [{"question": "who was saint anthony ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He probably spoke only his native language, Coptic, but his sayings were spread in a Greek translation. He himself wrote letters in Coptic, seven of which are extant. His biography was written by Saint Athanasius and titled \"Life of Saint Anthony the Great\". Many stories are also told about him in various collections of sayings of the Desert Fathers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though Anthony himself did not organize or create a monastery, a community grew around him based on his example of living an ascetic and isolated life. Athanasius' biography helped propagate Anthony's ideals. Athanasius writes, \"For monks, the life of Anthony is a sufficient example of asceticism.\" Asceticism is a lifestyle characterized by abstinence from worldly pleasures, often for the purpose of pursuing spiritual goals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The biography of Anthony's life by Athanasius of Alexandria helped to spread the concept of Christian monasticism, particularly in Western Europe via its Latin translations. He is often erroneously considered the first Christian monk, but as his biography and other sources make clear, there were many ascetics before him. Anthony was, however, the first to go into the wilderness (about AD 270), a geographical move that seems to have contributed to his renown.[6] Accounts of Anthony enduring supernatural temptation during his sojourn in the Eastern Desert of Egypt inspired the often-repeated subject of the temptation of St. Anthony in Western art and literature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anthony is appealed to against infectious diseases, particularly skin diseases. In the past, many such afflictions, including ergotism, erysipelas, and shingles, were referred to as \"St. Anthony's fire\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Famously, Anthony is said to have faced a series of supernatural temptations during his pilgrimage to the desert. The first to report on the temptation was his contemporary Athanasius of Alexandria. It is possible these events, like the paintings, are full of rich metaphor or in the case of the animals of the desert, perhaps a vision or dream. Some of the stories included in Saint Anthony's biography are perpetuated now mostly in paintings, where they give an opportunity for artists to depict their more lurid or bizarre interpretations. Many artists, including Martin Schongauer, Hieronymus Bosch, Dorothea Tanning, Max Ernst, Leonora Carrington and Salvador Dal\u00ed, have depicted these incidents from the life of Anthony; in prose, the tale was retold and embellished by Gustave Flaubert in \"The Temptation of Saint Anthony\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Emphasis on these stories, however, did not really begin until the Middle Ages, when the psychology of the individual became of greater interest. Below are some of the tales.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Saint Anthony was on a journey in the desert to find Saint Paul of Thebes, who according to his dream was a better Hermit than he. Saint Anthony had been under the impression that he was the first person to ever dwell in the desert; however, due to the dream, Saint Anthony was called into the desert to find his \"better\", Saint Paul. On his way there, he ran into two creatures in the forms of a centaur and a satyr. Although chroniclers sometimes postulated they might have been living beings, Western theology considers to have been demons.", "qas": [{"question": "who was saint anthony ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While traveling through the desert, Saint Anthony first found the centaur, a \"creature of mingled shape, half horse half man,\" whom he asked about directions. The creature tried to speak in an unintelligible language, but ultimately pointed with his hand the way desired, and then ran away and vanished from sight. It was interpreted as a demon trying to terrify him, or alternately a creature engendered by the desert.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the man who discovered the centaur ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Saint Anthony found next the satyr, a \"a mannikin with hooked snout, horned forehead, and extremities like goats's feet.\" This creature was peaceful and offered him fruits, and when Saint Anthony asked who he was, the satyr replied, \"I'm a mortal being and one of those inhabitants of the desert whom the Gentiles deluded by various forms of error worship under the names of Fauns, Satyrs, and Incubi. I am sent to represent my tribe. We pray you in our behalf to entreat the favor of your Lord and ours, who, we have learnt, came once to save the world, and 'whose sound has gone forth into all the earth.'\" Upon hearing this, Saint Anthony was overjoyed and rejoiced over the glory of Christ. He condemned the city of Alexandria for worshipping monsters instead of God while beasts like the satyr spoke about Christ.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another time Saint Anthony was travelling in the desert and found a plate of silver coins in his path.", "qas": [{"question": "where was a plate of silver coins located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Once, Saint Anthony tried hiding in a cave to escape the demons that plagued him. There were so many little demons in the cave though that Saint Anthony's servant had to carry him out because they had beaten him to death. When the hermits were gathered to Saint Anthony's corpse to mourn his death, Saint Anthony was revived. He demanded that his servants take him back to that cave where the demons had beaten him. When he got there he called out to the demons, and they came back as wild beasts to rip him to shreds. All of a sudden a bright light flashed, and the demons ran away. Saint Anthony knew that the light must have come from God, and he asked God where was he before when the demons attacked him. God replied, \"I was here but I would see and abide to see thy battle, and because thou hast mainly fought and well maintained thy battle, I shall make thy name to be spread through all the world.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who tried lying in a cave ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 27, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Most of what is known about Saint Anthony comes from the \"Life of Anthony\". Written in Greek around 360 by Athanasius of Alexandria, it depicts Anthony as an illiterate and holy man who through his existence in a primordial landscape has an absolute connection to the divine truth, which always is in harmony with that of Athanasius as the biographer. Sometime before 374 it was translated into Latin by Evagrius of Antioch. The Latin translation helped the \"Life\" become one of the best known works of literature in the Christian world, a status it would hold through the Middle Ages. In addition to the \"Life\", several surviving homilies and epistles of varying authenticity provide some additional autobiographical detail.\nAnthony had been secretly buried on the mountain-top where he had chosen to live. His remains were reportedly discovered in 361, and transferred to Alexandria. Some time later, they were taken from Alexandria to Constantinople, so that they might escape the destruction being perpetrated by invading Saracens. In the eleventh century, the Byzantine emperor gave them to the French Count Jocelin. Jocelin had them transferred to La-Motte-Saint-Didier, which was then renamed Saint-Antoine-en-Dauphin\u00e9. There, Anthony is credited with assisting in a number of miraculous healings, primarily from ergotism, which became known as \"St. Anthony's Fire\". He was credited by two local noblemen of assisting them in recovery from the disease. They then founded the Hospital Brothers of St. Anthony in honor of him, who specialized in nursing the victims of skin diseases.", "qas": [{"question": "what is one of the reason that saint anthony comes from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Veneration of Anthony in the East is more restrained. There are comparatively few icons and paintings of him. He is, however, regarded as the \"first master of the desert and the pinnacle of holy monks\", and there are monastic communities of the Maronite, Chaldean, and Orthodox churches which state that they follow his monastic rule. During the Middle Ages, Anthony, along with Quirinus of Neuss, Cornelius and Hubertus, was venerated as one of the Four Holy Marshals (\"Vier Marsch\u00e4lle Gottes\") in the Rhineland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Examples of purely Coptic literature are the works of Saint Anthony and Saint Pachomius, who only spoke Coptic, and the sermons and preachings of Saint Shenouda the Archmandrite, who chose to only write in Coptic. Saint Shenouda was a popular leader who only spoke to Egyptians in the Egyptian language (Coptic), not in Greek.", "qas": [{"question": "who is saint anthony and saint pachomius ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 30, 0)"}, {"question": "who was the popular leader of egypt ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 30, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The earliest original writings in Coptic language were the letters by Saint Anthony. During the 3rd and 4th centuries many ecclesiastics and monks wrote in Coptic.", "qas": [{"question": "who were the letters by saint anthony ?", "answers": [], "id": "(42, 31, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The main character in the Hervey Allen novel \"Anthony Adverse\", and the 1936 film of the same name, is an abandoned child who is placed in a foundling wheel on the saint's feast day, and given the name Anthony in his honor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Amblypoda", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Amblypoda is a taxonomic hypothesis uniting a group of extinct, herbivorous mammals. They were considered a suborder of the primitive ungulate mammals and have since been shown to represent a polyphyletic group.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Amblypoda take their name from their short and stumpy feet, which were furnished with five toes each and supported massive pillar-like limbs. The brain cavity was extremely small and insignificant in comparison to the bodily mass, which was equal to that of the largest rhinoceroses. These animals were descendants of the small ancestral ungulates that retained all the primitive characteristics of the latter, accompanied by a huge increase in body size.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Amblypoda were confined to the Paleocene and Eocene periods and occurred in North America, Asia (especially Mongolia) and Europe. The cheek teeth were short-crowned (brachyodont), with the tubercles more-or-less completely fused into transverse ridges, or cross-crests (lophodont type), and the total number of teeth was in one case the typical 44, but in another was fewer. The vertebra of the neck unite on nearly flat surfaces, the humerus had lost the foramen, or perforation, at the lower end, and the third trochanter to the femur may have also been wanting. In the forelimb, the upper and lower series of carpal (finger) bones scarcely alternated, but in the hind foot, the astragalus overlapped the cuboid, while the fibula, which was quite distinct from the tibia (as was the radius from the ulna in the forelimb), articulated with both astragalus and calcaneum.", "qas": [{"question": "where were the waldensians confined to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The most generalized type was \"Coryphodon\", representing the family Coryphodontidae, from the lower Eocene of Europe and North America, in which there were 44 teeth and no horn-like excrescences on the long skull, while the femur had a third trochanter. The canines were somewhat elongated and were followed by a short gap in each jaw, and the cheek-teeth were adapted for succulent food. The length of the body reached about six feet in some cases.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the most generalized type ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the middle Eocene formations of North America occurred the more specialized \"Uintatherium\" (or \"Dinoceras\"), typifying the family Uintatheriidae. Uintatheres were huge creatures with long narrow skulls, of which the elongated facial portion carried three pairs of bony horn-cores, probably covered with short horns in life, the hind-pair having been much the largest. The dental formula was i. 0/3, c. 1/1, p.\u00a03/3\u00b74, m. 3/3, the upper canines having been long sabre-like weapons, protected by a descending flange on each side of the lower front jaw.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the basal Eocene of North America, the Amblypoda were represented by extremely primitive, five-toed, small ungulates such as \"Periptychus\" and \"Pantolambda\", each of these typifying a family. The full typical series of 44 teeth was developed in each, but whereas in the Periptychidae, the upper molars were bunodont and tritubercular, in the Pantolambdidae, they had assumed a selenodont structure. Creodont characters were displayed in the skeleton.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the basal composed of ?", "answers": [], "id": "(43, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Few authorities recognize Amblypoda in modern classifications. The following mammals were once considered part of this group:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Amblygonite", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Amblygonite () is a fluorophosphate mineral, (Li,Na)AlPO(F,OH), composed of lithium, sodium, aluminium, phosphate, fluoride and hydroxide. The mineral occurs in pegmatite deposits and is easily mistaken for albite and other feldspars. Its density, cleavage and flame test for lithium are diagnostic. Amblygonite forms a series with \"montebrasite\", the low fluorine endmember. Geologic occurrence is in granite pegmatites, high-temperature tin veins, and greisens. Amblygonite occurs with spodumene, apatite, lepidolite, tourmaline, and other lithium-bearing minerals in pegmatite veins. It contains about 10% lithium, and has been utilized as a source of lithium. The chief commercial sources have historically been the deposits of California and France.", "qas": [{"question": "what is . ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The mineral was first discovered in Saxony by August Breithaupt in 1817, and named by him from the Greek \"amblus\", blunt, and \"gonia\", angle, because of the obtuse angle between the cleavages. Later it was found at Montebras, Creuse, France, and at Hebron in Maine; and because of slight differences in optical character and chemical composition the names montebrasite and hebronite have been applied to the mineral from these localities. It has been discovered in considerable quantity at Pala in San Diego county, California; Caceres, Spain; and the Black Hills of South Dakota. The largest documented single crystal of amblygonite measured 7.62\u00d72.44\u00d71.83 m and weighed ~102 tons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Transparent amblygonite has been faceted and used as a gemstone. As a gemstone set into jewelry it is vulnerable to breakage and abrasion from general wear, as its hardness and toughness are poor. The main sources for gem material are Brazil and the United States. Australia, France, Germany, Namibia, Norway, and Spain have also produced gem quality amblygonite.", "qas": [{"question": "which countries have produced photographic quality ?", "answers": [], "id": "(44, 2, 3)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Amygdalin", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Amygdalin (from Ancient Greek: \"\" \"almond\") is a naturally occurring chemical compound, famous for falsely being promoted as a cancer cure. It is found in many plants, but most notably in the seeds (kernels) of apricot, bitter almonds, apple, peach, and plum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amygdalin is classified as a cyanogenic glycoside because each amygdalin molecule includes a nitrile group, which can be released as the toxic cyanide anion by the action of a beta-glucosidase: eating amygdalin will cause it to release cyanide in the human body, and may lead to cyanide poisoning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the early 1950s, both amygdalin and a modified form named laetrile have been promoted as alternative cancer treatments, often using the misnomer vitamin B. But studies have found them to be clinically ineffective in the treatment of cancer, as well as potentially toxic or lethal when taken by mouth, due to cyanide poisoning. The promotion of laetrile to treat cancer has been described in the medical literature as a canonical example of quackery, and as \"the slickest, most sophisticated, and certainly the most remunerative cancer quack promotion in medical history\". Neither amygdalin nor laetrile is a vitamin.", "qas": [{"question": "what is laetrile ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 2, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Amygdalin is a cyanogenic glycoside derived from the aromatic amino acid phenylalanine. Amygdalin and prunasin are common among plants of the family Rosaceae, particularly the genus \"Prunus\", Poaceae (grasses), Fabaceae (legumes), and in other food plants, including flaxseed and manioc. Within these plants, amygdalin and the enzymes necessary to hydrolyze them are stored in separate locations so that they will mix in response to tissue damage. This provides a natural defense system.", "qas": [{"question": "what is amygdalin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Amygdalin is contained in stone fruit kernels, such as apricot (1.4%), peach (0.68%), bitter almond (5%), and plum (0.04\u20131.7%), and also in the seeds of the apple (0.3%). The stones are taken out of the fruit and cracked to obtain the kernels, which are dried in the sun or in ovens. The kernels are boiled in ethanol; on evaporation of the solution and the addition of diethyl ether, amygdalin is precipitated as minute white crystals. Natural amygdalin has the (\"R\")-configuration at the chiral phenyl center. Under mild basic conditions, this stereogenic center isomerizes; the (\"S\")-epimer is called neoamygdalin. Although the synthesized version of amygdalin is the (\"R\")-epimer, the stereogenic center attached to the nitrile and phenyl groups easily epimerizes if the manufacturer does not store the compound correctly.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amygdalin is hydrolyzed by intestinal \u03b2-glucosidase (emulsin) and amygdalin beta-glucosidase (amygdalase) to give gentiobiose and -mandelonitrile. Gentiobiose is further hydrolyzed to give glucose, whereas mandelonitrile (the cyanohydrin of benzaldehyde) decomposes to give benzaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide. Hydrogen cyanide in sufficient quantities (allowable daily intake: ~0.6\u00a0mg) causes cyanide poisoning (fatal oral dose: 0.6\u20131.5\u00a0mg/kg).", "qas": [{"question": "what is hydrolyzed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Laetrile (patented 1961) is a simpler semisynthetic version of amygdalin. Laetrile is synthesized from amygdalin by hydrolysis. The usual preferred commercial source is from apricot kernels (\"Prunus armeniaca\"). The name is derived from the separate words \"laevarotatory\" and \"mandelonitrile\". Laevarotatory describes the stereochemistry of the molecule, while mandelonitrile refers to the portion of the molecule from which cyanide is released by decomposition.\nA 500\u00a0mg laetrile tablet may contain between 5\u201351\u00a0mg of hydrogen cyanide per gram.", "qas": [{"question": "when was laetrile patented ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Like amygdalin, laetrile is hydrolyzed in the duodenum (alkaline) and in the intestine (enzymatically) to -glucuronic acid and -mandelonitrile; the latter hydrolyzes to benzaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide, that in sufficient quantities causes cyanide poisoning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Claims for laetrile were based on three different hypotheses: The first hypothesis proposed that cancerous cells contained copious beta-glucosidases, which release HCN from laetrile via hydrolysis. Normal cells were reportedly unaffected, because they contained low concentrations of beta-glucosidases and high concentrations of rhodanese, which converts HCN to the less toxic thiocyanate. Later, however, it was shown that both cancerous and normal cells contain only trace amounts of beta-glucosidases and similar amounts of rhodanese.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The second proposed that, after ingestion, amygdalin was hydrolyzed to mandelonitrile, transported intact to the liver and converted to a beta-glucuronide complex, which was then carried to the cancerous cells, hydrolyzed by beta-glucuronidases to release mandelonitrile and then HCN. Mandelonitrile, however, dissociates to benzaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide, and cannot be stabilized by glycolsylation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Finally, the third asserted that laetrile is the discovered vitamin B-17, and further suggests that cancer is a result of \"B-17 deficiency\". It postulated that regular dietary administration of this form of laetrile would, therefore, actually prevent all incidence of cancer. There is no evidence supporting this conjecture in the form of a physiologic process, nutritional requirement, or identification of any deficiency syndrome. The term \"vitamin B-17\" is not recognized by Committee on Nomenclature of the American Institute of Nutrition Vitamins. Ernst T. Krebs branded laetrile as a vitamin in order to have it classified as a nutritional supplement rather than as a pharmaceutical.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amygdalin was first isolated in 1830 from bitter almond seeds (\"Prunus dulcis\") by Pierre-Jean Robiquet and Antoine Boutron-Charlard. Liebig and W\u00f6hler found three hydrolysis products of amygdalin: sugar, benzaldehyde, and prussic acid (hydrogen cyanide, HCN). Later research showed that sulfuric acid hydrolyzes it into -glucose, benzaldehyde, and prussic acid; while hydrochloric acid gives mandelic acid, -glucose, and ammonia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1845 amygdalin was used as a cancer treatment in Russia, and in the 1920s in the United States, but it was considered too poisonous. In the 1950s, a purportedly non-toxic, synthetic form was patented for use as a meat preservative, and later marketed as laetrile for cancer treatment.", "qas": [{"question": "what was used as a cancer treatment in the 1930s ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The U.S. Food and Drug Administration prohibited the interstate shipment of amygdalin and laetrile in 1977. Thereafter, 27 U.S. states legalized the use of amygdalin within those states.", "qas": [{"question": "how many states did the united states use for amygdalin within the states ?", "answers": [], "id": "(45, 13, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In a 1977 controlled, blinded trial, laetrile showed no more activity than placebo.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Subsequently, laetrile was tested on 14 tumor systems without evidence of effectiveness. The Memorial Sloan\u2013Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) concluded that \"laetrile showed no beneficial effects.\" Mistakes in an earlier MSKCC press release were highlighted by a group of laetrile proponents led by Ralph Moss, former public affairs official of MSKCC who had been fired following his appearance at a press conference accusing the hospital of covering up the benefits of laetrile. These mistakes were considered scientifically inconsequential, but Nicholas Wade in \"Science\" stated that \"even the appearance of a departure from strict objectivity is unfortunate.\" The results from these studies were published all together.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 2015 systematic review from the Cochrane Collaboration found:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The authors also recommended, on ethical and scientific grounds, that no further clinical research into laetrile or amygdalin be conducted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Given the lack of evidence, laetrile has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or the European Commission.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The U.S. National Institutes of Health evaluated the evidence separately and concluded that clinical trials of amygdalin showed little or no effect against cancer. For example, a 1982 trial by the Mayo Clinic of 175 patients found that tumor size had increased in all but one patient. The authors reported that \"the hazards of amygdalin therapy were evidenced in several patients by symptoms of cyanide toxicity or by blood cyanide levels approaching the lethal range.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The study concluded \"Patients exposed to this agent should be instructed about the danger of cyanide poisoning, and their blood cyanide levels should be carefully monitored. Amygdalin (Laetrile) is a toxic drug that is not effective as a cancer treatment\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Additionally, \"No controlled clinical trials (trials that compare groups of patients who receive the new treatment to groups who do not) of laetrile have been reported.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The side effects of laetrile treatment are the symptoms of cyanide poisoning. These symptoms include: nausea and vomiting, headache, dizziness, cherry red skin color, liver damage, abnormally low blood pressure, droopy upper eyelid, trouble walking due to damaged nerves, fever, mental confusion, coma, and death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The European Food Safety Agency's Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain has studied the potential toxicity of the amygdalin in apricot kernels. The Panel reported, \"If consumers follow the recommendations of websites that promote consumption of apricot kernels, their exposure to cyanide will greatly exceed\" the dose expected to be toxic. The Panel also reported that acute cyanide toxicity had occurred in adults who had consumed 20 or more kernels and that in children \"five or more kernels appear to be toxic\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Advocates for laetrile assert that there is a conspiracy between the US Food and Drug Administration, the pharmaceutical industry and the medical community, including the American Medical Association and the American Cancer Society, to exploit the American people, and especially cancer patients.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Advocates of the use of laetrile have also changed the rationale for its use, first as a treatment of cancer, then as a vitamin, then as part of a \"holistic\" nutritional regimen, or as treatment for cancer pain, among others, none of which have any significant evidence supporting its use.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite the lack of evidence for its use, laetrile developed a significant following due to its wide promotion as a \"pain-free\" treatment of cancer as an alternative to surgery and chemotherapy that have significant side effects. The use of laetrile led to a number of deaths.\nThe FDA and AMA crackdown, begun in the 1970s, effectively escalated prices on the black market, played into the conspiracy narrative and enabled unscrupulous profiteers to foster multimillion-dollar smuggling empires.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some North American cancer patients have traveled to Mexico for treatment with the substance, for example at the Oasis of Hope Hospital in Tijuana. The actor Steve McQueen died in Mexico following surgery to remove a stomach tumor having previously undergone extended treatment for pleural mesothelioma (a cancer associated with asbestos exposure) under the care of William D. Kelley, a de-licensed dentist and orthodontist who claimed to have devised a cancer treatment involving pancreatic enzymes, 50 daily vitamins and minerals, frequent body shampoos, enemas, and a specific diet as well as laetrile.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Laetrile advocates in the United States include Dean Burk, a former chief chemist of the National Cancer Institute cytochemistry laboratory, and national arm wrestling champion Jason Vale, who claimed that his kidney and pancreatic cancers were cured by eating apricot seeds. Vale was convicted in 2004 for, among other things, fraudulently marketing laetrile as a cancer cure. The court also found that Vale had made at least $500,000 from his fraudulent sales of laetrile.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 1970s, court cases in several states challenged the FDA's authority to restrict access to what they claimed are potentially lifesaving drugs. More than twenty states passed laws making the use of Laetrile legal. After the unanimous Supreme Court ruling in \"Rutherford v. United States\" which established that interstate transport of the compound was illegal, usage fell off dramatically. The US Food and Drug Administration continues to seek jail sentences for vendors marketing laetrile for cancer treatment, calling it a \"highly toxic product that has not shown any effect on treating cancer.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Running amok", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Running amok, sometimes referred to as simply amok or gone amok, also spelled amuk, from the Southeast Asian Austronesian languages (especially Malaysian and Indonesian), is \"an episode of sudden mass assault against people or objects usually by a single individual following a period of brooding that has traditionally been regarded as occurring especially in Malay culture but is now increasingly viewed as psychopathological behavior\". The syndrome of \"Amok\" is found in the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM-IV TR). The phrase is often used in a less serious manner when describing something that is wildly out of control or causing a frenzy (e.g., a dog tearing up the living room furniture might be termed as \"running amok\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amok originated from the Malaysian/Indonesian word \"meng-\u00e2muk\", which when roughly defined means \"to make a furious and desperate charge\". According to Malaysian and Indonesian cultures, amok was rooted in a deep spiritual belief. They believed that amok was caused by the \"hantu belian\", which was an evil tiger spirit that entered one\u2019s body and caused the heinous act. As a result of the belief, those in Indonesian culture tolerated amok and dealt with the after-effects with no ill will towards the assailant.", "qas": [{"question": "what did the indonesian with no ill do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Although commonly used in a colloquial and less-violent sense, the phrase is particularly associated with a specific sociopathic culture-bound syndrome in the cultures of Malaysia, Indonesia and Brunei. In a typical case of \"running amok\", an individual (often male), having shown no previous sign of anger or any inclination to violence, will acquire a weapon (traditionally a sword or dagger, but presently any of a variety of weapons) and in a sudden frenzy, will attempt to kill or seriously injure anyone he encounters and himself. Amok typically takes place in a well populated or crowded area. Amok episodes of this kind normally end with the attacker being killed by bystanders or committing suicide, eliciting theories that amok may be a form of intentional suicide in cultures where suicide is heavily stigmatized. Those who do not commit suicide and are not killed typically lose consciousness, and upon regaining consciousness, claim amnesia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An early Western description of the practice appears in the journals of Captain James Cook, a British explorer, who encountered amok firsthand in 1770 during a voyage around the world. Cook writes of individuals behaving in a reckless, violent manner, without cause and \"indiscriminately killing and maiming villagers and animals in a frenzied attack.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "A widely accepted explanation links amok with male honor (amok by women and children is virtually unknown).\nRunning amok would thus be both a way of escaping the world (since perpetrators were normally killed or committed suicide) and re-establishing one's reputation as a man to be feared and respected.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a commonly accepted explanation of women and children ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"Running amok\" is used to refer to the behavior of someone who, in the grip of strong emotion, obtains a weapon and begins attacking people indiscriminately, often with multiple fatalities. An episode of amok may be triggered by a period of depression or highly aggressive behavior. The slang terms \"going postal\" or \"going ballistic\" are similar in scope.\nPolice describe such an event as a killing spree. If the individual is seeking death an alternate method is often \"suicide by cop\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amok is often described as a culture-bound (or culture-specific) syndrome, which is a psychological condition whose manifestation is strongly shaped by cultural factors. Other reported culture-bound syndromes are latah and koro. Amok is also sometimes considered one of the subcategories of dissociative disorders (cross-cultural variant).", "qas": [{"question": ". is sometimes considered one of the subcategories of what ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 6, 2)"}]}, {"context": "In 1849, amok was officially classified as a psychiatric condition based on numerous reports and case studies that showed the majority of individuals who committed amok were, in some sense, mentally ill. The modern DSM-IV method of classification of mental disorders contains two official types of amok disorder; beramok and amok. Beramok is considered to be the more common of the two and is associated with the depression and sadness resulting from a loss and the subsequent brooding process. Loss includes, but is not limited to, the death of a spouse or loved one, divorce, loss of a job, money, power, etc. Beramok is associated with mental issues of severe depression or other mood disorders. Amok, the rarer form, is believed to stem from rage, insult, or a vendetta against a person, society, or object for a wide variety of reasons. Amok has been more closely associated with psychosis, personality disorders, bipolar disorder, and delusions.", "qas": [{"question": "what was officially labeled as a psychiatric condition ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 7, 0)"}, {"question": "what is amok ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 7, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Early travelers in Asia sometimes describe a kind of military amok, in which soldiers apparently facing inevitable defeat suddenly burst into a frenzy of violence which so startled their enemies that it either delivered victory or at least ensured what the soldier in that culture considered an honourable death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An example would be during the Battle of Bukit Chandu in Singapore during WWII when 41 outnumbered soldiers of the Malay Regiment, led by Adnan Saidi, charged and went all out against a 13 000 strong invading Japanese Army. They continued the fight armed with just knives and bayonets for three days before they were finally defeated.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This form of amok appears to resemble the Germanic \"Berserker\", the \"cafard\" or \"cathard\" (Polynesia), \"mal de pelea\" (Puerto Rico), and \"iich'aa\" (Navaho).", "qas": []}, {"context": "In contemporary Indonesia, the term \"amok\" (\"amuk\") generally refers not to individual violence, but to frenzied violence by mobs. Indonesians now commonly use the term 'gelap mata' (literally 'darkened eyes') to refer to individual amok. Laurens van der Post experienced the phenomenon in the East Indies and wrote in 1955:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Philippines, \"amok\" also means unreasoning murderous rage by an individual. In 1876, the Spanish governor-general of the Philippines Jos\u00e9 Malcampo coined the term \"juramentado\" for the behavior (from \"juramentar\" \u2013 \"to take an oath\"), surviving into modern Philippine languages as \"huramentado\". It has historically been linked with the Moro people of Mindanao, particularly in the Sulu Archipelago, in connection with societal and cultural pressures.", "qas": [{"question": "what does amok mean ?", "answers": [], "id": "(46, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Norse Berserkers and the Zulu battle trance are two other examples of the tendency of certain groups to work themselves up into a killing frenzy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition, some notable cases have occurred among the Rajputs. In 1634, the eldest son of the raja of Jodhpur ran amok at the court of Shah Jahan, failing in his attack on the emperor, but killing five of his officials. During the 18th century, again, at Hyderabad (Sind), two envoys, sent by the Jodhpur chief in regard to a quarrel between the two states, stabbed the prince and twenty-six of his suite before they themselves fell.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Apostles' Creed", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Apostles' Creed (Latin: \"Symbolum Apostolorum\" or \"Symbolum Apostolicum\"), sometimes entitled the Apostolic Creed or the Symbol of the Apostles, is an early statement of Christian belief\u2014a creed or \"symbol\". It is widely used by a number of Christian denominations for both liturgical and catechetical purposes, most visibly by liturgical Churches of Western tradition, including the Catholic Church, Lutheranism and Anglicanism. It is also used by Presbyterians, Moravians, Methodists and Congregationalists.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another term for christian belief\u2014a ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Apostles' Creed is Trinitarian in structure with sections affirming belief in God the Father, Jesus Christ His Son and the Holy Spirit. The Apostles' Creed was based on Christian theological understanding of the Canonical gospels, the letters of the New Testament and to a lesser extent the Old Testament. Its basis appears to be the old Roman Creed known also as the Old Roman Symbol.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the old roman roman priest known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 1, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Because of the early origin of its original form, it does not address some Christological issues defined in the Nicene and other Christian Creeds. It thus says nothing explicitly about the divinity of either Jesus or the Holy Spirit. Nor does it address many other theological questions which became objects of dispute centuries later.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earliest known mention of the expression \"Apostles' Creed\" occurs in a letter of AD\u00a0390 from a synod in Milan and may have been associated with the belief, widely accepted in the 4th century, that, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, each of the Twelve Apostles contributed an article to the twelve articles of the creed.\nThe word \"Symbolum\", standing alone, appears around the middle of the third century in the correspondence of St. Cyprian and St. Firmilia, the latter in particular speaking of the Creed as the \"Symbol of the Trinity\", and recognizing it as an integral part of the rite of baptism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The title \"Symbolum Apostolicum\" (Symbol or Creed of the Apostles) appears for the first time in a letter, probably written by Ambrose, from a Council in Milan to Pope Siricius in about AD\u00a0390 \"Let them give credit to the Creed of the Apostles, which the Roman Church has always kept and preserved undefiled\". But what existed at that time was not what is now known as the Apostles' Creed but a shorter statement of belief that, for instance, did not include the phrase \"maker of heaven and earth\", a phrase that may have been inserted only in the 7th century.\nThe account of the origin of this creed, the forerunner and principal source of the Apostles' Creed, as having been jointly created by the Apostles under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, with each of the twelve contributing one of the articles, was already current at that time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The earlier text evolved from simpler texts based on , part of the Great Commission, and it has been argued that it was already in written form by the late 2nd century (c. 180).", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the individual statements of belief that are included in the Apostles' Creed \u2013 even those not found in the Old Roman Symbol \u2013 are found in various writings by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Novatian, Marcellus, Rufinus, Ambrose, Augustine, Nicetas, and Eusebius Gallus, the earliest appearance of what we know as the Apostles' Creed was in the \"De singulis libris canonicis scarapsus\" (\"\"Excerpt from Individual Canonical Books\"\") of St. Pirminius (Migne, \"Patrologia Latina\" 89, 1029 ff.), written between 710 and 714. Bettenson and Maunder state that it is first from \"Dicta Abbatis Pirminii de singulis libris canonicis scarapsus\" (\"idem quod excarpsus\", excerpt), c. 750. This longer Creed seems to have arisen in what is now France and Spain. Charlemagne imposed it throughout his dominions, and it was finally accepted in Rome, where the Old Roman Symbol or similar formulas had survived for centuries. It has been argued nonetheless that it dates from the second half of the 5th century, though no earlier.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As can be seen from various creeds all quoted in full below, although the original Greek and Latin creeds both specifically refer to \u201cthe resurrection of the \"flesh\"\u201d (\u03c3\u03b1\u03c1\u03ba\u1f78\u03c2 \u1f00\u03bd\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd and \"carnis resurrectionem\"), the versions used by several churches, like the Roman Catholic Church, the Church of England, Lutheran churches and Methodist churches, talk more generally of \u201cthe resurrection of the \"body\"\u201d.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some have suggested that the Apostles' Creed was spliced together with phrases from the New Testament. For instance, the phrase \"descendit ad inferos\" (\"he descended into hell\") echoes , \"\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03ad\u03b2\u03b7 \u03b5\u1f30\u03c2 \u03c4\u1f70 \u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03ce\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1 \u03bc\u03ad\u03c1\u03b7 \u03c4\u1fc6\u03c2 \u03b3\u1fc6\u03c2\" (\"he descended into the lower earthly regions\"). It is of interest that this phrase first appeared in one of the two versions of Rufinus in AD\u00a0390 and then did not appear again in any version of the creed until AD\u00a0650.", "qas": [{"question": "what do some scholars suggest the apostles' creed was together with ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 8, 0)"}, {"question": "in what year did the phrase `` creed '' appear ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "This phrase and that on the communion of saints are articles found in the Apostles' Creed, but not in the Old Roman Symbol nor in the Nicene Creed.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the old roman symbol ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Musical settings of the Symbolum Apostolorum as a motet are rare. The French composer Le Brung published one Latin setting in 1540, and the Spanish composer Fernando de las Infantas published two in 1578.", "qas": []}, {"context": "More recently, in 1979 John Michael Talbot, a Third Order Franciscan, composed and recorded \"Creed\" on his album, \"The Lord's Supper\". In 1986 Graham Kendrick published the popular \"We believe in God the Father\", closely based on the Apostles' Creed. Rich Mullins and Beaker also composed a musical setting titled \"Creed\", released on Mullins' 1993 album \"A Liturgy, a Legacy, & a Ragamuffin Band\". The song \"Creed\" on Petra's 1990 album \"Beyond Belief\" is loosely based on the Apostles' Creed.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the song `` `` beyond gods '' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 11, 3)"}]}, {"context": "GIA Publications published a hymn text in 1991 directly based on the Apostles' Creed, called \"I Believe in God Almighty.\" It has been sung to hymn tunes from Wales, the Netherlands, and Ireland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2014 Hillsong released a version of the Apostles' Creed under the title \"This I Believe (The Creed)\" on their album \"No Other Name\". Keith Getty and Kristyn Getty released an expression of the Apostles' Creed under the title \"We Believe (Apostle's Creed)\" on their 2016 album \"Facing a Task Unfinished\".", "qas": [{"question": "in 2014 , what was the title of the book released in 2014 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(47, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "<poem>Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, Creatorem caeli et terrae,\nCredo in Spiritum Sanctum,\nAmen.</poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Greek text is \"not normally used in Greek and Eastern Orthodox churches\".\n<poem>\n\u03a0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b5\u03cd\u03c9 \u03b5\u1f30\u03c2 \u03b8\u03b5\u00f2\u03bd \u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03ad\u03c1\u03b1, \u03c0\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03bf\u03ba\u03c1\u03ac\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03b1, \u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03b7\u03c4\u1f74\u03bd \u03bf\u1f50\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u1fe6 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03b3\u1fc6\u03c2.\n\u039a\u03b1\u1f76 (\u03b5\u1f30\u03c2) \u1f38\u03b7\u03c3\u03bf\u1fe6\u03bd \u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u00f2\u03bd, \u03c5\u1f31\u1f78\u03bd \u03b1\u1f50\u03c4\u03bf\u1fe6 \u03c4\u00f2\u03bd \u03bc\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03b3\u03b5\u03bd\u1fc6, \u03c4\u00f2\u03bd \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \u1f21\u03bc\u1ff6\u03bd,\n\u03a0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b5\u03cd\u03c9 \u03b5\u1f30\u03c2 \u03c4\u00f2 \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1 \u03c4\u00f2 \u1f05\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd, \u1f01\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u1f74\u03bd \u1f10\u03ba\u03ba\u03bb\u03b7\u03c3\u03af\u03b1\u03bd, \u1f01\u03b3\u03af\u03c9\u03bd \u03ba\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03c9\u03bd\u03af\u03b1\u03bd,\n\u1f08\u03bc\u03ae\u03bd.\n</poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "The English Language Liturgical Consultation (ELLC) is an international ecumenical group whose primary purpose is to provide ecumenically accepted texts for those who use English in their liturgy. In 1988 it produced a translation of the Apostles' Creed, distinguished among other things by its avoidance of the word \"his\" in relation to God. The text is as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" gives the following English translation of the Apostles' Creed. In its discussion of the Creed, the Catechism maintains the traditional division into twelve articles, the numbering of which is given below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The English text used in the Mass of the Roman Rite is at right below:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Pelbartus Ladislaus of Temesv\u00e1r assigned one special phrase to each apostle: Peter (No.\u00a01), John (No.\u00a02), James, son of Zebedee (No.\u00a03), Andrew (No.\u00a04), Philip (No.\u00a05a: descendit ad infernos...), Thomas (No.\u00a05b: ascendit ad caelos...), Bartholomew (No.\u00a06), Matthew (No.\u00a07), James, son of Alphaeus (No.\u00a08), Simon (No.\u00a09), Jude (No.\u00a010), Matthias (No.\u00a011\u201312).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anabaptist theologians fought for believer's baptism under reference to a biblical understanding of the creed:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Church of England there are currently two authorized forms of the creed: that of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" (1662) and that of \"Common Worship\" (2000).\nBook of Common Prayer, 1662\n<poem>I believe in God the Father Almighty,\nMaker of heaven and earth:", "qas": []}, {"context": "And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,\nWho was conceived by the Holy Ghost,\nBorn of the Virgin Mary,\nSuffered under Pontius Pilate,\nWas crucified, dead, and buried:\nHe descended into hell;\nThe third day he rose again from the dead;\nHe ascended into heaven,\nAnd sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty;\nFrom thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.", "qas": []}, {"context": "I believe in the Holy Ghost;\nThe holy Catholick Church;\nThe Communion of Saints;\nThe Forgiveness of sins;\nThe Resurrection of the body,\nAnd the Life everlasting.\nAmen.</poem>", "qas": []}, {"context": "Common Worship", "qas": []}, {"context": "The publication \"Evangelical Lutheran Worship\" published by Augsburg Fortress, is the primary worship resource for the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the largest Lutheran denomination in the United States, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada. It presents the official ELCA version, footnoting the phrase \"he descended to the dead\" to indicate an alternative reading: \"or \u2018he descended into hell,\u2019 another translation of this text in widespread use\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The text is as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Church of Denmark still uses the phrase \"We renounce the devil and all his doings and all his beings\" as the beginning of this creed, before the line \"We believe in God etc.\" This is mostly due to the influence of the Danish pastor Grundtvig. See .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The United Methodists commonly incorporate the Apostles' Creed into their worship services. The version which is most often used is located at No. 881 in the \"United Methodist Hymnal\", one of their most popular hymnals and one with a heritage to brothers John Wesley and Charles Wesley, founders of Methodism. It is notable for omitting the line \"he descended into hell\", but is otherwise very similar to the Book of Common Prayer version. The 1989 Hymnal has both the traditional version and the 1988 ecumenical version, which includes \"he descended to the dead.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"United Methodist Hymnal\" also contains (at #882) what it terms the \"Ecumenical Version\" of this creed which is the ecumenically accepted modern translation of the International Committee on English Texts (1975) as amended by the subsequent successor body, the English Language Liturgical Consultation (1987). This form of the Apostles' Creed can be found incorporated into the Eucharistic and Baptismal Liturgies in the Hymnal and in \"The United Methodist Book of Worship\", and hence it is growing in popularity and use. The word \"catholic\" is intentionally left lowercase in the sense that the word catholic applies to the universal and ecumenical Christian church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The liturgical communities in western Christianity that derive their rituals from the Roman Missal, including those particular communities which use the Roman Missal itself (Roman Catholics), the \"Book of Common Prayer\" (Anglicans and Episcopalians), \"Evangelical Lutheran Worship\" (Evangelical Lutheran Church in America), \"Lutheran Service Book\" (Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod), and \"The United Methodist Book of Worship\" (The United Methodist Church), use the Apostles' Creed and interrogative forms of it in their rites of Baptism, which they consider to be the sacrament of initiation into the Church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An interrogative form of the Apostles' Creed is used in the Rite of Baptism (for both children and adults). The minister of baptism asks the following questions (ICEL, 1974):", "qas": []}, {"context": "To each question, the catechumen, or, in the case of an infant, the parents and sponsor(s) (godparent(s)) in his or her place, answers \"I do.\" Then the celebrant says:", "qas": []}, {"context": "And all respond: Amen.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 2002 edition, the Apostles' Creed is included in the Roman Missal with the indication, \"Instead of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, especially during Lent and Easter time, the baptismal Symbol of the Roman Church, known as the Apostles' Creed, may be used.\" Previously the Nicene Creed was the only profession of faith that the Missal gave for use at Mass, except in Masses for children; but in some countries use of the Apostles' Creed was already permitted.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Until the simplification of rubrics attendant to the General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII adopted in 1955, the Apostles' Creed was recited in the breviary at the beginning of Matins and Prime, at the end of Compline, and in some \"Preces\" (a series of versicles and responses preceded by \"Kyrie, eleison\" (\"Lord, have mercy\") and the Our Father) of Prime and Compline on certain days during Advent and Lent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Apostles' Creed is used in the non-Eucharistic services of Matins and Evening Prayer (Evensong). It is invoked after the recitation or singing of the Canticles, and it is the only part of the services in which the congregation traditionally turns to face the altar, if they are seated transversely in the quire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Episcopal Church uses the Apostles' Creed as a Baptismal Covenant for those who are to receive the Rite of Baptism. Regardless of age, candidates are to be sponsored by parents or godparents. Youths able to understand the significance of the Rite may go through the ritual speaking for themselves. Younger children and infants rely on their sponsors to act upon their behalf.", "qas": []}, {"context": "1. The celebrant calls for the candidates for Baptism to be presented.", "qas": []}, {"context": "2. The catechumen or sponsors state their request for Baptism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "3a. If the catechumen is of age, the celebrant will ask him or her if he or she desires Baptism, to which the catechumen will respond: \"I do.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "3b. If the candidate relies on sponsors, the celebrant asks them if they will raise the child in \"the Christian faith and life\" (ECUSA BCP), and will raise the child through \"prayers and witness to grow into the full stature of Christ\" to which the parents will state to each, \"I will, with God's help.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "4. A series of questions is then asked, to which the reply is always \"I renounce them\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "5. The second half of the query is asked, to which the reply is always \"I do\":", "qas": []}, {"context": "6. The Apostles' Creed is then recited by candidates, sponsors and congregation, each section of the Creed being an answer to the celebrant's question, 'Do you believe in God the Father (God the Son, God the Holy Spirit)?'", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lutherans following the \"Lutheran Service Book\" (Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod and the Lutheran Church\u2013Canada), like Roman Catholics, use the Apostles' Creed during the Sacrament of Baptism:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following each question, the candidate answers by saying \"Yes, I believe\". If the candidate is a child, the godparents are to answer the questions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For ELCA Lutherans who use the Evangelical Lutheran Worship book, the Apostles' Creed appears during the Sacrament of Holy Baptism Rite on p.\u00a0229 of the hardcover pew edition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Methodists use the Apostles' Creed as part of their baptismal rites in the form of an interrogatory addressed to the candidate(s) for baptism and the whole congregation as a way of professing the faith within the context of the Church's sacramental act. For infants, it is the professing of the faith by the parents, sponsors, and congregation on behalf of the candidate(s); for confirmands, it is the professing of the faith before and among the congregation. For the congregation, it is a reaffirmation of their professed faith.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Amicable numbers", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Amicable numbers are two different numbers so related that the sum of the proper divisors of each is equal to the other number. (A proper divisor of a number is a positive factor of that number other than the number itself. For example, the proper divisors of 6 are 1, 2, and 3.) A pair of amicable numbers constitutes an aliquot sequence of period 2. A related concept is that of a perfect number, which is a number that equals the sum of \"its own\" proper divisors, in other words a number which forms an aliquot sequence of period 1. Numbers that are members of an aliquot sequence with period greater than 2 are known as sociable numbers.", "qas": [{"question": "how many different numbers are there ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The smallest pair of amicable numbers is (220, 284). They are amicable because the proper divisors of 220 are 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55 and 110, of which the sum is 284; and the proper divisors of 284 are 1, 2, 4, 71 and 142, of which the sum is 220.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the smallest number of amicable numbers ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 1, 0)"}, {"question": "what is amicable ?", "answers": [], "id": "(48, 1, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The first ten amicable pairs are: (220, 284), (1184, 1210), (2620, 2924), (5020, 5564), (6232, 6368), (10744, 10856), (12285, 14595), (17296, 18416), (63020, 76084), and (66928, 66992). . (Also see and )", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amicable numbers were known to the Pythagoreans, who credited them with many mystical properties. A general formula by which some of these numbers could be derived was invented circa 850 by the Iraqi mathematician Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra (826\u2013901). Other Arab mathematicians who studied amicable numbers are al-Majriti (died 1007), al-Baghdadi (980\u20131037), and al-F\u0101ris\u012b (1260\u20131320). The Iranian mathematician Muhammad Baqir Yazdi (16th century) discovered the pair (9363584, 9437056), though this has often been attributed to Descartes. Much of the work of Eastern mathematicians in this area has been forgotten.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra's formula was rediscovered by Fermat (1601\u20131665) and Descartes (1596\u20131650), to whom it is sometimes ascribed, and extended by Euler (1707\u20131783). It was extended further by Borho in 1972. Fermat and Descartes also rediscovered pairs of amicable numbers known to Arab mathematicians. Euler also discovered dozens of new pairs. The second smallest pair, (1184, 1210), was discovered in 1866 by a then teenage B. Nicol\u00f2 I. Paganini (not to be confused with the composer and violinist), having been overlooked by earlier mathematicians.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 1946 there were 390 known pairs, but the advent of computers has allowed the discovery of many thousands since then. Exhaustive searches have been carried out to find all pairs less than a given bound, this bound being extended from 10 in 1970, to 10 in 1986, 10 in 1993, 10 in 2015, and to 10 in 2016.", "qas": []}, {"context": ", there are over 1,222,571,199 known amicable pairs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While these rules do generate some pairs of amicable numbers, many other pairs are known, so these rules are by no means comprehensive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In particular, the two rules below produce only even amicable pairs, so they are of no interest for the open problem of finding amicable pairs coprime to 210 = 2\u00b73\u00b75\u00b77, while over 1000 pairs coprime to 30 = 2\u00b73\u00b75 are known [Garc\u00eda, Pedersen & te Riele (2003), S\u00e1ndor & Crstici (2004)]. \nThe Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra theorem is a method for discovering amicable numbers invented in the ninth century by the Arab mathematician Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It states that if\nwhere is an integer and , , and are prime numbers, then and are a pair of amicable numbers. This formula gives the pairs for , for , and for , but no other such pairs are known. Numbers of the form are known as Thabit numbers. In order for Ibn Qurra's formula to produce an amicable pair, two consecutive Thabit numbers must be prime; this severely restricts the possible values of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "To establish the theorem, Th\u00e2bit ibn Qurra proved nine lemmas divided into two groups. The first three lemmas deal with the determination of the aliquot parts of a natural integer. The second group of lemmas deals more specifically with the formation of perfect, abundant and deficient numbers.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Euler's rule\" is a generalization of the Th\u00e2bit ibn Qurra theorem. It states that if\nwhere are integers and , , and are prime numbers, then and are a pair of amicable numbers. Th\u0101bit ibn Qurra's theorem corresponds to the case . Euler's rule creates additional amicable pairs for with no others being known. Euler (1747 & 1750) overall found 58 new pairs to make all the by then existing pairs into 61.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Let (, ) be a pair of amicable numbers with , and write and where is the greatest common divisor of and . If and are both coprime to and square free then the pair (, ) is said to be regular , otherwise it is called irregular or exotic. If (, ) is regular and and have and prime factors respectively, then is said to be of type .", "qas": []}, {"context": "For example, with , the greatest common divisor is and so and . Therefore, is regular of type .", "qas": []}, {"context": "An amicable pair is twin if there are no integers between and belonging to any other amicable pair .", "qas": []}, {"context": "In every known case, the numbers of a pair are either both even or both odd. It is not known whether an even-odd pair of amicable numbers exists, but if it does, the even number must either be a square number or twice one, and the odd number must be a square number. However, amicable numbers where the two members have different smallest prime factors do exist: there are seven such pairs known. Also, every known pair shares at least one common prime factor. It is not known whether a pair of coprime amicable numbers exists, though if any does, the product of the two must be greater than 10. Also, a pair of coprime amicable numbers cannot be generated by Thabit's formula (above), nor by any similar formula.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1955, Paul Erd\u0151s showed that the density of amicable numbers, relative to the positive integers, was 0.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to the sum of amicable pairs conjecture, as the number of the amicable numbers approaches infinity, the percentage of the sums of the amicable pairs divisible by ten approaches 100% .", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAmicable numbers formula_1 satisfy formula_2 and formula_3 which can be written together as formula_4. This can be generalized to larger tuples, say formula_5, where we require", "qas": []}, {"context": "For example, (1980, 2016, 2556) is an amicable triple , and (3270960, 3361680, 3461040, 3834000) is an amicable quadruple .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Amicable multisets are defined analogously and generalizes this a bit further .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Sociable numbers are the numbers in cyclic lists of numbers (with a length greater than 2) where each number is the sum of the proper divisors of the preceding number. For example, formula_7 are sociable numbers of order 4.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The aliquot sequence can be represented as a directed graph, formula_8, for a given integer formula_9, where formula_10 denotes the\nsum of the proper divisors of formula_11.\nCycles in formula_8 represent sociable numbers within the interval formula_13. Two special cases are loops that represent perfect numbers and cycles of length two that represent amicable pairs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Agar", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Agar (pronounced , sometimes ) or agar-agar is a jelly-like substance, obtained from red algae.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar is a mixture of two components: the linear polysaccharide agarose, and a heterogeneous mixture of smaller molecules called agaropectin. It forms the supporting structure in the cell walls of certain species of algae, and is released on boiling. These algae are known as agarophytes, and belong to the Rhodophyta (red algae) phylum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar has been used as an ingredient in desserts throughout Asia, and also as a solid substrate to contain culture media for microbiological work. Agar can be used as a laxative, an appetite suppressant, a vegetarian substitute for gelatin, a thickener for soups, in fruit preserves, ice cream, and other desserts, as a clarifying agent in brewing, and for sizing paper and fabrics.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The gelling agent in agar is an unbranched polysaccharide obtained from the cell walls of some species of red algae, primarily from \"tengusa\" (\"Gelidiaceae\") and \"ogonori\" (\"Gracilaria\"). For commercial purposes, it is derived primarily from \"ogonori\". In chemical terms, agar is a polymer made up of subunits of the sugar galactose.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the chemical equivalent of the sugar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 3, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Agar may have been discovered in Japan in 1658 by Mino Tar\u014dzaemon (), an innkeeper who, according to legend, was said to have discarded surplus seaweed soup and noticed that it gelled later after a winter night's freezing. Over the following centuries, agar became a common gelling agent in several Southeast Asian cuisines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar was first subjected to chemical analysis in 1859 by the French chemist Anselme Payen, who had obtained agar from the marine algae \"Gelidium corneum\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beginning in the late 19th century, agar began to be used heavily as a solid medium for growing various microbes. Agar was first described for use in microbiology in 1882 by the German microbiologist Walther Hesse, an assistant working in Robert Koch's laboratory, on the suggestion of his wife Fannie Hesse. Agar quickly supplanted gelatin as the base of microbiological media, due to its higher melting temperature, allowing microbes to be grown at higher temperatures without the media liquefying.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With its newfound use in microbiology, agar production quickly increased. This production centered on Japan, which produced most of the world's agar until World War II. However, with the outbreak of World War II, many nations were forced to establish domestic agar industries in order to continue microbiological research. Around the time of World War II, approximately 2,500 tons of agar were produced annually. By the mid-1970s, production worldwide had increased dramatically to approximately 10,000 tons each year. Since then, production of agar has fluctuated due to unstable and sometimes over-utilized seaweed populations.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the process in agar production ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The word \"agar\" comes from agar-agar, the Malay name for red algae (\"Gigartina\", \"Gracilaria\") from which the jelly is produced. It is also known as Kanten () (from the phrase \"kan-zarashi tokoroten\" () or \u201ccold-exposed agar\u201d), Japanese isinglass, Ceylon moss or Jaffna moss. \"Gracilaria lichenoides\" is specifically referred to as agal-agal or Ceylon agar.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another name for ceylon agar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 8, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Agar consists of a mixture of two polysaccharides: agarose and agaropectin, with agarose making up about 70% of the mixture. Agarose is a linear polymer, made up of repeating units of agarobiose, a disaccharide made up of D-galactose and 3,6-anhydro-L-galactopyranose. Agaropectin is a heterogeneous mixture of smaller molecules that occur in lesser amounts, and is made up of alternating units of D-galactose and L-galactose heavily modified with acidic side-groups, such as sulfate and pyruvate.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar exhibits hysteresis, melting at 85\u00a0\u00b0C (358 K, 185\u00a0\u00b0F) and solidifying from 32\u201340\u00a0\u00b0C (305\u2013313 K, 90\u2013104\u00a0\u00b0F). This property lends a suitable balance between easy melting and good gel stability at relatively high temperatures. Since many scientific applications require incubation at temperatures close to human body temperature (37\u00a0\u00b0C), agar is more appropriate than other solidifying agents that melt at this temperature, such as gelatin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar-agar is a natural vegetable gelatin counterpart. White and semi-translucent, it is sold in packages as washed and dried strips or in powdered form. It can be used to make jellies, puddings, and custards. For making jelly, it is boiled in water until the solids dissolve. Sweetener, flavouring, colouring, fruit or vegetables are then added and the liquid is poured into molds to be served as desserts and vegetable aspics, or incorporated with other desserts, such as a jelly layer in a cake.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar-agar is approximately 80% fiber, so it can serve as an intestinal regulator. Its bulking quality has been behind fad diets in Asia, for example the \"kanten\" (the Japanese word for agar-agar) diet. Once ingested, \"kanten\" triples in size and absorbs water. This results in the consumers feeling fuller. This diet has recently received some press coverage in the United States as well. The diet has shown promise in obesity studies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One use of agar in Japanese cuisine (Wagashi) is \"anmitsu\", a dessert made of small cubes of agar jelly and served in a bowl with various fruits or other ingredients. It is also the main ingredient in \"mizu y\u014dkan\", another popular Japanese food.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Philippine cuisine, it is used to make the jelly bars in the various gulaman refreshments or desserts such as \"sago gulaman\", \"buko pandan\", \"agar flan\", \"halo-halo\", and the black and red \"gulaman\" used in various fruit salads.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Vietnamese cuisine, jellies made of flavored layers of agar agar, called \"th\u1ea1ch\", are a popular dessert, and are often made in ornate molds for special occasions. In Indian cuisine, agar agar is known as \"China grass\" and is used for making desserts. In Burmese cuisine, a sweet jelly known as \"kyauk kyaw\" is made from agar.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the dish called in burma ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 15, 2)"}, {"question": "what is the name of a popular dishes in vietnamese cuisine ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 15, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In Russia, it is used in addition or as a replacement to pectin in jams and marmalades, as a substitute to gelatin for its superior gelling properties, and as a strengthening ingredient in souffles and custards. Another use of agar-agar is in \"ptich'ye moloko\" (bird's milk), a rich jellified custard (or soft meringue) used as a cake filling or chocolate-glazed as individual sweets. Agar-agar may also be used as the gelling agent in gel clarification, a culinary technique used to clarify stocks, sauces, and other liquids.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mexico has traditional candies made out of Agar gelatin, most of them in colorful, half-circle shapes that resemble a melon or watermelon fruit slice, and commonly covered with sugar. They are known in Spanish as \"Dulce de Agar\" (Agar sweets)", "qas": [{"question": "what is the spanish word for agar de agar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 17, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Agar-agar is an allowed nonorganic/nonsynthetic additive used as a thickener, gelling agent, texturizer, moisturizer, emulsifier, flavor enhancer, and absorbent in certified organic foods.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An agar plate or Petri dish is used to provide a growth medium using a mix of agar and other nutrients in which microorganisms, including bacteria and fungi, can be cultured and observed under the microscope. Agar is indigestible for many organisms so that microbial growth does not affect the gel used and it remains stable. Agar is typically sold commercially as a powder that can be mixed with water and prepared similarly to gelatin before use as a growth medium. Other ingredients are added to the agar to meet the nutritional needs of the microbes. Many specific formulations are available, because some microbes prefer certain environmental conditions over others. Agar is often dispensed using a sterile media dispenser.", "qas": [{"question": "what is agar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 19, 5)"}, {"question": "what type of meat is used to provide a growth medium in bacteria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "As a gel, an agar or agarose medium is porous and therefore can be used to measure microorganism motility and mobility. The gel's porosity is directly related to the concentration of agarose in the medium, so various levels of effective viscosity (from the cell's \"point of view\") can be selected, depending on the experimental objectives.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A common identification assay involves culturing a sample of the organism deep within a block of nutrient agar. Cells will attempt to grow within the gel structure. Motile species will be able to migrate, albeit slowly, throughout the gel and infiltration rates can then be visualized, whereas non-motile species will show growth only along the now-empty path introduced by the invasive initial sample deposition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another setup commonly used for measuring chemotaxis and chemokinesis utilizes the under-agarose cell migration assay, whereby a layer of agarose gel is placed between a cell population and a chemoattractant. As a concentration gradient develops from the diffusion of the chemoattractant into the gel, various cell populations requiring different stimulation levels to migrate can then be visualized over time using microphotography as they tunnel upward through the gel against gravity along the gradient.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Research grade agar is used extensively in plant biology as it is supplemented with a nutrient and vitamin mixture that allows for seedling germination in Petri dishes under sterile conditions (given that the seeds are sterilized as well). Nutrient and vitamin supplementation for \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" is standard across most experimental conditions. Murashige & Skoog (MS) nutrient mix and Gamborg's B5 vitamin mix in general are used. A 1.0% agar/0.44% MS+vitamin dHO solution is suitable for growth media between normal growth temps.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a 1.0% solution for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 23, 3)"}]}, {"context": "When using agar, within any growth medium, it is important to know that the solidification of the agar is pH-dependent. The optimal range for solidification is between 5.4-5.7. Usually, the application of KOH is needed to increase the pH to this range. A general guideline is about 600 \u00b5l 0.1M KOH per 250 ml GM. This entire mixture can be sterilized using the liquid cycle of an autoclave.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the term for the growth of the agar ?", "answers": [], "id": "(49, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "This medium nicely lends itself to the application of specific concentrations of phytohormones etc. to induce specific growth patterns in that one can easily prepare a solution containing the desired amount of hormone, add it to the known volume of GM, and autoclave to both sterilize and evaporate off any solvent that may have been used to dissolve the often-polar hormones. This hormone/GM solution can be spread across the surface of Petri dishes sown with germinated and/or etiolated seedlings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Experiments with the moss \"Physcomitrella patens\", however, have shown that choice of the gelling agent\u00a0\u2014 agar or Gelrite - does influence phytohormone sensitivity of the plant cell culture.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Agar is used:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Gelidium agar is used primarily for bacteriological plates. Gracilaria agar is used mainly in food applications.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2016, AMAM, a Japanese company, developed a prototype for Agar-based commercial packaging system called Agar Plasticity, intended as a replacement for oil-based plastic packaging.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Acid rain", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Acid rain is a rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic, meaning that it has elevated levels of hydrogen ions (low pH). It can have harmful effects on plants, aquatic animals and infrastructure. Acid rain is caused by emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide, which react with the water molecules in the atmosphere to produce acids. Some governments have made efforts since the 1970s to reduce the release of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide into the atmosphere with positive results. Nitrogen oxides can also be produced naturally by lightning strikes, and sulphur dioxide is produced by volcanic eruptions. Acid rain has been shown to have adverse impacts on forests, freshwaters and soils, killing insect and aquatic life-forms, causing paint to peel, corrosion of steel structures such as bridges, and weathering of stone buildings and statues as well as having impacts on human health.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the temperature that makes it difficult to make a hot cold temperature ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"Acid rain\" is a popular term referring to the deposition of a mixture from wet (rain, snow, sleet, fog, cloudwater, and dew) and dry (acidifying particles and gases) acidic components. Distilled water, once carbon dioxide is removed, has a neutral pH of 7. Liquids with a pH less than 7 are acidic, and those with a pH greater than 7 are alkaline. \"Clean\" or unpolluted rain has an acidic pH, but usually no lower than 5.7, because carbon dioxide and water in the air react together to form carbonic acid, a weak acid according to the following reaction:", "qas": [{"question": "what kind of oxygen does the air react to ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 1, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Carbonic acid then can ionize in water forming low concentrations of carbonate and hydronium ions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, unpolluted rain can also contain other chemicals which affect its pH (acidity level). A common example is nitric acid produced by electric discharge in the atmosphere such as lightning. Acid deposition as an environmental issue (discussed later in the article) would include additional acids other than .", "qas": [{"question": "what type of rain can be found in unpolluted tropical ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The corrosive effect of polluted, acidic city air on limestone and marble was noted in the 17th century by John Evelyn, who remarked upon the poor condition of the Arundel marbles.\nSince the Industrial Revolution, emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere have increased. In 1852, Robert Angus Smith was the first to show the relationship between acid rain and atmospheric pollution in Manchester, England.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though acidic rain was discovered in 1853, it was not until the late 1960s that scientists began widely observing and studying the phenomenon. The term \"acid rain\" was coined in 1872 by Robert Angus Smith. Canadian Harold Harvey was among the first to research a \"dead\" lake. At first the main focus in research lay on local affects of acid rain. Waldemar Christofer Br\u00f8gger was the first to acknowledge long-distance transportation of pollutants crossing borders from the United Kingdom to Norway. Public awareness of acid rain in the U.S increased in the 1970s after The New York Times published reports from the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire of the myriad deleterious environmental effects shown to result from it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Occasional pH readings in rain and fog water of well below 2.4 have been reported in industrialized areas. Industrial acid rain is a substantial problem in China and Russia and areas downwind from them. These areas all burn sulphur-containing coal to generate heat and electricity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The problem of acid rain has not only increased with population and industrial growth, but has become more widespread. The use of tall smokestacks to reduce local pollution has contributed to the spread of acid rain by releasing gases into regional atmospheric circulation. Often deposition occurs a considerable distance downwind of the emissions, with mountainous regions tending to receive the greatest deposition (simply because of their higher rainfall). An example of this effect is the low pH of rain which falls in Scandinavia.", "qas": [{"question": "what has become more widespread than the problem of acid rain ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The earliest report about acid rain in the United States was from the chemical evidence from Hubbard Brook Valley. In 1972, a group of scientists including Gene Likens discovered the rain that was deposited at White Mountains of New Hampshire was acidic. The pH of the sample was measured to be 4.03 at Hubbard Brook. The Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study followed up with a series of research that analyzed the environmental effects of acid rain. Acid rain that mixed with stream water at Hubbard Brook was neutralized by the alumina from soils. The result of this research indicates the chemical reaction between acid rain and aluminum leads to increasing rate of soil weathering. Experimental research was done to examine the effects of increased acidity in stream on ecological species. In 1980, a group of scientists modified the acidity of Norris Brook, New Hampshire, and observed the change in species' behaviors. There was a decrease in species diversity, an increase in community dominants, and a decrease in the food web complexity.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the earliest report about acid rain in the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1980, the U.S. Congress passed an Acid Deposition Act. This Act established an 18-year assessment and research program under the direction of the National Acidic Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP). NAPAP looked at the entire problem from a scientific perspective. It enlarged a network of monitoring sites to determine how acidic the precipitation actually was, and to determine long-term trends, and established a network for dry deposition. It looked at the effects of acid rain and funded research on the effects of acid precipitation on freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems, historical buildings, monuments, and building materials. It also funded extensive studies on atmospheric processes and potential control programs.", "qas": [{"question": "what act did congress pass in 1980, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "From the start, policy advocates from all sides attempted to influence NAPAP activities to support their particular policy advocacy efforts, or to disparage those of their opponents. For the U.S. Government's scientific enterprise, a significant impact of NAPAP were lessons learned in the assessment process and in environmental research management to a relatively large group of scientists, program managers and the public.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1981, the National Academy of Sciences was looking into research about the controversial issues regarding acid rain. President Ronald Reagan did not place a huge attention on the issues of acid rain until his personal visit to Canada and confirmed that Canadian border suffered from the drifting pollution from smokestacks in Midwest of US. Reagan honored the agreement to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau\u2019s enforcement of anti-pollution regulation. In 1982, US President Ronald Reagan commissioned William Nierenberg to serve on the National Science Board. Nierenberg selected scientists including Gene Likens to serve on a panel to draft a report on acid rain. In 1983, the panel of scientists came up with a draft report, which concluded that acid rain is a real problem and solutions should be sought. White House Office of Science and Technology Policy reviewed the draft report and sent Fred Singer\u2019s suggestions of the report, which cast doubt on the cause of acid rain. The panelists revealed rejections against Singer\u2019s positions and submitted the report to Nierenberg in April. In May 1983, the House of Representatives voted against legislations that aimed to control sulphur emissions. There was a debate about whether Nierenberg delayed to release the report. Nierenberg himself denied the saying about his suppression of the report and explained that the withheld of the report after the House's vote was due to the fact that the report was not ready to be published.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year was the national academy of sciences published ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1991, the US National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP) provided its first assessment of acid rain in the United States. It reported that 5% of New England Lakes were acidic, with sulfates being the most common problem. They noted that 2% of the lakes could no longer support Brook Trout, and 6% of the lakes were unsuitable for the survival of many species of minnow. Subsequent Reports to Congress have documented chemical changes in soil and freshwater ecosystems, nitrogen saturation, decreases in amounts of nutrients in soil, episodic acidification, regional haze, and damage to historical monuments.", "qas": [{"question": "what does napap stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Meanwhile, in 1990, the U.S. Congress passed a series of amendments to the Clean Air Act. Title IV of these amendments established the a cap and trade system designed to control emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Title IV called for a total reduction of about 10 million tons of SO emissions from power plants, close to a 50% reduction. It was implemented in two phases. Phase I began in 1995, and limited sulphur dioxide emissions from 110 of the largest power plants to a combined total of 8.7 million tons of sulphur dioxide. One power plant in New England (Merrimack) was in Phase I. Four other plants (Newington, Mount Tom, Brayton Point, and Salem Harbor) were added under other provisions of the program. Phase II began in 2000, and affects most of the power plants in the country.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 1990s, research continued. On March 10, 2005, the EPA issued the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR). This rule provides states with a solution to the problem of power plant pollution that drifts from one state to another. CAIR will permanently cap emissions of SO and NO in the eastern United States. When fully implemented, CAIR will reduce SO emissions in 28 eastern states and the District of Columbia by over 70% and NO emissions by over 60% from 2003 levels.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Overall, the program's cap and trade program has been successful in achieving its goals. Since the 1990s, SO emissions have dropped 40%, and according to the Pacific Research Institute, acid rain levels have dropped 65% since 1976. Conventional regulation was used in the European Union, which saw a decrease of over 70% in SO emissions during the same time period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2007, total SO emissions were 8.9 million tons, achieving the program's long-term goal ahead of the 2010 statutory deadline.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2007 the EPA estimated that by 2010, the overall costs of complying with the program for businesses and consumers would be $1 billion to $2 billion a year, only one fourth of what was originally predicted. Forbes says: \"In 2010, by which time the cap and trade system had been augmented by the George W. Bush administration's Clean Air Interstate Rule, SO2 emissions had fallen to 5.1 million tons.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term Citizen science can be traced back as far as January 1989 and a campaign by the Audubon Society to measure Acid rain. Scientist Muki Haklay cites in a policy report for the Wilson Center entitled 'Citizen Science and Policy: A European Perspective' a first use of the term 'citizen science' by R. Kerson in the magazine MIT Technology Review from January 1989. Quoting from the Wilson Center report: \"The new form of engagement in science received the name \"citizen science\". The first recorded example of the use of the term is from 1989, describing how 225 volunteers across the US collected rain samples to assist the Audubon Society in an acid-rain awareness raising campaign. The volunteers collected samples, checked for acidity, and reported back to the organization. The information was then used to demonstrate the full extent of the phenomenon.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The most important gas which leads to acidification is sulphur dioxide. Emissions of nitrogen oxides which are oxidized to form nitric acid are of increasing importance due to stricter controls on emissions of sulphur containing compounds. 70 Tg(S) per year in the form of SO comes from fossil fuel combustion and industry, 2.8 Tg(S) from wildfires and 7\u20138 Tg(S) per year from volcanoes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The principal natural phenomena that contribute acid-producing gases to the atmosphere are emissions from volcanoes. Thus, for example, fumaroles from the Laguna Caliente crater of Po\u00e1s Volcano create extremely high amounts of acid rain and fog, with acidity as high as a pH of 2, clearing an area of any vegetation and frequently causing irritation to the eyes and lungs of inhabitants in nearby settlements.\nAcid-producing gasses are also created by biological processes that occur on the land, in wetlands, and in the oceans. The major biological source of sulphur containing compounds is dimethyl sulfide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nitric acid in rainwater is an important source of fixed nitrogen for plant life, and is also produced by electrical activity in the atmosphere such as lightning.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acidic deposits have been detected in glacial ice thousands of years old in remote parts of the globe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Soils of coniferous forests are naturally very acidic due to the shedding of needles, and the results of this phenomenon should not be confused with acid rain.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the cause of soils forests ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The principal cause of acid rain is sulphur and nitrogen compounds from human sources, such as electricity generation, factories, and motor vehicles. Electrical power generation using coal is among the greatest contributors to gaseous pollutions that are responsible for acidic rain. The gases can be carried hundreds of kilometers in the atmosphere before they are converted to acids and deposited. In the past, factories had short funnels to let out smoke but this caused many problems locally; thus, factories now have taller smoke funnels. However, dispersal from these taller stacks causes pollutants to be carried farther, causing widespread ecological damage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Combustion of fuels produces sulphur dioxide and nitric oxides. They are converted into sulphuric acid and nitric acid.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the acid that is converted into sulphuric acid ?", "answers": [], "id": "(50, 25, 1)"}]}, {"context": "In the gas phase sulphur dioxide is oxidized by reaction with the hydroxyl radical via an intermolecular reaction:\nwhich is followed by:\nIn the presence of water, sulphur trioxide (SO) is converted rapidly to sulphuric acid:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nitrogen dioxide reacts with OH to form nitric acid:", "qas": []}, {"context": "When clouds are present, the loss rate of SO is faster than can be explained by gas phase chemistry alone. This is due to reactions in the liquid water droplets.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nsulphur dioxide dissolves in water and then, like carbon dioxide, hydrolyses in a series of equilibrium reactions:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nThere are a large number of aqueous reactions that oxidize sulphur from S(IV) to S(VI), leading to the formation of sulphuric acid. The most important oxidation reactions are with ozone, hydrogen peroxide and oxygen (reactions with oxygen are catalyzed by iron and manganese in the cloud droplets).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Wet deposition of acids occurs when any form of precipitation (rain, snow, and so on.) removes acids from the atmosphere and delivers it to the Earth's surface. This can result from the deposition of acids produced in the raindrops (see aqueous phase chemistry above) or by the precipitation removing the acids either in clouds or below clouds. Wet removal of both gases and aerosols are both of importance for wet deposition.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acid deposition also occurs via dry deposition in the absence of precipitation. This can be responsible for as much as 20 to 60% of total acid deposition. This occurs when particles and gases stick to the ground, plants or other surfaces.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acid rain has been shown to have adverse impacts on forests, freshwaters and soils, killing insect and aquatic life-forms as well as causing damage to buildings and having impacts on human health.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both the lower pH and higher aluminium concentrations in surface water that occur as a result of acid rain can cause damage to fish and other aquatic animals. At pHs lower than 5 most fish eggs will not hatch and lower pHs can kill adult fish. As lakes and rivers become more acidic biodiversity is reduced. Acid rain has eliminated insect life and some fish species, including the brook trout in some lakes, streams, and creeks in geographically sensitive areas, such as the Adirondack Mountains of the United States. However, the extent to which acid rain contributes directly or indirectly via runoff from the catchment to lake and river acidity (i.e., depending on characteristics of the surrounding watershed) is variable. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) website states: \"Of the lakes and streams surveyed, acid rain caused acidity in 75% of the acidic lakes and about 50% of the acidic streams\". Lakes hosted by silicate basement rocks are more acidic than lakes within limestone or other basement rocks with a carbonate composition (i.e. marble) due to buffering effects by carbonate minerals, even with the same amount of acid rain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Soil biology and chemistry can be seriously damaged by acid rain. Some microbes are unable to tolerate changes to low pH and are killed. The enzymes of these microbes are denatured (changed in shape so they no longer function) by the acid. The hydronium ions of acid rain also mobilize toxins, such as aluminium, and leach away essential nutrients and minerals such as magnesium.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Soil chemistry can be dramatically changed when base cations, such as calcium and magnesium, are leached by acid rain thereby affecting sensitive species, such as sugar maple (Acer saccharum).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Adverse effects may be indirectly related to acid rain, like the acid's effects on soil (see above) or high concentration of gaseous precursors to acid rain. High altitude forests are especially vulnerable as they are often surrounded by clouds and fog which are more acidic than rain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other plants can also be damaged by acid rain, but the effect on food crops is minimized by the application of lime and fertilizers to replace lost nutrients. In cultivated areas, limestone may also be added to increase the ability of the soil to keep the pH stable, but this tactic is largely unusable in the case of wilderness lands. When calcium is leached from the needles of red spruce, these trees become less cold tolerant and exhibit winter injury and even death.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acid rain has a much less harmful effect on the oceans. However, acid rain can cause the oceans acidity to rise, making it more difficult for different coastal species to create their exoskeletons that they need to survive. These coastal species link together as part of the ocean's food chain and without them being a source for other marine life to feed off of more marine life will die.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Coral's limestone skeletal is sensitive to pH drop, because the calcium carbonate, core component of the limestone dissolves in acidic (low pH) solutions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acid rain does not directly affect human health. The acid in the rainwater is too dilute to have direct adverse effects. However, the particulates responsible for acid rain (sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides) do have an adverse effect. Increased amounts of fine particulate matter in the air do contribute to heart and lung problems including asthma and bronchitis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Acid rain can damage buildings, historic monuments, and statues, especially those made of rocks, such as limestone and marble, that contain large amounts of calcium carbonate. Acids in the rain react with the calcium compounds in the stones to create gypsum, which then flakes off.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The effects of this are commonly seen on old gravestones, where acid rain can cause the inscriptions to become completely illegible. Acid rain also increases the corrosion rate of metals, in particular iron, steel, copper and bronze.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Places significantly impacted by acid rain around the globe include most of eastern Europe from Poland northward into Scandinavia, the eastern third of the United States, and southeastern Canada. Other affected areas include the southeastern coast of China and Taiwan.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many coal-firing power stations use flue-gas desulphurization (FGD) to remove sulphur-containing gases from their stack gases. For a typical coal-fired power station, FGD will remove 95% or more of the SO in the flue gases. An example of FGD is the wet scrubber which is commonly used. A wet scrubber is basically a reaction tower equipped with a fan that extracts hot smoke stack gases from a power plant into the tower. Lime or limestone in slurry form is also injected into the tower to mix with the stack gases and combine with the sulphur dioxide present. The calcium carbonate of the limestone produces pH-neutral calcium sulfate that is physically removed from the scrubber. That is, the scrubber turns sulphur pollution into industrial sulfates.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In some areas the sulfates are sold to chemical companies as gypsum when the purity of calcium sulfate is high. In others, they are placed in landfill. However, the effects of acid rain can last for generations, as the effects of pH level change can stimulate the continued leaching of undesirable chemicals into otherwise pristine water sources, killing off vulnerable insect and fish species and blocking efforts to restore native life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fluidized bed combustion also reduces the amount of sulphur emitted by power production.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vehicle emissions control reduces emissions of nitrogen oxides from motor vehicles.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A number of international treaties on the long-range transport of atmospheric pollutants have been agreed for example, the 1985 Helsinki Protocol on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. Canada and the US signed the Air Quality Agreement in 1991. Most European countries and Canada have signed the treaties.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In this regulatory scheme, every current polluting facility is given or may purchase on an open market an emissions allowance for each unit of a designated pollutant it emits. Operators can then install pollution control equipment, and sell portions of their emissions allowances they no longer need for their own operations, thereby recovering some of the capital cost of their investment in such equipment. The intention is to give operators economic incentives to install pollution controls.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first emissions trading market was established in the United States by enactment of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. The overall goal of the Acid Rain Program established by the Act is to achieve significant environmental and public health benefits through reductions in emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO) and nitrogen oxides (NO), the primary causes of acid rain. To achieve this goal at the lowest cost to society, the program employs both regulatory and market based approaches for controlling air pollution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Acephali", "paragraphs": [{"context": "In church history, the term (from Ancient Greek: \u1f00\u03ba\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9 \"akephaloi\", \"headless\", singular \u1f00\u03ba\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \"akephalos\" from \u1f00- \"a-\", \"without\", and \u03ba\u03b5\u03c6\u03b1\u03bb\u03ae \"kephal\u00e9\", \"head\") has been applied to several sects that supposedly had no leader. E. Cobham Brewer wrote, in \"Dictionary of Phrase and Fable\", that acephalites, \"properly means men without a head.\" Jean Cooper wrote, in \"Dictionary of Christianity\", that it characterizes \"various schismatical Christian bodies\". Among them were Nestorians who rejected the Council of Ephesus condemnation of Patriarch Nestorius of Constantinople, which deposed Nestorius and declared him a heretic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Those who refused to acknowledge the authority of the Council of Chalcedon were originally called Haesitantes; the \"\" developed from among them, and, according to Blunt, the earlier name \u2013 Haesitantes \u2013 seems to have been used for only a short time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With the apparent purpose of bringing the Orthodox and heretics into unity, Patriarch Peter III of Alexandria and Patriarch Acacius of Constantinople had elaborated a new creed in which they expressly condemned both Nestorius and Eutyches, a presbyter and archimandrite, but at the same time rejected the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon. This ambiguous formula, though approved by Byzantine Emperor Zeno and imposed in his \"Henoticon\", could only satisfy the indifferent.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term applied to a 5th-century faction among the Eutychians, who seceded from Peter, a Monophysite or more accurately a Miaphysite, in 482, after Peter signed the \"Henoticon\" and was recognised by Zeno as the legitimate patriarch of Alexandria by which they were \"deprived of their head\".", "qas": [{"question": "who recognized alexandria as the legitimate patriarch of alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(51, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The condemnation of Eutyches irritated the rigid Monophysites; the equivocal attitude taken towards the Council of Chalcedon appeared to them insufficient, and many of them, especially the monks, deserted Peter, preferring to be without a head, rather than remain in communion with him.\nLater, they joined the adherents of the non-Chalcedonian Patriarch Severus of Antioch.\nThey were, according to \"Oxford English Dictionary Online\", a \"group of extreme Monophysites\" and \"were absorbed by the Jacobites\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Liberatus of Carthage wrote, in ', that those at the Council of Ephesus who followed neither Patriarch Cyril I of Alexandria nor Patriarch John I of Antioch were called '.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the patriarch of carthage ?", "answers": [], "id": "(51, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Esaianites were one of the sects into which the Alexandrian \" separated at the end of the 5th century. They were the followers of Esaias, a deacon of Palestine, who claimed to have been consecrated to the episcopal office by the Bishop Eusebius. His opponents averred that after the bishop's death his hands had been laid upon the head of Esaias by some of his friends.", "qas": []}, {"context": "' were a sect of ' who followed Chalcedonian Patriarch Paul of Alexandria, who was deposed by a synod at Gaza, in 541, for his uncanonical consecration by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and who, after his deposition, sided with the Miaphysites.", "qas": [{"question": "who was patriarch of alexandria ?", "answers": [], "id": "(51, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Barsanians, later called Semidalites, were a sect of \" at the end of the 5th century. They had no succession of priests, and professed to keep up the celebration of a valid Eucharist by placing a few crumbs of some of the bread which had been consecrated by Dioscorus into a vessel of meal, and then using as fully consecrated the bread baked from it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to Brewer, acephalites were also certain bishops exempt from the jurisdiction and discipline of their patriarch. Cooper explains that they are \"priests rejecting episcopal authority or bishops that of their metropolitans.\" Blunt described \"\" as those clergy who were ordained with a sinecure benefice and who generally obtained their orders by paying for them, that is by simony. The Council of Pavia, in 853, legislated its canons 18 and 23 against them, from which it appears, according to Blunt, that they were mostly chaplains to noblemen, that they produced much scandal in the Church, and that they disseminated many errors.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the creator of the bishop ?", "answers": [], "id": "(51, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "According to Brewer, acephalites were also a sect of Levellers during the reign of Henry I of England who acknowledged no leader. They were, according to \"Oxford English Dictionary Online\", \"a group of free socagers having no feudal superior except the king.\" This usage is now considered obsolete.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Fabled human-like creatures in Greek mythology, analogous to Pliny the Elder's ', without heads and with facial features on their torsos, were also called '.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Anthony of Saxony", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Anthony (27 December 1755 in Dresden \u2013 6 June 1836 in Dresden), also known by his German name Anton (full name: \"Anton Clemens Theodor Maria Joseph Johann Evangelista Johann Nepomuk Franz Xavier Aloys Januar\"), was a King of Saxony (1827\u20131836) from the House of Wettin. He became known as \"Anton der G\u00fctige\", (en: \"Anthony the Kind\").", "qas": [{"question": "where was anthony born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(52, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "He was the fifth but third surviving son of Frederick Christian, Elector of Saxony, and Maria Antonia of Bavaria.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With few chances to take part in the politics of the Electorate of Saxony or receive any land from his older brother Frederick Augustus III, Anton lived under the shadows. No Elector of Saxony after Johann Georg I gave appananges to his younger sons.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the first years of the reign of his older brother as Elector, Anton was the third in line, preceded only by his older brother Karl. The death of Karl (8 September 1781) make him the next in line to the Electorate as Crown Prince (de: \"Kronprinz\"); this was because all the pregnancies of the Electress Amalie, except for one daughter, ended in a stillbirth.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the older brother of the old brother ?", "answers": [], "id": "(52, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "His aunt, the Dauphine of France, had wanted to engage her daughter Marie Z\u00e9phyrine of France to Anthony; Marie Z\u00e9phyrine died in 1755 abandoning plans. Another French candidate was Marie Z\u00e9phyrine's sister Marie Clothilde (later Queen of Sardinia) but again nothing happened.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Turin on 29 September 1781 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 24 October 1781 (in person), Anton married firstly with the Princess Caroline of Savoy (Maria Carolina Antonietta Adelaida), daughter of the King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia and Maria Antonietta of Spain. Caroline died after only one year of marriage, on 28 December 1782 having succumbed to smallpox. They had no children.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Florence on 8 September 1787 (by proxy) and again in Dresden on 18 October 1787 (in person), Anton married a second time with the Archduchess Maria Theresia of Austria (Maria Theresia Josephe Charlotte Johanna), daughter of the Grand Duke Leopold I of Tuscany, later Emperor Leopold II. Mozart's opera \"Don Giovanni\" was originally intended to be performed in honor of Anton and his wife for a visit to Prague on 14 October 1787, as they traveled between Dresden and Vienna, and librettos were printed with dedication to them. The premiere could not be arranged in time, however, so the opera \"The Marriage of Figaro\" was substituted on the express orders of the bride's uncle, Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II. The choice of \"The Marriage of Figaro\" was considered improper for a new bride by many observers, and the couple left the opera theater early without seeing the entire work performed. Mozart complained bitterly of the intrigues surrounding this incident in a letter to his friend Gottfried von Jacquin that was written in stages between 15 October and 25 October 1787. Anthony was also present in Prague in September 1791 for the first performance of Mozart's opera \"La clemenza di Tito\", which was written as part of the coronation ceremonies of his father-in-law, Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II, as King of Bohemia.", "qas": [{"question": "who did moses marry in florence ?", "answers": [], "id": "(52, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The couple had four children, but none survived to the age of two:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Electress gave birth for last time in 1799 to another stillborn child. After this Anton became, officially, the Heir to the Electorate and, from 1806, the Kingdom of Saxony.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Anton succeeded his brother Frederick August I as King of Saxony when he died, on 5 May 1827. The 71-year-old new king was completely inexperienced in government, thus he had no intention of initiating profound changes in foreign or domestic policy.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Prussian diplomats discussed granting the Prussian Rhineland (predominantly Catholic) to Anton (a Catholic) in exchange for Lutheran Saxony in 1827, but nothing came of these talks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After the July Revolution of 1830 in France, disturbances in Saxony began in autumn. These were directed primarily against the old Constitution. Therefore, on 13 September the cabinet dismissed Count Detlev von Einsiedel, followed by Bernhard von Lindenau. Because the people wished a younger regent, Anton agreed to appoint his nephew Frederick Augustus Prince Co-Regent (de: \"Prinz-Mitregenten\"). As another consequence of the disturbances, a new constitution was accepted in 1831 which came into effect on 4 September of that year. With it Saxony became a Constitutional monarchy and obtained a bi-cameral legislature and a responsible ministry, which replaced the old feudal estates. The constitution was more conservative than other constitutions existing at this time in the German Union. Still the constitution served Saxony until 1918. The king kept his exclusive sovereignty but was bound by the Government Business to cooperate with the Ministers and the decisions of both Chambers of the States (de: \"Kammern der St\u00e4ndeversammlung\") meeting. The entry of Saxony into the \"Zollverein\" in 1833 let trade, industry and traffic blossom farther.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Without surviving male issue, Anton was succeeded as king by his nephew, Frederick Augustus II.", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Albert III, Duke of Saxony", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Albert III () (27 January 144312 September 1500) was a Duke of Saxony. He was nicknamed Albert the Bold or Albert the Courageous and founded the \"Albertine line\" of the House of Wettin.", "qas": [{"question": "when was albert iii born ?", "answers": [], "id": "(53, 0, 0)"}, {"question": "what was the nickname given to albert ?", "answers": [], "id": "(53, 0, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Albert was born in Grimma as the third and youngest son (but fifth child in order of birth) of Frederick II the Gentle, Elector of Saxony, and Margarete of Austria, sister of Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor. Later, he was a member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the third child son ?", "answers": [], "id": "(53, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "After escaping from the hands of Kunz von Kaufungen, who had abducted him together with his brother Ernest, he spent some time at the court of the emperor Frederick III in Vienna.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Eger (Cheb) on 11 November 1464 Albert married Zdenka (Sidonie), daughter of George of Podebrady, King of Bohemia; but failed to obtain the Bohemian Crown on the death of George in 1471. After the death of his father in 1464, Albert and Ernest ruled their lands together, but in 1485 a division was made by the Treaty of Leipzig, and Albert received the Meissen, together with some adjoining districts, and founded the Albertine branch of the House of Wettin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regarded as a capable soldier by the emperor, Albert (in 1475) took a prominent part in the campaign against Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and in 1487 led an expedition against Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, which failed owing to lack of support on the part of the emperor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1488 he was appointed Governor of the Netherlands (until 1493) and marched with the imperial forces to free the Roman king Maximilian from his imprisonment at Bruges, and when, in 1489, the King returned to Germany, Albert was left as his representative to prosecute the war against the rebels. He was successful in restoring the authority of Maximilian in Holland, Flanders, and Brabant, but failed to obtain any repayment of the large sums of money which he had spent in these campaigns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "His services were rewarded in 1498 when Maximilian bestowed upon him the title of Hereditary Governor (\"potestat\") of Friesland, but he had to make good his claim by force of arms. He had to a great extent succeeded, and was paying a visit to Saxony, when he was recalled by news of a fresh rising. The duke recaptured Groningen, but soon afterwards he died at Emden. He was buried at Meissen.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Albert, who was a man of great strength and considerable skill in feats of arms, delighted in tournaments and knightly exercises. His loyalty to the emperor Frederick, and the expenses incurred in this connection, aroused some irritation among his subjects, but his rule was a period of prosperity in Saxony.", "qas": []}, {"context": "With his wife Sidonie, Albrecht had nine children:", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Arlo Guthrie", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Arlo Davy Guthrie (born July 10, 1947) is an American folk singer-songwriter. Like his father, Woody Guthrie, he is known for singing songs of protest against social injustice, and storytelling while performing songs. Guthrie's best-known work is his debut piece, \"Alice's Restaurant Massacree\", a satirical talking blues song about 18 minutes in length that has since become a Thanksgiving anthem. His only top-40 hit was a cover of Steve Goodman's \"City of New Orleans\". His song \"Massachusetts\" was named the official folk song of the state in which he has lived most of his adult life. Guthrie has also made several acting appearances. He is the father of four children, who have also had careers as musicians.", "qas": [{"question": "how many children did he have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 0, 6)"}, {"question": "who born in 1934 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Guthrie was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of the folk singer and composer Woody Guthrie and Marjorie Mazia Guthrie. His sister is the record producer Nora Guthrie. His mother was a one-time professional dancer with the Martha Graham Company and founder of the Committee to Combat Huntington's Disease (later Huntington's Disease Society of America), the illness from which Woody Guthrie died in 1967. Arlo's father was from a Protestant family and his mother was Jewish. His maternal grandmother was the renowned Yiddish poet Aliza Greenblatt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Guthrie received religious training for his bar mitzvah from Rabbi Meir Kahane, who would go on to form the Jewish Defense League. \"Rabbi Kahane was a really nice, patient teacher,\" Guthrie later recalled, \"but shortly after he started giving me my lessons, he started going haywire. Maybe I was responsible.\" Guthrie converted to Catholicism in 1977, before embracing interfaith beliefs later in his life.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Guthrie attended Woodward School in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn from first through eighth grades and later graduated from the Stockbridge School, in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in 1965. He spent the summer of 1965 in London, eventually meeting Karl Dallas, who connected Guthrie with London's folk rock scene and became a lifelong friend of his. He briefly attended Rocky Mountain College, in Billings, Montana. He received an honorary doctorate from Siena College in 1981 and from Westfield State College in 2008.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As a singer, songwriter and lifelong political activist, Guthrie carries on the legacy of his father. He was awarded the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience award on September 26, 1992.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On Thanksgiving Day 1965, while in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, after a brief stint in college, Guthrie, then 18 years old, was arrested for illegally dumping on private property what he described as \"a half-ton of garbage\" from the home of his friends, teachers Ray and Alice Brock, after he discovered the local landfill was closed for the holiday. Guthrie and his friend, Richard Robbins, appeared in court, pled guilty to the charges, were levied a nominal fine and picked up the garbage that weekend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This littering charge would soon serve as the basis for Guthrie's most famous work, \"Alice's Restaurant Massacree\", a talking blues song that lasts 18 minutes and 34 seconds in its original recorded version. Guthrie has pointed out that this was also the exact length of one of the infamous gaps in Richard Nixon's Watergate tapes, and that Nixon owned a copy of the record. The Alice in the song is Alice Brock, who had been a librarian at Arlo's boarding school in the town before opening her restaurant. She later opened an art studio in Provincetown, Massachusetts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The song lampoons the Vietnam War draft. However, Guthrie has stated in multiple interviews that the song is more an \"anti-stupidity\" song than an anti-war song, adding that it is based on a true incident. In the song, Guthrie is called up for a draft examination and rejected as unfit for military service as a result of a criminal record consisting solely of one conviction for littering. Alice and her restaurant are the subjects of the refrain, but are generally mentioned only incidentally in the story (early drafts of the song explained that the restaurant was a place to hide from the police). Though her presence is implied at certain points in the story, Alice herself is described explicitly in the tale only briefly when she bails Guthrie and a friend out of jail. On the DVD commentary for the 1969 movie, Guthrie stated that the events presented in the song all actually happened (others, such as the arresting officer, William Obanhein, disputed this, and Guthrie has said that he embellished some minor details).", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the war game ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\"Alice's Restaurant\" was the song that earned Guthrie his first recording contract, after counterculture radio host Bob Fass began playing a tape recording of one of Guthrie's live performances of the song repeatedly one night in 1967. A performance at the Newport Folk Festival on July 17, 1967 was also very well received. Soon afterward, Guthrie recorded the song in front of a studio audience in New York City and released it as side one of the album, \"Alice's Restaurant\". By the end of the decade, Guthrie had gone from playing coffee houses and small venues to playing massive and prestigious venues such as Carnegie Hall and the Woodstock Festival.", "qas": [{"question": "who was the song the song that played playing in 1967. restaurant ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "For a short period after its release in October 1967, \"Alice's Restaurant\" was heavily played on U.S. college and counterculture radio stations. It became a symbol of the late 1960s, and for many it defined an attitude and lifestyle that were lived out across the country in the ensuing years. Its leisurely, sassy finger-picking acoustic guitar and rambling lyrics were widely memorized and played by irreverent youth. Many stations in the United States have a Thanksgiving Day tradition of playing \"Alice's Restaurant\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "A 1969 film, directed and co-written by Arthur Penn, was based on the true story told in the song, but with the addition of a large number of fictional scenes. This film, also called \"Alice's Restaurant\", featured Arlo and several other figures in the song portraying themselves. The part of his father Woody Guthrie, who had died in 1967, was played by an actor, Joseph Boley; Alice, who made a cameo appearance as an extra, was also recast, with actress Pat Quinn in the title role (Alice Brock later disowned the film's portrayal of her).", "qas": [{"question": "who directed ` jaws ' ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Despite its popularity, the song \"Alice's Restaurant Massacree\" is not always featured on the set list of any given Guthrie performance. Since putting it back into his setlist in 1984, he has performed the song every ten years, stating in a 2014 interview that the Vietnam War had ended by the 1970s and that everyone who was attending his concerts had likely already heard the song anyway. So, after a brief period in the late 1960s and early 1970s when he replaced the monologue with a fictional one involving \"multicolored rainbow roaches\", he decided to do it only on special occasions from that point forward.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Alice's Restaurant\" song was one of a few very long songs to become popular just when albums began replacing hit singles as young people's main music listening. But in 1972 Guthrie had a highly successful single too, Steve Goodman's song \"City of New Orleans\", a wistful paean to long-distance passenger rail travel. Guthrie's first trip on that train was in December 2005 (when his family joined other musicians on a train trip across the country to raise money for musicians financially devastated by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita, in the South of the United States). He also had a minor hit with his song \"Coming into Los Angeles\", which was played at the 1969 Woodstock Festival, but did not get much radio airplay because of its plot (involving the smuggling of drugs from London by airplane), and success with a live version of \"The Motorcycle Song\" (one of the songs on the B-side of the \"Alice's Restaurant\" album). A cover of the folk song \"Gypsy Davy\" was a hit on the easy listening charts.", "qas": [{"question": "what was a hit on easy listening chart ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 12, 4)"}, {"question": "what was one of the few short songs that hit singles ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the fall of 1975 during a benefit concert in Massachusetts, Arlo Guthrie performed with his band, Shenandoah, in public for the first time. They continued to tour and record throughout the 1970s until the early 1990s. Although the band received good reviews, it never gained the popularity that Guthrie did while playing solo. This band is not to be confused with the popular country music group Shenandoah, an entirely different group that had musical hits from 1986 to 2006. Arlo Guthrie's band Shenandoah consisted (after 1976) of David Grover, Steve Ide, Carol Ide, Terry A La Berry and Dan Velika. The Ides, along with Terry a la Berry, reunited with Guthrie for a 2018 tour.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Guthrie's 1976 album \"Amigo\" received a five-star (highest rating) from \"Rolling Stone\", and may be his best-received work. However, that album, like Guthrie's earlier Warner Bros. Records albums, is rarely heard today, even though each contains strong folk and folk rock music accompanied by widely regarded musicians such as Ry Cooder.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A number of musicians from a variety of genres have joined Guthrie onstage, including Pete Seeger, David Bromberg, Cyril Neville, Emmylou Harris, Willie Nelson, Judy Collins, John Prine, Wesley Gray, Josh Ritter, and others.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Though Guthrie is best known for being a musician, singer, and composer, throughout the years he has also appeared as an actor in films and on television. The film \"Alice's Restaurant\" (1969) is his best known role, but he has had small parts in several films and even co-starred in a television drama, \"Byrds of Paradise\".", "qas": [{"question": "who is best known for being a actor ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 16, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Guthrie has had minor roles in several movies and television series. Usually, he has appeared as himself, often performing music and/or being interviewed about the 1960s, folk music and various social causes. His television appearances have included a broad range of programs from \"The Muppet Show\" (1979) to \"Politically Incorrect\" (1998). A rare dramatic film part was in the 1992 movie \"Roadside Prophets\". Guthrie's memorable appearance at the 1969 Woodstock Festival was documented in the Michael Wadleigh film \"Woodstock\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Guthrie also made a pilot for a TV variety show called \"The Arlo Guthrie Show\" in February 1987. The hour-long program included story telling and musical performances and was filmed in Austin, Texas. It was broadcast nationally on PBS. Special guests were Pete Seeger, Bonnie Raitt, David Bromberg and Jerry Jeff Walker.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the tv show that worked on the tv show ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In his earlier years, at least from the 1960s to the 1980s, Guthrie had taken a decidedly leftist approach to American politics. In his often lengthy comments during concerts his expressed positions were consistently anti-war, anti-Nixon, pro-drugs and in favor of making nuclear power illegal. However, he apparently regarded himself as more an individualist than the major youth culture spokesperson he had been regarded as by the media, as evidenced by the lyrics in his 1979 song \"Prologue\": \"I can remember all of your smiles during the demonstrations, ... and together we sang our victory songs though we were worlds apart.\" A 1969 rewrite of \"Alice's Restaurant\" pokes fun at then-former President Lyndon Johnson and his staff.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1984, he was the featured celebrity in George McGovern's campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in Guthrie's home state of Massachusetts, performing at rallies and receptions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Guthrie identified as a registered Republican in 2008. He endorsed Texas Congressman Ron Paul for the 2008 Republican Party nomination, and said, \"I love this guy. Dr. Paul is the only candidate I know of who would have signed the Constitution of the United States had he been there. I'm with him, because he seems to be the only candidate who actually believes it has as much relevance today as it did a couple of hundred years ago. I look forward to the day when we can work out the differences we have with the same revolutionary vision and enthusiasm that is our American legacy.\" He told \"The New York Times Magazine\" that he is a Republican because, \"We had enough good Democrats. We needed a few more good Republicans. We needed a loyal opposition.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Commenting on the upcoming 2016 election, Guthrie identified himself as an independent, and said he was \"equally suspicious of Democrats as I am of Republicans.\" He declined to endorse a candidate, noting that he personally liked Bernie Sanders despite disagreeing with Sanders' platform, and he praised Donald Trump for not relying on campaign donations, stating that he thought it \"wonderful\" that \"he's [Trump] not in anyone's pocket,\" but did not believe that this necessarily means that Trump has the best interests of the country in mind.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2018, Guthrie contacted publication Urban Milwaukee to clarify his political stance. He stated \"I am not a Republican,\" and expressed deep disagreement with the Trump administration's views and policies on immigration. Guthrie further clarified, \"I left the party years ago and do not identify myself with either party these days. I strongly urge my fellow Americans to stop the current trend of guilt by association, and look beyond the party names and affiliations, and work for candidates whose policies are more closely aligned with their own, whatever they may be ... I don't pretend to be right all the time, and sometimes I've gone so far as to change my mind from time to time.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Like his father, Woody Guthrie, Guthrie often sings songs of protest against social injustice. He collaborated with poet Adrian Mitchell to tell the story of Chilean folk singer and activist V\u00edctor Jara in song. He regularly performed with folk musician Pete Seeger, one of his father's longtime partners. Ramblin' Jack Elliott, who had lived for two years in the Guthries' home before Arlo left for boarding school, had absorbed Woody's style perhaps better than anyone; Arlo has been said to have credited Elliott for passing it along to him.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the father of arizona 's father ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 24, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1991, Guthrie bought the church that had served as Alice and Ray Brock's former home in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, and converted it to the Guthrie Center, an interfaith meeting place that serves people of all religions. The center provides weekly free lunches in the community and support for families living with HIV/AIDS, as well as other life-threatening illnesses. It also hosts a summertime concert series and Guthrie does six or seven fund raising shows there every year. There are several annual events such as the Walk-A-Thon to Cure Huntington's Disease and a \"Thanksgiving Dinner That Can't Be Beat\" for families, friends, doctors and scientists who live and work with Huntington's disease.", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the title characters in the comic strip \"Arlo and Janis\" is named after Guthrie. Cartoonist Jimmy Johnson noted he was inspired by a friend who resembled Guthrie to name one of his characters Arlo.", "qas": [{"question": "who is one of the characters in comic strip ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 26, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Guthrie resides in the town of Washington, Massachusetts, where he and Jackie Hyde, his wife of 43 years, were long time residents. Jackie died on October 14, 2012, shortly after being diagnosed with liver cancer. He also has a home in Sebastian, Florida.", "qas": [{"question": "where is john vi home ?", "answers": [], "id": "(54, 27, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Guthrie's son Abe Guthrie and his daughters Annie, Sarah Lee Guthrie, and Cathy Guthrie are also musicians. Annie Guthrie writes songs and performs, and also takes care of family touring details. Sarah Lee performs and records with her husband Johnny Irion. Cathy plays ukulele in Folk Uke, a group she formed with Amy Nelson, the daughter of Willie Nelson. Abe Guthrie was formerly in the folk-rock band, Xavier, and has also toured with his father. Abe Guthrie's son, Krishna, is a drummer and toured with Arlo Guthrie on his European tour in 2006 and played guitar for the 2009\u20132010 Tour. Krishna plays drums in Modest Me. Arlo Guthrie is a grandfather of Abe's son Krishna and daughter Serena, Annie's son Shiva Das (Mo) and daughter Jacklyn, Sarah Lee's daughters Olivia Nora and Sophia Irion and Cathy's daughter Marjorie Maybelle Midwood.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Book of Alma", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Book of Alma: The Son of Alma (), usually referred to as the Book of Alma, is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon. The title refers to Alma the Younger, a prophet and \"chief judge\" of the Nephites.", "qas": [{"question": "who is the book of alma ?", "answers": [], "id": "(55, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Book of Alma is the longest of all the books of the Book of Mormon, consisting of 63 chapters. The book records the first 39 years of what the Nephites termed \"the reign of the judges\", a period in which the Nephite nation adopted a constitutional theocratic government in which the judicial and executive branches of the government were combined.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The history of the book is outlined as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first four chapters, describe the rebellions of followers of Nehor and Amlici. Contrary to the dominant lay ministry that existed in the Nephite culture, Nehor established a church in which priests were given a separate social status and were paid for their ministry. After killing a religious leader during a theological argument, Nehor was tried and executed for his crimes. The followers of Amlici resented the dominant political and religious parties and sought to reestablish the monarchy that the reign of the judges had replaced. Alma, who was chief judge, governor, and high priest over the people of Nephi, led an army against Amlici and his followers and drove the rebellion out of the land.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Towards the end of chapter four, Alma realizes that the affairs of the Church require his entire concentration. He resigns from his political office and appoints Nephihah as chief judge and governor of the land. Chapters 5-16 record sermons and missionary travels of Alma between 83 and 78 BC. Alma and one of his converted followers, Amulek, provide important teachings about the atonement of Christ, overcoming pride and the natural man, retaining conversion, the resurrection of all men, and judgment day. Later, their teachings about faith and worship in Alma 32-34 are important sources of instruction and insight.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chapters 17 to 27 describe the missionary labors of the sons of King Mosiah II who was the last king over the people of Nephi prior to the peaceful transition of the nation from a monarchy to a republican form of government. The sons of Mosiah, named Ammon, Aaron, Omner and Himni, chose to devote themselves to missionary labors preaching to the people of the Lamanite nation, which periodically went to war against the Nephite nation. They lived and taught among the Lamanites between the years 91 and 77 BC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chapters 28 to 35 relate the account of a rebellion of a subgroup of the Nephite nation who called themselves Zoramites. The Zoramites believed in a form of predestination and taught that all others except their people would be damned. Their apostasy from the Church was conjoined with plans to rebel against the Nephite government. Alma took two of his sons, the sons of Mosiah, Amulek, and Zeezrom on a mission among the Zoramites in an attempt to restore their loyalty to both the Church and the state. Alma and his companions had some success among the poor class of Zoramites who were then exiled from the Zoramite community by the governing rich class of Zoramites. The wealthier Zoramites eventually defected and united with the Lamanites.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chapters 36 to 42 record the teachings of Alma to his sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton. These teachings discuss the ministry and atonement of Jesus, the laws of justice and mercy, the need for repentance, and the resurrection and judgment of all people.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chapters 43 to 62 record the struggles of the Nephite people during a war against the attacking Lamanite nation between the years of 74 and 57 BC. The Chief Captain (senior military commander) of the Nephites during this time was Captain Moroni. The Nephites were ultimately successful in their defense against the Lamanites.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chapter 63 includes concluding historical notes covering the years 56 to 53 BC. This is largely a period of post-war reconstruction and exploration in the Nephite nation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This outline is based on \"main sections\" and \"antagonist characters\" in the Book of Alma. There are two main features in this history, chapters 1 - 42 deal with Missionary Work, and chapters 43 - 63 contain the Wars. The history of the Zoramites provides a transition from Missionary Work to the War chapters of the Book of Alma. The two main sections also mirror the first two antagonist characters, Nehor (\"religious agenda\") and Amlici (\"political agenda\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "In , Alma the Younger speaks to the people of Zarahemla in which he asks 50 rhetorical questions, which are widely cited in the LDS church.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alma's sermon on faith to the Zoramites in is widely used to explain the process of developing faith. Investigators are invited to try a similar experiment of faith in order to come to develop a testimony. It is worth noting that Alma doesn't actually compare faith to a seed, he compares the word to a seed (), although this is a common misconception.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to John W. Welch, based on the appearance of the following elements in Alma 12-13, the Nephite temple ceremony utilized familiar temple motifs, including:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Antioxidant", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Antioxidants are compounds that inhibit oxidation. Oxidation is a chemical reaction that can produce free radicals, thereby leading to chain reactions that may damage the cells of organisms. Antioxidants such as thiols or ascorbic acid (vitamin C) terminate these chain reactions. To balance the oxidative state, plants and animals maintain complex systems of overlapping antioxidants, such as glutathione and enzymes (e.g., catalase and superoxide dismutase), produced internally, or the dietary antioxidants vitamin C, and vitamin E.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The term \"antioxidant\" is mostly used for two entirely different groups of substances: industrial chemicals that are added to products to prevent oxidation, and naturally occurring compounds that are present in foods and tissue. The former, industrial antioxidants, have diverse uses: acting as preservatives in food and cosmetics, and being oxidation-inhibitors in fuels.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antioxidant dietary supplements have not been shown to improve health in humans, or to be effective at preventing disease. Supplements of beta-carotene, vitamin A, and vitamin E have no positive effect on mortality rate or cancer risk. Additionally, supplementation with selenium or vitamin E do not reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.", "qas": [{"question": "what is an example of a vitamin that can not reduce the risk of chronic disease ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 2, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Although certain levels of antioxidant vitamins in the diet are required for good health, there is still considerable debate on whether antioxidant-rich foods or supplements have anti-disease activity. Moreover, if they are actually beneficial, it is unknown which antioxidants are health-promoting in the diet and in what amounts beyond typical dietary intake. Some authors dispute the hypothesis that antioxidant vitamins could prevent chronic diseases, and others declare that the hypothesis is unproven and misguided.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Polyphenols, which often have antioxidant properties in vitro, are not necessarily antioxidants in vivo due to extensive metabolism following digestion. In many polyphenols the catechol group acts as an electron acceptor and is therefore responsible for the antioxidant activity. However, this catechol group undergoes extensive metabolism upon uptake in the human body, for example by catechol-O-methyl transferase, and is therefore no longer able to act as an electron acceptor. Many polyphenols may have non-antioxidant roles in minute concentrations that affect cell-to-cell signaling, receptor sensitivity, inflammatory enzyme activity or gene regulation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although dietary antioxidants have been investigated for potential effects on neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, these studies have been inconclusive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Common pharmaceuticals (and supplements) with antioxidant properties may interfere with the efficacy of certain anticancer medication and radiation. A 2016 systematic review examined allopurinol and acetylcysteine as possible add-on treatments for schizophrenia. Tirilazad, a steroid derivative that inhibits lipid peroxidation, was shown in human trials to have no effect on mortality or other outcomes in subarachnoid haemorrhage and worsened results in ischemic stroke.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Relatively strong reducing acids can have antinutrient effects by binding to dietary minerals such as iron and zinc in the gastrointestinal tract and preventing them from being absorbed. Notable examples are oxalic acid, tannins and phytic acid, which are high in plant-based diets. Calcium and iron deficiencies are not uncommon in diets in developing countries where less meat is eaten and there is high consumption of phytic acid from beans and unleavened whole grain bread.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Nonpolar antioxidants such as eugenol\u2014a major component of oil of cloves\u2014have toxicity limits that can be exceeded with the misuse of undiluted essential oils. Toxicity associated with high doses of water-soluble antioxidants such as ascorbic acid are less of a concern, as these compounds can be excreted rapidly in urine. More seriously, very high doses of some antioxidants may have harmful long-term effects. The beta-carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) study of lung cancer patients found that smokers given supplements containing beta-carotene and vitamin A had increased rates of lung cancer. Subsequent studies confirmed these adverse effects.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These harmful effects may also be seen in non-smokers, as one meta-analysis including data from approximately 230,000 patients showed that \u03b2-carotene, vitamin A or vitamin E supplementation is associated with increased mortality, but saw no significant effect from vitamin C. No health risk was seen when all the randomized controlled studies were examined together, but an increase in mortality was detected when only high-quality and low-bias risk trials were examined separately. As the majority of these low-bias trials dealt with either elderly people, or people with disease, these results may not apply to the general population. This meta-analysis was later repeated and extended by the same authors, with the new analysis published by the Cochrane Collaboration; this analysis confirmed the previous results. These two publications are consistent with some previous meta-analyzes that also suggested that Vitamin E supplementation increased mortality, and that antioxidant supplements increased the risk of colon cancer. Beta-carotene may also increase lung cancer. Overall, the large number of clinical trials carried out on antioxidant supplements suggest that either these products have no effect on health, or that they cause a small increase in mortality in elderly or vulnerable populations.", "qas": [{"question": "how many patients were studied in non-smokers ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "While antioxidant supplementation is widely used in attempts to prevent the development of cancer, antioxidants may interfere with cancer treatments, since the environment of cancer cells causes high levels of oxidative stress, making these cells more susceptible to the further oxidative stress induced by treatments. As a result, by reducing the redox stress in cancer cells, antioxidant supplements (and pharmaceuticals) could decrease the effectiveness of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. On the other hand, other reviews have suggested that antioxidants could reduce side effects or increase survival times.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the effect of cancer cells ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "A paradox in metabolism is that, while the vast majority of complex life on Earth requires oxygen for its existence, oxygen is a highly reactive molecule that damages living organisms by producing reactive oxygen species. Consequently, organisms contain a complex network of antioxidant metabolites and enzymes that work together to prevent oxidative damage to cellular components such as DNA, proteins and lipids. In general, antioxidant systems either prevent these reactive species from being formed, or remove them before they can damage vital components of the cell. However, reactive oxygen species also have useful cellular functions, such as redox signaling. Thus, the function of antioxidant systems is not to remove oxidants entirely, but instead to keep them at an optimum level.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a highly ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The reactive oxygen species produced in cells include hydrogen peroxide (HO), hypochlorous acid (HClO), and free radicals such as the hydroxyl radical (\u00b7OH) and the superoxide anion (O). The hydroxyl radical is particularly unstable and will react rapidly and non-specifically with most biological molecules. This species is produced from hydrogen peroxide in metal-catalyzed redox reactions such as the Fenton reaction. These oxidants can damage cells by starting chemical chain reactions such as lipid peroxidation, or by oxidizing DNA or proteins. Damage to DNA can cause mutations and possibly cancer, if not reversed by DNA repair mechanisms, while damage to proteins causes enzyme inhibition, denaturation and protein degradation.", "qas": [{"question": "what does hydrogen stand for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The use of oxygen as part of the process for generating metabolic energy produces reactive oxygen species. In this process, the superoxide anion is produced as a by-product of several steps in the electron transport chain. Particularly important is the reduction of coenzyme Q in complex III, since a highly reactive free radical is formed as an intermediate (Q\u00b7). This unstable intermediate can lead to electron \"leakage\", when electrons jump directly to oxygen and form the superoxide anion, instead of moving through the normal series of well-controlled reactions of the electron transport chain. Peroxide is also produced from the oxidation of reduced flavoproteins, such as complex I. However, although these enzymes can produce oxidants, the relative importance of the electron transfer chain to other processes that generate peroxide is unclear. In plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, reactive oxygen species are also produced during photosynthesis, particularly under conditions of high light intensity. This effect is partly offset by the involvement of carotenoids in photoinhibition, and in algae and cyanobacteria, by large amount of iodide and selenium, which involves these antioxidants reacting with over-reduced forms of the photosynthetic reaction centres to prevent the production of reactive oxygen species.", "qas": [{"question": "what produces reactive oxygen ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Antioxidants are classified into two broad divisions, depending on whether they are soluble in water (hydrophilic) or in lipids (lipophilic). In general, water-soluble antioxidants react with oxidants in the cell cytosol and the blood plasma, while lipid-soluble antioxidants protect cell membranes from lipid peroxidation. These compounds may be synthesized in the body or obtained from the diet. The different antioxidants are present at a wide range of concentrations in body fluids and tissues, with some such as glutathione or ubiquinone mostly present within cells, while others such as uric acid are more evenly distributed (see table below). Some antioxidants are only found in a few organisms and these compounds can be important in pathogens and can be virulence factors.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The relative importance and interactions between these different antioxidants is a very complex question, with the various antioxidant compounds and antioxidant enzyme systems having synergistic and interdependent effects on one another. The action of one antioxidant may therefore depend on the proper function of other members of the antioxidant system. The amount of protection provided by any one antioxidant will also depend on its concentration, its reactivity towards the particular reactive oxygen species being considered, and the status of the antioxidants with which it interacts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some compounds contribute to antioxidant defense by chelating transition metals and preventing them from catalyzing the production of free radicals in the cell. Particularly important is the ability to sequester iron, which is the function of iron-binding proteins such as transferrin and ferritin. Selenium and zinc are commonly referred to as \"antioxidant nutrients\", but these chemical elements have no antioxidant action themselves and are instead required for the activity of some antioxidant enzymes, as is discussed below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Uric acid is by far the highest concentration antioxidant in human blood. Uric acid (UA) is an antioxidant oxypurine produced from xanthine by the enzyme xanthine oxidase, and is an intermediate product of purine metabolism. In almost all land animals, urate oxidase further catalyzes the oxidation of uric acid to allantoin, but in humans and most higher primates, the urate oxidase gene is nonfunctional, so that UA is not further broken down. The evolutionary reasons for this loss of urate conversion to allantoin remain the topic of active speculation. The antioxidant effects of uric acid have led researchers to suggest this mutation was beneficial to early primates and humans. Studies of high altitude acclimatization support the hypothesis that urate acts as an antioxidant by mitigating the oxidative stress caused by high-altitude hypoxia.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the highest concentration in human blood ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Uric acid has the highest concentration of any blood antioxidant and provides over half of the total antioxidant capacity of human serum. Uric acid's antioxidant activities are also complex, given that it does not react with some oxidants, such as superoxide, but does act against peroxynitrite, peroxides, and hypochlorous acid. Concerns over elevated UA's contribution to gout must be considered as one of many risk factors. By itself, UA-related risk of gout at high levels (415\u2013530 \u03bcmol/L) is only 0.5% per year with an increase to 4.5% per year at UA supersaturation levels (535+ \u03bcmol/L). Many of these aforementioned studies determined UA's antioxidant actions within normal physiological levels, and some found antioxidant activity at levels as high as 285 \u03bcmol/L.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ascorbic acid or \"vitamin C\" is a monosaccharide oxidation-reduction (redox) catalyst found in both animals and plants. As one of the enzymes needed to make ascorbic acid has been lost by mutation during primate evolution, humans must obtain it from the diet; it is therefore a vitamin. Most other animals are able to produce this compound in their bodies and do not require it in their diets. Ascorbic acid is required for the conversion of the procollagen to collagen by oxidizing proline residues to hydroxyproline. In other cells, it is maintained in its reduced form by reaction with glutathione, which can be catalysed by protein disulfide isomerase and glutaredoxins. Ascorbic acid is a redox catalyst which can reduce, and thereby neutralize, reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide. In addition to its direct antioxidant effects, ascorbic acid is also a substrate for the redox enzyme ascorbate peroxidase, a function that is particularly important in stress resistance in plants. Ascorbic acid is present at high levels in all parts of plants and can reach concentrations of 20\u00a0millimolar in chloroplasts.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a monosaccharide ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 19, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the concentration of ascorbic acid ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 19, 7)"}]}, {"context": "Glutathione is a cysteine-containing peptide found in most forms of aerobic life. It is not required in the diet and is instead synthesized in cells from its constituent amino acids. Glutathione has antioxidant properties since the thiol group in its cysteine moiety is a reducing agent and can be reversibly oxidized and reduced. In cells, glutathione is maintained in the reduced form by the enzyme glutathione reductase and in turn reduces other metabolites and enzyme systems, such as ascorbate in the glutathione-ascorbate cycle, glutathione peroxidases and glutaredoxins, as well as reacting directly with oxidants. Due to its high concentration and its central role in maintaining the cell's redox state, glutathione is one of the most important cellular antioxidants. In some organisms glutathione is replaced by other thiols, such as by mycothiol in the Actinomycetes, bacillithiol in some Gram-positive bacteria, or by trypanothione in the Kinetoplastids.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Vitamin E is the collective name for a set of eight related tocopherols and tocotrienols, which are fat-soluble vitamins with antioxidant properties. Of these, \u03b1-tocopherol has been most studied as it has the highest bioavailability, with the body preferentially absorbing and metabolising this form.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the collective name for vitamin e ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "It has been claimed that the \u03b1-tocopherol form is the most important lipid-soluble antioxidant, and that it protects membranes from oxidation by reacting with lipid radicals produced in the lipid peroxidation chain reaction. This removes the free radical intermediates and prevents the propagation reaction from continuing. This reaction produces oxidised \u03b1-tocopheroxyl radicals that can be recycled back to the active reduced form through reduction by other antioxidants, such as ascorbate, retinol or ubiquinol. This is in line with findings showing that \u03b1-tocopherol, but not water-soluble antioxidants, efficiently protects glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)-deficient cells from cell death. GPx4 is the only known enzyme that efficiently reduces lipid-hydroperoxides within biological membranes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "However, the roles and importance of the various forms of vitamin E are presently unclear, and it has even been suggested that the most important function of \u03b1-tocopherol is as a signaling molecule, with this molecule having no significant role in antioxidant metabolism. The functions of the other forms of vitamin E are even less well understood, although \u03b3-tocopherol is a nucleophile that may react with electrophilic mutagens, and tocotrienols may be important in protecting neurons from damage.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a nucleophile ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 23, 1)"}, {"question": "what is the most important function of vitamin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Antioxidants that are reducing agents can also act as pro-oxidants. For example, vitamin C has antioxidant activity when it reduces oxidizing substances such as hydrogen peroxide, however, it will also reduce metal ions that generate free radicals through the Fenton reaction.", "qas": [{"question": "what does vitamin c do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 24, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The relative importance of the antioxidant and pro-oxidant activities of antioxidants is an area of current research, but vitamin C, which exerts its effects as a vitamin by oxidizing polypeptides, appears to have a mostly antioxidant action in the human body. However, less data is available for other dietary antioxidants, such as vitamin E, or the polyphenols. Likewise, the pathogenesis of diseases involving hyperuricemia likely involve uric acid's direct and indirect pro-oxidant properties.", "qas": []}, {"context": "That is, paradoxically, agents which are normally considered antioxidants can act as conditional pro-oxidants and actually increase oxidative stress. Besides ascorbate, medically important conditional pro-oxidants include uric acid and sulfhydryl amino acids such as homocysteine. Typically, this involves some transition-series metal such as copper or iron as catalyst. The potential role of the pro-oxidant role of uric acid in (e.g.) atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke is considered above. Another example is the postulated role of homocysteine in atherosclerosis.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As with the chemical antioxidants, cells are protected against oxidative stress by an interacting network of antioxidant enzymes. Here, the superoxide released by processes such as oxidative phosphorylation is first converted to hydrogen peroxide and then further reduced to give water. This detoxification pathway is the result of multiple enzymes, with superoxide dismutases catalysing the first step and then catalases and various peroxidases removing hydrogen peroxide. As with antioxidant metabolites, the contributions of these enzymes to antioxidant defenses can be hard to separate from one another, but the generation of transgenic mice lacking just one antioxidant enzyme can be informative.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Superoxide dismutases (SODs) are a class of closely related enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of the superoxide anion into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide. SOD enzymes are present in almost all aerobic cells and in extracellular fluids. Superoxide dismutase enzymes contain metal ion cofactors that, depending on the isozyme, can be copper, zinc, manganese or iron. In humans, the copper/zinc SOD is present in the cytosol, while manganese SOD is present in the mitochondrion. There also exists a third form of SOD in extracellular fluids, which contains copper and zinc in its active sites. The mitochondrial isozyme seems to be the most biologically important of these three, since mice lacking this enzyme die soon after birth. In contrast, the mice lacking copper/zinc SOD (Sod1) are viable but have numerous pathologies and a reduced lifespan (see article on superoxide), while mice without the extracellular SOD have minimal defects (sensitive to hyperoxia). In plants, SOD isozymes are present in the cytosol and mitochondria, with an iron SOD found in chloroplasts that is absent from vertebrates and yeast.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a class of closely related enzymes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 28, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Catalases are enzymes that catalyse the conversion of hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen, using either an iron or manganese cofactor. This protein is localized to peroxisomes in most eukaryotic cells. Catalase is an unusual enzyme since, although hydrogen peroxide is its only substrate, it follows a ping-pong mechanism. Here, its cofactor is oxidised by one molecule of hydrogen peroxide and then regenerated by transferring the bound oxygen to a second molecule of substrate. Despite its apparent importance in hydrogen peroxide removal, humans with genetic deficiency of catalase\u00a0\u2014 \"acatalasemia\"\u00a0\u2014 or mice genetically engineered to lack catalase completely, suffer few ill effects.", "qas": [{"question": "what are enzymes ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 29, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Peroxiredoxins are peroxidases that catalyze the reduction of hydrogen peroxide, organic hydroperoxides, as well as peroxynitrite. They are divided into three classes: typical 2-cysteine peroxiredoxins; atypical 2-cysteine peroxiredoxins; and 1-cysteine peroxiredoxins. These enzymes share the same basic catalytic mechanism, in which a redox-active cysteine (the peroxidatic cysteine) in the active site is oxidized to a sulfenic acid by the peroxide substrate. Over-oxidation of this cysteine residue in peroxiredoxins inactivates these enzymes, but this can be reversed by the action of sulfiredoxin. Peroxiredoxins seem to be important in antioxidant metabolism, as mice lacking peroxiredoxin 1 or 2 have shortened lifespan and suffer from hemolytic anaemia, while plants use peroxiredoxins to remove hydrogen peroxide generated in chloroplasts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The thioredoxin system contains the 12-kDa protein thioredoxin and its companion thioredoxin reductase. Proteins related to thioredoxin are present in all sequenced organisms. Plants, such as \"Arabidopsis thaliana,\" have a particularly great diversity of isoforms. The active site of thioredoxin consists of two neighboring cysteines, as part of a highly conserved CXXC motif, that can cycle between an active dithiol form (reduced) and an oxidized disulfide form. In its active state, thioredoxin acts as an efficient reducing agent, scavenging reactive oxygen species and maintaining other proteins in their reduced state. After being oxidized, the active thioredoxin is regenerated by the action of thioredoxin reductase, using NADPH as an electron donor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The glutathione system includes glutathione, glutathione reductase, glutathione peroxidases, and glutathione \"S\"-transferases. This system is found in animals, plants and microorganisms. Glutathione peroxidase is an enzyme containing four selenium-cofactors that catalyzes the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide and organic hydroperoxides. There are at least four different glutathione peroxidase isozymes in animals. Glutathione peroxidase 1 is the most abundant and is a very efficient scavenger of hydrogen peroxide, while glutathione peroxidase 4 is most active with lipid hydroperoxides. Surprisingly, glutathione peroxidase 1 is dispensable, as mice lacking this enzyme have normal lifespans, but they are hypersensitive to induced oxidative stress. In addition, the glutathione \"S\"-transferases show high activity with lipid peroxides. These enzymes are at particularly high levels in the liver and also serve in detoxification metabolism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Oxidative stress is thought to contribute to the development of a wide range of diseases including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, the pathologies caused by diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and neurodegeneration in motor neuron diseases. In many of these cases, it is unclear if oxidants trigger the disease, or if they are produced as a secondary consequence of the disease and from general tissue damage; One case in which this link is particularly well understood is the role of oxidative stress in cardiovascular disease. Here, low density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation appears to trigger the process of atherogenesis, which results in atherosclerosis, and finally cardiovascular disease.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Oxidative damage in DNA can cause cancer. Several antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase, glutathione S-transferase etc. protect DNA from oxidative stress. It has been proposed that polymorphisms in these enzymes are associated with DNA damage and subsequently the individual's risk of cancer susceptibility.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A low calorie diet extends median and maximum lifespan in many animals. This effect may involve a reduction in oxidative stress. While there is some evidence to support the role of oxidative stress in aging in model organisms such as \"Drosophila melanogaster\" and \"Caenorhabditis elegans\", the evidence in mammals is less clear. Indeed, a 2009 review of experiments in mice concluded that almost all manipulations of antioxidant systems had no effect on aging.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antioxidants are used as food additives to help guard against food deterioration. Exposure to oxygen and sunlight are the two main factors in the oxidation of food, so food is preserved by keeping in the dark and sealing it in containers or even coating it in wax, as with cucumbers. However, as oxygen is also important for plant respiration, storing plant materials in anaerobic conditions produces unpleasant flavors and unappealing colors. Consequently, packaging of fresh fruits and vegetables contains an ~8% oxygen atmosphere. Antioxidants are an especially important class of preservatives as, unlike bacterial or fungal spoilage, oxidation reactions still occur relatively rapidly in frozen or refrigerated food. These preservatives include natural antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (AA, E300) and tocopherols (E306), as well as synthetic antioxidants such as propyl gallate (PG, E310), tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ), butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA, E320) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT, E321).", "qas": [{"question": "what are natural ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 36, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The most common molecules attacked by oxidation are unsaturated fats; oxidation causes them to turn rancid. Since oxidized lipids are often discolored and usually have unpleasant tastes such as metallic or sulfurous flavors, it is important to avoid oxidation in fat-rich foods. Thus, these foods are rarely preserved by drying; instead, they are preserved by smoking, salting or fermenting. Even less fatty foods such as fruits are sprayed with sulfurous antioxidants prior to air drying. Oxidation is often catalyzed by metals, which is why fats such as butter should never be wrapped in aluminium foil or kept in metal containers. Some fatty foods such as olive oil are partially protected from oxidation by their natural content of antioxidants, but remain sensitive to photooxidation. Antioxidant preservatives are also added to fat based cosmetics such as lipstick and moisturizers to prevent rancidity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antioxidants are frequently added to industrial products. A common use is as stabilizers in fuels and lubricants to prevent oxidation, and in gasolines to prevent the polymerization that leads to the formation of engine-fouling residues. In 2014, the worldwide market for natural and synthetic antioxidants was US $2.25 billion with a forecast of growth to $3.25 billion by 2020.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antioxidant polymer stabilizers are widely used to prevent the degradation of polymers such as rubbers, plastics and adhesives that causes a loss of strength and flexibility in these materials. Polymers containing double bonds in their main chains, such as natural rubber and polybutadiene, are especially susceptible to oxidation and ozonolysis. They can be protected by antiozonants. Solid polymer products start to crack on exposed surfaces as the material degrades and the chains break. The mode of cracking varies between oxygen and ozone attack, the former causing a \"crazy paving\" effect, while ozone attack produces deeper cracks aligned at right angles to the tensile strain in the product. Oxidation and UV degradation are also frequently linked, mainly because UV radiation creates free radicals by bond breakage. The free radicals then react with oxygen to produce peroxy radicals which cause yet further damage, often in a chain reaction. Other polymers susceptible to oxidation include polypropylene and polyethylene. The former is more sensitive owing to the presence of secondary carbon atoms present in every repeat unit. Attack occurs at this point because the free radical formed is more stable than one formed on a primary carbon atom. Oxidation of polyethylene tends to occur at weak links in the chain, such as branch points in low-density polyethylene.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Antioxidant vitamins are found in vegetables, fruits, eggs, legumes and nuts. Vitamins A, C, and E can be destroyed by long-term storage or prolonged cooking. The effects of cooking and food processing are complex, as these processes can also increase the bioavailability of antioxidants, such as some carotenoids in vegetables. Processed food contains fewer antioxidant vitamins than fresh and uncooked foods, as preparation exposes food to heat and oxygen.", "qas": [{"question": "what kind of foods does the processed food contain ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 40, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Other antioxidants are not obtained from the diet, but instead are made in the body. For example, ubiquinol (coenzyme Q) is poorly absorbed from the gut and is made through the mevalonate pathway. Another example is glutathione, which is made from amino acids. As any glutathione in the gut is broken down to free cysteine, glycine and glutamic acid before being absorbed, even large oral intake has little effect on the concentration of glutathione in the body. Although large amounts of sulfur-containing amino acids such as acetylcysteine can increase glutathione, no evidence exists that eating high levels of these glutathione precursors is beneficial for healthy adults.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Measurement of antioxidant content in food is not a straightforward process, as antioxidants collectively are a diverse group of compounds with different reactivities to various reactive oxygen species. In food science, the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) was once an industry standard for estimating antioxidant strength of whole foods, juices and food additives, mainly from the presence of polyphenols. Earlier measurements and ratings by the United States Department of Agriculture were withdrawn in 2012 as biologically irrelevant to human health, referring to an absence of physiological evidence for polyphenols having antioxidant properties \"in vivo\". Consequently, the ORAC method, derived only from \"in vitro\" experiments, is no longer considered relevant to human diets or biology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Alternative \"in vitro\" measurements of antioxidant content in foods \u2013 also based on the presence of polyphenols \u2013 include the Folin-Ciocalteu reagent, and the Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity assay.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As part of their adaptation from marine life, terrestrial plants began producing non-marine antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C), polyphenols and tocopherols. The evolution of angiosperm plants between 50 and 200 million years ago resulted in the development of many antioxidant pigments\u00a0\u2013 particularly during the Jurassic period\u00a0\u2013 as chemical defences against reactive oxygen species that are byproducts of photosynthesis. Originally, the term antioxidant specifically referred to a chemical that prevented the consumption of oxygen. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, extensive study concentrated on the use of antioxidants in important industrial processes, such as the prevention of metal corrosion, the vulcanization of rubber, and the polymerization of fuels in the fouling of internal combustion engines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Early research on the role of antioxidants in biology focused on their use in preventing the oxidation of unsaturated fats, which is the cause of rancidity. Antioxidant activity could be measured simply by placing the fat in a closed container with oxygen and measuring the rate of oxygen consumption. However, it was the identification of vitamins C and E as antioxidants that revolutionized the field and led to the realization of the importance of antioxidants in the biochemistry of living organisms. The possible mechanisms of action of antioxidants were first explored when it was recognized that a substance with anti-oxidative activity is likely to be one that is itself readily oxidized. Research into how vitamin E prevents the process of lipid peroxidation led to the identification of antioxidants as reducing agents that prevent oxidative reactions, often by scavenging reactive oxygen species before they can damage cells.", "qas": [{"question": "what does research into which vitamin gene reduce ?", "answers": [], "id": "(56, 45, 4)"}]}]}, {"title": "Brass", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Brass is an alloy of copper and zinc, in proportions which can be varied to achieve varying mechanical and electrical properties. It is a substitutional alloy: atoms of the two constituents may replace each other within the same crystal structure. In contrast, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin.", "qas": [{"question": "brass is an alloy of what two elements ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Both bronze and brass may include small proportions of a range of other elements including arsenic, lead, phosphorus, aluminium, manganese, and silicon. The distinction is largely historical. Modern practice in museums and archaeology increasingly avoids both terms for historical objects in favour of the all-embracing \"copper alloy\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brass is used for decoration for its bright gold-like appearance; for applications where low friction is required such as locks, gears, bearings, doorknobs, ammunition casings and valves; for plumbing and electrical applications; and extensively in brass musical instruments such as horns and bells where a combination of high workability (historically with hand tools) and durability is desired. It is also used in zippers. Brass is often used in situations in which it is important that sparks not be struck, such as in fittings and tools used near flammable or explosive materials.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brass has higher malleability than bronze or zinc. The relatively low melting point of brass (, depending on composition) and its flow characteristics make it a relatively easy material to cast. By varying the proportions of copper and zinc, the properties of the brass can be changed, allowing hard and soft brasses. The density of brass is .", "qas": [{"question": "what is the density of brass ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 3, 3)"}, {"question": "brass has higher malleability than what metal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Today, almost 90% of all brass alloys are recycled. Because brass is not ferromagnetic, it can be separated from ferrous scrap by passing the scrap near a powerful magnet. Brass scrap is collected and transported to the foundry where it is melted and recast into billets. Billets are heated and extruded into the desired form and size. The general softness of brass means that it can often be machined without the use of cutting fluid, though there are exceptions to this.", "qas": [{"question": "how many brass alloys are recycled ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Aluminium makes brass stronger and more corrosion-resistant. Aluminium also causes a highly beneficial hard layer of aluminium oxide (AlO) to be formed on the surface that is thin, transparent and self-healing. Tin has a similar effect and finds its use especially in seawater applications (naval brasses). Combinations of iron, aluminium, silicon and manganese make brass wear and tear resistant.", "qas": [{"question": "what makes copper stronger ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "To enhance the machinability of brass, lead is often added in concentrations of around 2%. Since lead has a lower melting point than the other constituents of the brass, it tends to migrate towards the grain boundaries in the form of globules as it cools from casting. The pattern the globules form on the surface of the brass increases the available lead surface area which in turn affects the degree of leaching. In addition, cutting operations can smear the lead globules over the surface. These effects can lead to significant lead leaching from brasses of comparatively low lead content.", "qas": [{"question": "what can cause lead to lead leaching ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 6, 4)"}]}, {"context": "In October 1999 the California State Attorney General sued 13 key manufacturers and distributors over lead content. In laboratory tests, state researchers found the average brass key, new or old, exceeded the California Proposition 65 limits by an average factor of 19, assuming handling twice a day. In April 2001 manufacturers agreed to reduce lead content to 1.5%, or face a requirement to warn consumers about lead content. Keys plated with other metals are not affected by the settlement, and may continue to use brass alloys with higher percentage of lead content.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Also in California, lead-free materials must be used for \"each component that comes into contact with the wetted surface of pipes and pipe fittings, plumbing fittings and fixtures.\" On January 1, 2010, the maximum amount of lead in \"lead-free brass\" in California was reduced from 4% to 0.25% lead.", "qas": []}, {"context": "<nowiki> </nowiki>The so-called dezincification resistant (DZR or DR) brasses, sometimes referred to as CR (corrosion resistant) brasses, are used where there is a large corrosion risk and where normal brasses do not meet the standards. Applications with high water temperatures, chlorides present, or deviating water qualities (soft water) play a role. DZR-brass is excellent in water boiler systems. This brass alloy must be produced with great care, with special attention placed on a balanced composition and proper production temperatures and parameters to avoid long-term failures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The high malleability and workability, relatively good resistance to corrosion, and traditionally attributed acoustic properties of brass, have made it the usual metal of choice for construction of musical instruments whose acoustic resonators consist of long, relatively narrow tubing, often folded or coiled for compactness; silver and its alloys, and even gold, have been used for the same reasons, but brass is the most economical choice. Collectively known as brass instruments, these include the trombone, tuba, trumpet, cornet, baritone horn, euphonium, tenor horn, and French horn, and many other \"horns\", many in variously-sized families, such as the saxhorns. Other wind instruments may be constructed of brass or other metals, and indeed most modern student-model flutes and piccolos are made of some variety of brass, usually a cupronickel alloy similar to nickel silver/German silver. Clarinets, especially low clarinets such as the contrabass and subcontrabass, are sometimes made of metal because of limited supplies of the dense, fine-grained tropical hardwoods traditionally preferred for smaller woodwinds. For the same reason, some low clarinets, bassoons and contrabassoons feature a hybrid construction, with long, straight sections of wood, and curved joints, neck, and/or bell of metal. The use of metal also avoids the risks of exposing wooden instruments to changes in temperature or humidity, which can cause sudden cracking. Even though the saxophones and sarrusaphones are classified as woodwind instruments, they are normally made of brass for similar reasons, and because their wide, conical bores and thin-walled bodies are more easily and efficiently made by forming sheet metal than by machining wood.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The keywork of most modern woodwinds, including wooden-bodied instruments, is also usually made of an alloy such as Nickel Silver/German Silver. Such alloys are stiffer and more durable than the brass used to construct the instrument bodies, but still workable with simple hand tools -- a boon to quick repairs. The mouthpieces of both brass instruments and, less commonly, woodwind instruments are often made of brass among other metals as well.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of instruments are often made of brass ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 11, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Next to the brass instruments, the most notable use of brass in music is in various percussion instruments, most notably cymbals, gongs, and orchestral (tubular) bells (large \"church\" bells are normally made of bronze). Small handbells and \"jingle bell\" are also commonly made of brass.", "qas": [{"question": "what is another name for jingle bell ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 12, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The harmonica is a free reed aerophone, also often made from brass. In organ pipes of the reed family, brass strips (called tongues) are used as the reeds, which beat against the shallot (or beat \"through\" the shallot in the case of a \"free\" reed). Although not part of the brass section, snare drums are also sometimes made of brass. Some parts on electric guitars are also made from brass, especially inertia blocks on tremolo systems for its tonal properties, and for string nuts and saddles for both tonal properties and its low friction.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the harmonica ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The bactericidal properties of brass have been observed for centuries, particularly in marine environments where it prevents biofouling. Depending upon the type and concentration of pathogens and the medium they are in, brass kills these microorganisms within a few minutes to hours of contact.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A large number of independent studies confirm this antimicrobial effect, even against antibiotic-resistant bacteria such as MRSA and VRSA. The mechanisms of antimicrobial action by copper and its alloys, including brass, are a subject of intense and ongoing investigation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brass is susceptible to stress corrosion cracking, especially from ammonia or substances containing or releasing ammonia. The problem is sometimes known as season cracking after it was first discovered in brass cartridges used for rifle ammunition during the 1920s in the British Indian Army. The problem was caused by high residual stresses from cold forming of the cases during manufacture, together with chemical attack from traces of ammonia in the atmosphere. The cartridges were stored in stables and the ammonia concentration rose during the hot summer months, thus initiating brittle cracks. The problem was resolved by annealing the cases, and storing the cartridges elsewhere.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although forms of brass have been in use since prehistory, its true nature as a copper-zinc alloy was not understood until the post medieval period because the zinc vapor which reacted with copper to make brass was not recognised as a metal. The King James Bible makes many references to \"brass\". The Shakespearean English form of the word 'brass' can mean any bronze alloy, or copper, rather than the strict modern definition of brass. The earliest brasses may have been natural alloys made by smelting zinc-rich copper ores. By the Roman period brass was being deliberately produced from metallic copper and zinc minerals using the cementation process, and variations on this method continued until the mid-19th century. It was eventually replaced by speltering, the direct alloying of copper and zinc metal which was introduced to Europe in the 16th century.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of alloy was not understood as a metal ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In West Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean early copper-zinc alloys are now known in small numbers from a number of 3rd millennium BC sites in the Aegean, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kalmykia, Turkmenistan and Georgia and from 2nd millennium BC sites in West India, Uzbekistan, Iran, Syria, Iraq and Canaan. However, isolated examples of copper-zinc alloys are known in China from as early as the 5th millennium BC.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The compositions of these early \"brass\" objects are highly variable and most have zinc contents of between 5% and 15% wt which is lower than in brass produced by cementation. These may be \"natural alloys\" manufactured by smelting zinc rich copper ores in redox conditions. Many have similar tin contents to contemporary bronze artefacts and it is possible that some copper-zinc alloys were accidental and perhaps not even distinguished from copper. However the large number of copper-zinc alloys now known suggests that at least some were deliberately manufactured and many have zinc contents of more than 12% wt which would have resulted in a distinctive golden color.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the alloys of brass and 15% ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 19, 0)"}]}, {"context": "By the 8th\u20137th century BC Assyrian cuneiform tablets mention the exploitation of the \"copper of the mountains\" and this may refer to \"natural\" brass. \"Oreikhalkon\" (mountain copper), the Ancient Greek translation of this term, was later adapted to the Latin \"aurichalcum\" meaning \"golden copper\" which became the standard term for brass. In the 4th century BC Plato knew \"orichalkos\" as rare and nearly as valuable as gold and Pliny describes how \"aurichalcum\" had come from Cypriot ore deposits which had been exhausted by the 1st century AD. X-ray fluorescence analysis of 39 orichalcum ingots recovered from a 2,600-year-old shipwreck off Sicily found them to be an alloy made with 75\u201380 percent copper, 15\u201320 percent zinc and small percentages of nickel, lead and iron.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the later part of first millennium BC the use of brass spread across a wide geographical area from Britain and Spain in the west to Iran, and India in the east. This seems to have been encouraged by exports and influence from the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean where deliberate production of brass from metallic copper and zinc ores had been introduced. The 4th century BC writer Theopompus, quoted by Strabo, describes how heating earth from Andeira in Turkey produced \"droplets of false silver\", probably metallic zinc, which could be used to turn copper into oreichalkos. In the 1st century BC the Greek Dioscorides seems to have recognised a link between zinc minerals and brass describing how Cadmia (zinc oxide) was found on the walls of furnaces used to heat either zinc ore or copper and explaining that it can then be used to make brass.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the first century BC brass was available in sufficient supply to use as coinage in Phrygia and Bithynia, and after the Augustan currency reform of 23 BC it was also used to make Roman \"dupondii\" and \"sestertii\". The uniform use of brass for coinage and military equipment across the Roman world may indicate a degree of state involvement in the industry, and brass even seems to have been deliberately boycotted by Jewish communities in Palestine because of its association with Roman authority.\nBrass was produced by the cementation process where copper and zinc ore are heated together until zinc vapor is produced which reacts with the copper. There is good archaeological evidence for this process and crucibles used to produce brass by cementation have been found on Roman period sites including Xanten and Nidda in Germany, Lyon in France and at a number of sites in Britain. They vary in size from tiny acorn sized to large amphorae like vessels but all have elevated levels of zinc on the interior and are lidded. They show no signs of slag or metal prills suggesting that zinc minerals were heated to produce zinc vapor which reacted with metallic copper in a solid state reaction. The fabric of these crucibles is porous, probably designed to prevent a buildup of pressure, and many have small holes in the lids which may be designed to release pressure or to add additional zinc minerals near the end of the process. Dioscorides mentioned that zinc minerals were used for both the working and finishing of brass, perhaps suggesting secondary additions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brass made during the early Roman period seems to have varied between 20% to 28% wt zinc. The high content of zinc in coinage and brass objects declined after the first century AD and it has been suggested that this reflects zinc loss during recycling and thus an interruption in the production of new brass. However it is now thought this was probably a deliberate change in composition and overall the use of brass increases over this period making up around 40% of all copper alloys used in the Roman world by the 4th century AD.", "qas": [{"question": "in what period did brass make up between to zinc ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 23, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Little is known about the production of brass during the centuries immediately after the collapse of the Roman Empire. Disruption in the trade of tin for bronze from Western Europe may have contributed to the increasing popularity of brass in the east and by the 6th\u20137th centuries AD over 90% of copper alloy artefacts from Egypt were made of brass. However other alloys such as low tin bronze were also used and they vary depending on local cultural attitudes, the purpose of the metal and access to zinc, especially between the Islamic and Byzantine world. Conversely the use of true brass seems to have declined in Western Europe during this period in favour of gunmetals and other mixed alloys but by about 1000 brass artefacts are found in Scandinavian graves in Scotland, brass was being used in the manufacture of coins in Northumbria and there is archaeological and historical evidence for the production of calamine brass in Germany and The Low Countries, areas rich in calamine ore.", "qas": []}, {"context": "These places would remain important centres of brass making throughout the medieval period, especially Dinant. Brass objects are still collectively known as \"dinanterie\" in French. The baptismal font at St Bartholomew's Church, Li\u00e8ge in modern Belgium (before 1117) is an outstanding masterpiece of Romanesque brass casting, though also often described as bronze. The metal of the early 12th-century Gloucester Candlestick is unusual even by medieval standards in being a mixture of copper, zinc, tin, lead, nickel, iron, antimony and arsenic with an unusually large amount of silver, ranging from 22.5% in the base to 5.76% in the pan below the candle. The proportions of this mixture may suggest that the candlestick was made from a hoard of old coins, probably Late Roman. Latten is a term for decorative borders and similar objects cut from sheet metal, whether of brass or bronze. Aquamaniles were typically made in brass in both the European and Islamic worlds.\nThe cementation process continued to be used but literary sources from both Europe and the Islamic world seem to describe variants of a higher temperature liquid process which took place in open-topped crucibles. Islamic cementation seems to have used zinc oxide known as \"tutiya\" or tutty rather than zinc ores for brass-making, resulting in a metal with lower iron impurities. A number of Islamic writers and the 13th century Italian Marco Polo describe how this was obtained by sublimation from zinc ores and condensed onto clay or iron bars, archaeological examples of which have been identified at Kush in Iran. It could then be used for brass making or medicinal purposes. In 10th century Yemen al-Hamdani described how spreading al-iglimiya, probably zinc oxide, onto the surface of molten copper produced tutiya vapor which then reacted with the metal. The 13th century Iranian writer al-Kashani describes a more complex process whereby \"tutiya\" was mixed with raisins and gently roasted before being added to the surface of the molten metal. A temporary lid was added at this point presumably to minimise the escape of zinc vapor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Europe a similar liquid process in open-topped crucibles took place which was probably less efficient than the Roman process and the use of the term tutty by Albertus Magnus in the 13th century suggests influence from Islamic technology. The 12th century German monk Theophilus described how preheated crucibles were one sixth filled with powdered calamine and charcoal then topped up with copper and charcoal before being melted, stirred then filled again. The final product was cast, then again melted with calamine. It has been suggested that this second melting may have taken place at a lower temperature to allow more zinc to be absorbed. Albertus Magnus noted that the \"power\" of both calamine and tutty could evaporate and described how the addition of powdered glass could create a film to bind it to the metal. \nGerman brass making crucibles are known from Dortmund dating to the 10th century AD and from Soest and Schwerte in Westphalia dating to around the 13th century confirm Theophilus' account, as they are open-topped, although ceramic discs from Soest may have served as loose lids which may have been used to reduce zinc evaporation, and have slag on the interior resulting from a liquid process.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some of the most famous objects in African art are the lost wax castings of West Africa, mostly from what is now Nigeria, produced first by the Kingdom of Ife and then the Benin Empire. Though normally described as \"bronzes\", the Benin Bronzes, now mostly in the British Museum and other Western collections, and the large portrait heads such as the Bronze Head from Ife of \"heavily leaded zinc-brass\" and the Bronze Head of Queen Idia, both also British Museum, are better described as brass, though of variable compositions. Work in brass or bronze continued to be important in Benin art and other West African traditions such as Akan goldweights, where the metal was regarded as a more valuable material than in Europe.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Renaissance saw important changes to both the theory and practice of brassmaking in Europe. By the 15th century there is evidence for the renewed use of lidded cementation crucibles at Zwickau in Germany. These large crucibles were capable of producing c.20\u00a0kg of brass. There are traces of slag and pieces of metal on the interior. Their irregular composition suggests that this was a lower temperature, not entirely liquid, process. The crucible lids had small holes which were blocked with clay plugs near the end of the process presumably to maximise zinc absorption in the final stages. Triangular crucibles were then used to melt the brass for casting.", "qas": [{"question": "what were concave crucibles used for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(57, 28, 6)"}]}, {"context": "16th-century technical writers such as Biringuccio, Ercker and Agricola described a variety of cementation brass making techniques and came closer to understanding the true nature of the process noting that copper became heavier as it changed to brass and that it became more golden as additional calamine was added. Zinc metal was also becoming more commonplace. By 1513 metallic zinc ingots from India and China were arriving in London and pellets of zinc condensed in furnace flues at the Rammelsberg in Germany were exploited for cementation brass making from around 1550.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Eventually it was discovered that metallic zinc could be alloyed with copper to make brass, a process known as speltering, and by 1657 the German chemist Johann Glauber had recognised that calamine was \"nothing else but unmeltable zinc\" and that zinc was a \"half ripe metal.\" However some earlier high zinc, low iron brasses such as the 1530 Wightman brass memorial plaque from England may have been made by alloying copper with \"zinc\" and include traces of cadmium similar to those found in some zinc ingots from China.\nHowever, the cementation process was not abandoned, and as late as the early 19th century there are descriptions of solid-state cementation in a domed furnace at around 900\u2013950\u00a0\u00b0C and lasting up to 10 hours. The European brass industry continued to flourish into the post medieval period buoyed by innovations such as the 16th century introduction of water powered hammers for the production of battery wares. By 1559 the Germany city of Aachen alone was capable of producing 300,000 cwt of brass per year. After several false starts during the 16th and 17th centuries the brass industry was also established in England taking advantage of abundant supplies of cheap copper smelted in the new coal fired reverberatory furnace. In 1723 Bristol brass maker Nehemiah Champion patented the use of granulated copper, produced by pouring molten metal into cold water. This increased the surface area of the copper helping it react and zinc contents of up to 33% wt were reported using this new technique.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1738 Nehemiah's son William Champion patented a technique for the first industrial scale distillation of metallic zinc known as \"distillation per descencum\" or \"the English process.\" This local zinc was used in speltering and allowed greater control over the zinc content of brass and the production of high-zinc copper alloys which would have been difficult or impossible to produce using cementation, for use in expensive objects such as scientific instruments, clocks, brass buttons and costume jewellery. However Champion continued to use the cheaper calamine cementation method to produce lower-zinc brass and the archaeological remains of bee-hive shaped cementation furnaces have been identified at his works at Warmley. By the mid-to-late 18th century developments in cheaper zinc distillation such as John-Jaques Dony's horizontal furnaces in Belgium and the reduction of tariffs on zinc as well as demand for corrosion-resistant high zinc alloys increased the popularity of speltering and as a result cementation was largely abandoned by the mid-19th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Bonn", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Federal City of Bonn () is a city on the banks of the Rhine in the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia, with a population of over 300,000. About south-southeast of Cologne, Bonn is in the southernmost part of the Rhine-Ruhr region, Germany's largest metropolitan area, with over 11 million inhabitants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of a political compromise following German reunification, the German federal government maintains a substantial presence in Bonn, and the city is considered a second, unofficial, capital of the country. Bonn is the secondary seat of the President, the Chancellor, the Bundesrat and the primary seat of six federal government ministries and twenty federal authorities. The unique title of Federal City () reflects its important political status within Germany.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Founded in the 1st century BC as a Roman settlement, Bonn is one of Germany's oldest cities. From 1597 to 1794, Bonn was the capital of the Electorate of Cologne, and residence of the Archbishops and Prince-electors of Cologne. Composer Ludwig van Beethoven was born in Bonn in 1770. From 1949 to 1990, Bonn was the provisional capital of West Germany, and Germany's present constitution, the Basic Law, was declared in the city in 1949. Berlin was re-affirmed by the Bundestag in Bonn as the capital of Germany, though due to the country's division a seat of government was maintained there - only in the eastern half - solely by the German Democratic Republic. From 1990 to 1999, Bonn served as the seat of government \u2013 but no longer capital \u2013 of reunited Germany.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The headquarters of Deutsche Post DHL and Deutsche Telekom, both DAX-listed corporations, are in Bonn. The city is home to the University of Bonn and a total of 20 United Nations institutions, including headquarters for Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Secretariat of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), and the UN Volunteers programme.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Situated in the southernmost part of the Rhine-Ruhr region, Germany's largest metropolitan area with over 11 million inhabitants, Bonn lies within the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia, close to the border with Rhineland-Palatinate. Spanning an area of more on both sides of the river Rhine, almost three quarters of the city lie on the river's left bank.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To the south and to the west, Bonn is bordering the Eifel region which encompasses the Rhineland Nature Park. To the north, Bonn borders the Cologne Lowland. Natural borders are constituted by the river Sieg to the north-east and by the Siebengebirge (also known as the Seven Hills) to the east. The largest extension of the city in north-south dimensions is and in west-east dimensions. The city borders have a total length of . The geographical centre of Bonn is the Bundeskanzlerplatz \"(Chancellor Square)\" in Bonn-Gronau.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the geographical centre of strasbourg ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 5, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The German state of North Rhine-Westphalia is divided into five governmental districts (), and Bonn is part of the governmental district of Cologne (). Within this governmental district, the city of Bonn is an urban district in its own right. The urban district of Bonn is then again divided into four administrative municipal districts (). These are Bonn, Bonn-Bad Godesberg, Bonn-Beuel and Bonn-Hardtberg.\nIn 1969, the independent towns of Bad Godesberg and Beuel as well as several villages were incorporated into Bonn, resulting in a city more than twice as large as before.\nBonn has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). In the south of the Cologne lowland in the Rhine valley, Bonn is in one of Germany's warmest regions.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the german state of north rhine-westphalia divided into ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The history of the city dates back to Roman times. In about 12 BC, the Roman army appears to have stationed a small unit in what is presently the historical centre of the city. Even earlier, the army had resettled members of a Germanic tribal group allied with Rome, the Ubii, in Bonn. The Latin name for that settlement, \"Bonna\", may stem from the original population of this and many other settlements in the area, the Eburoni. The Eburoni were members of a large tribal coalition effectively wiped out during the final phase of Caesar's War in Gaul. After several decades, the army gave up the small camp linked to the Ubii-settlement. During the 1st century AD, the army then chose a site to the north of the emerging town in what is now the section of Bonn-Castell to build a large military installation dubbed Castra Bonnensis, i.e., literally, \"Fort Bonn\". Initially built from wood, the fort was eventually rebuilt in stone. With additions, changes and new construction, the fort remained in use by the army into the waning days of the Western Roman Empire, possibly the mid-5th century. The structures themselves remained standing well into the Middle Ages, when they were called the Bonnburg. They were used by Frankish kings until they fell into disuse. Eventually, much of the building materials seem to have been re-used in the construction of Bonn's 13th-century city wall. The Sterntor (\"star gate\") in the city center is a reconstruction using the last remnants of the medieval city wall.", "qas": []}, {"context": "To date, Bonn's Roman fort remains the largest fort of its type known from the ancient world, i.e. a fort built to accommodate a full-strength Imperial Legion and its auxiliaries. The fort covered an area of approximately . Between its walls it contained a dense grid of streets and a multitude of buildings, ranging from spacious headquarters and large officers' quarters to barracks, stables and a military jail. Among the legions stationed in Bonn, the \"1st\", i.e. the Prima Legio Minervia, seems to have served here the longest. Units of the Bonn legion were deployed to theatres of war ranging from modern-day Algeria to what is now the Russian republic of Chechnya.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The chief Roman road linking the provincial capitals of Cologne and Mainz cut right through the fort where it joined the fort's main road (now, R\u00f6merstra\u00dfe). Once past the South Gate, the Cologne\u2013Mainz road continued along what are now streets named Belderberg, Adenauerallee et al. On both sides of the road, the local settlement, \"Bonna\", grew into a sizeable Roman town. Bonn is shown on the 4th century Peutinger Map.", "qas": [{"question": "where is strasbourg located ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 9, 3)"}]}, {"context": "In late antiquity, much of the town seems to have been destroyed by marauding invaders. The remaining civilian population then took refuge inside the fort along with the remnants of the troops stationed here. During the final decades of Imperial rule, the troops were supplied by Franci chieftains employed by the Roman administration. When the end came, these troops simply shifted their allegiances to the new barbarian rulers, the Kingdom of the Franks. From the fort, the Bonnburg, as well as from a new medieval settlement to the South centered around what later became the minster, grew the medieval city of Bonn. Local legends arose from this period that the name of the village came from Saint Boniface via Vulgar Latin \"*Bonnifatia\", but this proved to be a myth.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Between the 11th and 13th centuries, the Romanesque style Bonn Minster was built, and in 1597 Bonn became the seat of the Archdiocese of Cologne. The city gained more influence and grew considerably. The city was subject to a major bombardment during the Siege of Bonn in 1689. The elector Clemens August (ruled 1723\u20131761) ordered the construction of a series of Baroque buildings which still give the city its character. Another memorable ruler was Max Franz (ruled 1784\u20131794), who founded the university and the spa quarter of Bad Godesberg. In addition he was a patron of the young Ludwig van Beethoven, who was born in Bonn in 1770; the elector financed the composer's first journey to Vienna.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the romanesque style built ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1794, the city was seized by French troops, becoming a part of the First French Empire. In 1815 following the Napoleonic Wars, Bonn became part of the Kingdom of Prussia. Administered within the Prussian Rhine Province, the city became part of the German Empire in 1871 during the Prussian-led unification of Germany. Bonn was of little relevance in these years.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the reason for hanover ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 12, 3)"}]}, {"context": "During the Second World War, Bonn acquired military significance because of its strategic location on the Rhine, which formed a natural barrier to easy penetration into the German heartland from the west. The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Bonn on 7 March 1945, and the US 1st Infantry Division captured the city during the battle of 8\u20139 March 1945.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the Second World War, Bonn was in the British zone of occupation. Following the advocacy of West Germany's first chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, a former Cologne Mayor and a native of that area, Bonn became the \"de facto\" capital, officially designated the \"temporary seat of the Federal institutions,\" of the newly formed Federal Republic of Germany in 1949. However, the Bundestag, seated in Bonn's Bundeshaus, affirmed Berlin's status as the German capital. Bonn was chosen as the provisional capital and seat of government despite the fact that Frankfurt already had most of the required facilities and using Bonn was estimated to be 95 million DM more expensive than using Frankfurt. However, Adenauer and other prominent politicians intended to make Berlin the capital of the reunified Germany, and felt that locating the capital in a major city like Frankfurt or Hamburg would imply a permanent capital and weaken support in West Germany for reunification.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the second world war ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 14, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1949, the Parliamentary Council in Bonn drafted and adopted the current German constitution, the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany. As the political centre of West Germany, Bonn saw six Chancellors and six Presidents of the Federal Republic of Germany. Bonn's time as the capital of West Germany is commonly referred to as the \"Bonn Republic,\" in contrast to the \"Berlin Republic\" which followed reunification in 1990.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the capital of west germany known as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 15, 2)"}]}, {"context": "German reunification in 1990 made Berlin the nominal capital of Germany again. This decision did not mandate that the republic's political institutions would also move. While some argued for the seat of government to move to Berlin, others advocated leaving it in Bonn \u2014 a situation roughly analogous to that of the Netherlands, where Amsterdam is the capital but the Hague is the seat of government. Berlin's previous history as united Germany's capital was strongly connected with the German Empire, the Weimar Republic and more ominously with Nazi Germany. It was felt that a new peacefully united Germany should not be governed from a city connected to such overtones of war. Additionally, Bonn was closer to Brussels, headquarters of the European Economic Community. Former chancellor Willy Brandt caused considerable offence to the Western Allies during the debate by stating that France wouldn't have kept the seat of government at Vichy after Liberation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The heated debate that resulted was settled by the \"Bundestag\" (Germany's parliament) only on 20 June 1991. By a vote of 338\u2013320, the Bundestag voted to move the seat of government to Berlin. The vote broke largely along regional lines, with legislators from the south and west favouring Bonn and legislators from the north and east voting for Berlin. It also broke along generational lines as well; older legislators with memories of Berlin's past glory favoured Berlin, while younger legislators favoured Bonn. Ultimately, the votes of the eastern German legislators tipped the balance in favour of Berlin.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From 1990 to 1999, Bonn served as the seat of government of reunited Germany. In recognition of its former status as German capital, it holds the name of Federal City (). Bonn currently shares the status of Germany's seat of government with Berlin, with the President, the Chancellor and many government ministries maintaining substantial presences in Bonn. Over 8,000 of the 18,000 federal officials remain in Bonn. A total of 19 United Nations (UN) institutions operate from Bonn today.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the name of the city 's seat of reunited germany ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The city council of Bonn used to be based in the Rococo-style and 1737 built ' (old city hall) adjacent to Bonn's central market square. However, due to the enlargement of Bonn in 1969 through the incorporation of Beuel and Bad Godesberg, it moved into the larger Stadthaus facilities further up north. This was necessary for the city council to accommodate the increased number of representatives. The mayor of Bonn still sits in the ', which is also used for representative and official purposes.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As of the 2014\u20132020 election cycle, the Christian Democrats (CDU) hold the majority of mandates in the city council (27 seats), followed by the Social Democrats (SPD) with 20 seats, the Greens (B\u00fcndnis '90/Die Gr\u00fcnen) with 16 seats, the Liberals (FDP) with 7 seats, the Left (Die Linke) with 5 seats, the local B\u00fcrgerbund Bonn with 4 seats, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) with 3 seats, and independent candidates with a total of 4 seats. There are currently 86 seats in the city council of Bonn.", "qas": [{"question": "how many seats does the city council have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(58, 20, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The mayor is (CDU), directly elected in 2015.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Four delegates represent the Federal city of Bonn in the Landtag of North Rhine-Westphalia. The last election took place in May 2012. The current delegates are Bernhard von Gr\u00fcnberg (SPD),Renate Hendricks (SPD), Joachim Stamp (FDP) and Rolf Beu (B\u00fcndnis 90/Die Gr\u00fcnen).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The next Landtag elections take place in May 2017.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bonn's constituency is called \" (096). In the German federal election 2017, Ulrich Kelber (SPD) was elected a member of German Federal parliament, the Bundestag by direct mandate. It is his fifth term. Katja D\u00f6rner representing B\u00fcndnis 90/Die Gr\u00fcnen, Alexander Graf Lambsdorff for FDP and Claudia L\u00fccking-Michel of the CDU were elected from regional lists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The next federal election takes place on 24 October 2021.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Beethoven's birthplace is located in Bonngasse near the market place. Next to the market place is the Old City Hall, built in 1737 in Rococo style, under the rule of Clemens August of Bavaria. It is used for receptions of guests of the city, and as an office for the mayor. Nearby is the \"Kurf\u00fcrstliches Schloss\", built as a residence for the prince-elector and now the main building of the University of Bonn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Poppelsdorfer Allee\" is an avenue flanked by chestnut trees which had the first horsecar of the city. It connects the \"Kurf\u00fcrstliches Schloss\" with the \"Poppelsdorfer Schloss\", a palace that was built as a resort for the prince-electors in the first half of the 18th century, and whose grounds are now a botanical garden (the Botanischer Garten Bonn). This axis is interrupted by a railway line and Bonn Hauptbahnhof, a building erected in 1883/84.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Beethoven Monument stands on the M\u00fcnsterplatz, which is flanked by the Bonn Minster, one of Germany's oldest churches.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The three highest structures in the city are the WDR radio mast in Bonn-Venusberg (), the headquarters of the Deutsche Post called \"Post Tower\" () and the former building for the German members of parliament \"Langer Eugen\" () now the location of the UN Campus.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nJust as Bonn's other four major museums, the \"Haus der Geschichte\" or Museum of the History of the Federal Republic of Germany, is located on the so-called \"Museumsmeile\" (\"Museum Mile\")\".\" The Haus der Geschichte is one of the foremost German museums of contemporary German history, with branches in Berlin and Leipzig. In its permanent exhibition, the Haus der Geschichte presents German history from 1945 until the present, also shedding light on Bonn's own role as former capital of West Germany. Numerous temporary exhibitions emphasize different features, such as Nazism or important personalities in German history.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Kunstmuseum Bonn\" or Bonn Museum of Modern Art is an art museum founded in 1947. The Kunstmuseum exhibits both temporary exhibitions and its permanent collection. The latter is focused on Rhenish Expressionism and post-war German art. German artists on display include Georg Baselitz, Joseph Beuys, Hanne Darboven, Anselm Kiefer, Blinky Palermo and Wolf Vostell. The museum owns one of the largest collections of artwork by Expressionist painter August Macke. His work is also on display in the August-Macke-Haus, located in Macke's former home where he lived from 1911 to 1914.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Bundeskunsthalle\" (full name: Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle der Bundesrepublik Deutschland or Art and Exhibition Hall of the Federal Republic of Germany), focusses on the crossroads of culture, arts, and science. To date, it attracted more than 17 million visitors. One of its main objectives is to show the cultural heritage outside of Germany or Europe. Next to its changing exhibitions, the Bundeskunsthalle regularly hosts concerts, discussion panels, congresses, and lectures.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Museum Koenig\" is Bonn's natural history museum. Affiliated with the University of Bonn, it is also a zoological research institution housing the \"Leibniz-Institut f\u00fcr Biodiversit\u00e4t der Tiere\". Politically interesting, it is on the premises of the Museum Koenig where the Parlamentarischer Rat first met. The \"Deutsches Museum Bonn\", affiliated with one of the world's foremost science museums, the Deutsches Museum in Munich, is an interactive science museum focusing on post-war German scientists, engineers, and inventions. Other museums include the Beethoven House, birthplace of Ludwig van Beethoven, the Rheinisches Landesmuseum Bonn (Rhinish Regional Museum Bonn), the Bonn Women's Museum, the Rheinisches Malermuseum and the Arithmeum.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several parks, leisure and protected areas in and around Bonn. The \"\" is Bonn's most important leisure park, with its role being comparable to what Central Park is for New York. It lies on the banks of the Rhine and is the city's biggest park intra muros. The Rhine promenade and the \"Alter Zoll\" (Old Toll Station) are in direct neighbourhood of the city centre and are popular amongst both residents and visitors. The \"Arboretum Park H\u00e4rle\" is an arboretum with specimens dating to back to 1870. The \"Botanischer Garten\" (Botanical Garden) is affiliated with the university and it is here where Titan arum set a world record. The natural reserve of \"Kottenforst\" is a large area of protected woods on the hills west of the city centre. It is about in area and part of the Rhineland Nature Park ().", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the very south of the city, on the border with Wachtberg and Rhineland-Palatinate, there is an extinct volcano, the Rodderberg, featuring a popular area for hikes. Also south of the city, there is the Siebengebirge which is part of the lower half of the Middle Rhine region. The nearby upper half of the Middle Rhine from Bingen to Koblenz is a UNESCO World Heritage Site with more than 40 castles and fortresses from the Middle Ages and important German vineyards.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Named after Konrad Adenauer, the first post-war Chancellor of West Germany, Cologne Bonn Airport is situated north-east from the city centre of Bonn. With around 10.3 million passengers passing through it in 2015, it is the seventh-largest passenger airport in Germany and the third-largest in terms of cargo operations. By traffic units, which combines cargo and passengers, the airport is in fifth position in Germany. As of March 2015, Cologne Bonn Airport had services to 115 passenger destinations in 35 countries. The airport is one of Germany's few 24-hour airports, and is a hub for Eurowings and cargo operators FedEx Express and UPS Airlines.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The federal motorway (\"Autobahn\") A59 connects the airport with the city. Long distance and regional trains to and from the airport stop at Cologne/Bonn Airport station. Other major airports within a one-hour drive by car are Frankurt International Airport and D\u00fcsseldorf International Airport.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bonn's central railway station, Bonn Hauptbahnhof, serves urban (S-Bahn, U-Bahn, sharing the same network with the neighbouring city of Cologne), regional (Regionalbahn), and long distance destinations (ICE) such as Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, Zurich, Vienna, Brussels, Amsterdam and Paris. Daily, more than 67,000 people travel via Bonn Hauptbahnhof. In late 2016, around 80 long distance and more than 165 regional trains departed to or from Bonn every day. The other major railway station (Siegburg/Bonn) lies on the high-speed rail line between Cologne and Frankfurt.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The bus system of Bonn is composed of roughly 30 lines which operate on a regular basis. During peaks, buses usually run every 5 minutes; off-peak buses run every 20 minutes. Several lines offer night services, especially during the weekends. Bonn is part of the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Sieg (\"Rhine-Sieg Transport Association\") which is the public transport association covering the area of the Cologne/Bonn region.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Four German Autobahns run through or are adjacent to Bonn: the A59 (right bank of the Rhine, connecting Bonn with D\u00fcsseldorf and Duisburg), the A555 (left bank of the Rhine, connecting Bonn with Cologne), the A562 (connecting the right with the left bank of the Rhine south of Bonn), and the A565 (connecting the A59 and the A555 with the A61 to the southwest). Three Bundesstra\u00dfen, which have a general speed limit in contrast to the Autobahn, connect Bonn to its immediate surroundings (Bundesstra\u00dfen B9, B42 and B56).", "qas": []}, {"context": "With Bonn being divided into two parts by the Rhine, three bridges are crucial for inner-city road traffic: the Konrad-Adenauer-Br\u00fccke (A562), the Friedrich-Ebert-Br\u00fccke (A565), and the Kennedybr\u00fccke (B56). In addition, regular ferries operate between Bonn-Mehlem and K\u00f6nigswinter, Bonn-Bad Godesberg and Niederdollendorf, and Graurheindorf and Mondorf.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Located in the northern sub-district of Graurheindorf, the inland harbour of Bonn is used for container traffic as well as oversea transport. The annual turnover amounts to around . Regular passenger transport occurs to Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The head offices of Deutsche Telekom, its subsidiary T-Mobile, Deutsche Post, Haribo, German Academic Exchange Service, and SolarWorld are in Bonn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Rheinische Friedrich Wilhelms Universit\u00e4t Bonn (University of Bonn) is one of the largest universities in Germany. It is also the location of the German research institute Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) offices and of the German Academic Exchange Service (\"Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst\" \u2013 DAAD).", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n, Bonn had a population of 327,913. About 70% of the population was entirely of German origin, while about 100,000 people, equating to roughly 30%, were at least partly of non-German origin. The city is one of the fastest-growing municipalities in Germany and the 18th most populous city in the country. Bonn's population is predicted to surpass the populations of Wuppertal and Bochum before the year 2030.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The following list shows the largest groups of origin of minorites with \"migration background\" in Bonn .", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bonn is home of the Telekom Baskets Bonn, the only basketball club in Germany that owns its arena, the Telekom Dome. The club is a regular participant at international competitions such as the Basketball Champions League.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city also has an amateur football team Bonner SC which was formed in 1965 through the merger of \"Bonner FV\" and \"Tura Bonn\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Headquarter of the International Paralympic Committee have since 1999 been located in Bonn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1983, the City of Bonn has established friendship relations with the City of Tel Aviv, Israel, and since 1988 Bonn, in former times the residence of the Princes Electors of Cologne, and Potsdam, Germany, the formerly most important residential city of the Prussian rulers, have established a city-to-city partnership.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Central Bonn is surrounded by a number of traditional towns and villages which were independent up to several decades ago. As many of those communities had already established their own contacts and partnerships before the regional and local reorganisation in 1969, the Federal City of Bonn now has a dense network of city district partnerships with European partner towns.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city district of Bonn is a partner of the English university city of Oxford, England, UK (since 1947), of Budafok, District XXII of Budapest, Hungary (since 1991) and of Opole, Poland (officially since 1997; contacts were established 1954).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The district of Bad Godesberg has established partnerships with Saint-Cloud in France, Frascati in Italy, Windsor and Maidenhead in England, UK and Kortrijk in Belgium; a friendship agreement has been signed with the town of Yalova, Turkey.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The district of Beuel on the right bank of the Rhine and the city district of Hardtberg foster partnerships with towns in France: Mirecourt and Villemomble.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Moreover, the city of Bonn has developed a concept of international co-operation and maintains sustainability oriented project partnerships in addition to traditional city twinning, among others with Minsk in Belarus, Ulaanbaatar in Mongolia, Bukhara in Uzbekistan, Chengdu in China and La Paz in Bolivia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The city of Bonn is twinned with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nBonn city district has partnerships with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bad Godesberg district has partnerships with:\nThe city of Bonn also has project partnerships with:", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Ballroom dance", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Ballroom dance is a set of partner dances, which are enjoyed both socially and competitively around the world. Because of its performance and entertainment aspects, ballroom dance is also widely enjoyed on stage, film, and television.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"Ballroom dance\" may refer, at its widest definition, to almost any type of partner dancing as recreation. However, with the emergence of dancesport in modern times, the term has become narrower in scope and traditionally refers to the five International Standard and five International Latin style dances (see dance categories below). The two styles, while differing in technique, rhythm and costumes, exemplify core elements of ballroom dancing such as control and cohesiveness. Developed in England, the two styles are now regulated by the World Dance Council (WDC) and the World DanceSport Federation (WDSF). In the United States, two additional variations are popular: \"American Smooth\" and \"American Rhythm\", which combine elements of the Standard and Latin styles with influences from other dance traditions.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are also a number of historical dances, and local or national dances, which may be danced in ballrooms or salons. Sequence dancing, in pairs or other formations, is still a popular style of ballroom dance.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of dance is still a popular style of ballroom dance ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 2, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The term 'ballroom dancing' is derived from the word \"ball\" which in turn originates from the Latin word \"ballare\" which means 'to dance' (a ball-room being a large room specially designed for such dances). In times past, ballroom dancing was social dancing for the privileged, leaving folk dancing for the lower classes. These boundaries have since become blurred. The definition of ballroom dance also depends on the era: balls have featured popular dances of the day such as the Minuet, Quadrille, Polonaise, Polka, Mazurka, and others, which are now considered to be historical dances.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The first authoritative knowledge of the earliest ballroom dances was recorded toward the end of the 16th century, when Jehan Tabourot, under the pen name \"Thoinot-Arbeau\", published in 1588 his \"Orch\u00e9sographie\", a study of late 16th-century French renaissance social dance. Among the dances described were the solemn basse danse, the livelier branle, pavane, and the galliarde which Shakespeare called the \"cinq pace\" as it was made of five steps.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1650 the Minuet, originally a peasant dance of Poitou, was introduced into Paris and set to music by Jean-Baptiste Lully and danced by the King Louis XIV in public. The Minuet dominated the ballroom from that time until the close of the 18th century.", "qas": [{"question": "when did the minuet dominate the ballroom ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 5, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Toward the latter half of the 16th century, Louis XIV founded his 'Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Musique et de Danse', where specific rules for the execution of every dance and the \"five positions\" of the feet were formulated for the first time by members of the Acad\u00e9mie. Eventually, the first definite cleavage between ballet and ballroom came when professional dancers appeared in the ballets, and the ballets left the Court and went to the stage. Ballet technique such as the turned out positions of the feet, however, lingered for over two centuries and past the end of the Victoria era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The waltz with its modern hold took root in England in about 1812; in 1819 Carl Maria von Weber wrote \"Invitation to the Dance\", which marked the adoption of the waltz form into the sphere of absolute music. The dance was initially met with tremendous opposition due to the semblance of impropriety associated with the closed hold, though the stance gradually softened. In the 1840s several new dances made their appearance in the ballroom, including the polka, mazurka, and the Schottische. In the meantime a strong tendency emerged to drop all 'decorative' steps such as \"entrechats\" and \"ronds de jambes\" that had found a place in the Quadrilles and other dances.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Modern ballroom dance has its roots early in the 20th century, when several different things happened more or less at the same time. The first was a movement away from the sequence dances towards dances where the couples moved independently. This had been pre-figured by the waltz, which had already made this transition. The second was a wave of popular music, such as jazz. Since dance is to a large extent tied to music, this led to a burst of newly invented dances. There were many dance crazes in the period 1910\u20131930.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The third event was a concerted effort to transform some of the dance crazes into dances which could be taught to a wider dance public in the U.S. and Europe. Here Vernon and Irene Castle were important, and so was a generation of English dancers in the 1920s, including Josephine Bradley and Victor Silvester. These professionals analysed, codified, published, and taught a number of standard dances. It was essential, if popular dance was to flourish, for dancers to have some basic movements they could confidently perform with any partner they might meet. Here the huge Arthur Murray organisation in America, and the dance societies in England, such as the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing, were highly influential. Finally, much of this happened during and after a period of World War, and the effect of such a conflict in dissolving older social customs was considerable.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Later, in the 1930s, the on-screen dance pairing of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers influenced all forms of dance in the U.S. and elsewhere. Although both actors had separate careers, their filmed dance sequences together, which included portrayals of the Castles, have reached iconic status. Much of Astaire and Rogers' work portrayed social dancing, although the performances were highly choreographed (often by Astaire or Hermes Pan) and meticulously staged and rehearsed.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Competitions, sometimes referred to as dancesport, range from world championships, regulated by the World Dance Council (WDC), to less advanced dancers at various proficiency levels. Most competitions are divided into professional and amateur, though in the USA pro-am competitions typically accompany professional competitions. The International Olympic Committee now recognizes competitive ballroom dance. It has recognized another body, the World DanceSport Federation (WDSF), as the sole representative body for dancesport in the Olympic Games. However, it seems doubtful that dance will be included in the Olympic Games, especially in light of efforts to reduce the number of participating sports.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ballroom dance competitions are regulated by each country in its own way. There are about 30 countries which compete regularly in international competitions. There are another 20 or so countries which have membership of the WDC and/or the WDSF, but whose dancers rarely appear in international competitions. In Britain there is the British Dance Council, which grants national and regional championship titles, such as the British Ballroom Championships, the British Sequence Championships and the United Kingdom Championships. In the United States, the member branches of the WDC (National Dance Council of America) and the WDSF (USA Dance) both grant national and regional championship titles.", "qas": [{"question": "how are ballroom dance competitions regulated ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 12, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Ballroom dancing competitions in the former USSR also included the Soviet Ballroom dances, or \"Soviet Programme\". Australian New Vogue is danced both competitively and socially. In competition there are 15 recognised New Vogue dances, which are performed by the competitors in sequence. These dance forms are not recognised internationally, neither are the US variations such as American Smooth, and Rhythm. Such variations in dance and competition methods are attempts to meets perceived needs in the local market-place.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the former soviet ballroom ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Internationally, the Blackpool Dance Festival, hosted annually at Blackpool, England, is considered the most prestigious event a dancesport competitor can attend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Formation dance is another style of competitive dance recognised by the IDSF. In this style, multiple dancers (usually in couples and typically up to 16 dancers at one time) compete on the same team, moving in and out of various formations while dancing.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In competitive ballroom, dancers are judged by diverse criteria such as poise, the hold or frame, posture, musicality and expression, timing, body alignment and shape, floor craft, foot and leg action, and presentation. Judging in a performance-oriented sport is inevitably subjective in nature, and controversy and complaints by competitors over judging placements are not uncommon. The scorekeepers\u2014called scrutineers\u2014will tally the total number recalls accumulated by each couple through each round until the finals, when the Skating system is used to place each couple by ordinals, typically 1\u20136, though the number of couples in the final may vary. Sometimes, up to 8 couples may be present on the floor during the finals.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Competitors dance at different levels based on their ability and experience. The levels are split into two categories, syllabus and open. The syllabus levels are newcomer/pre-bronze, bronze, silver, and gold\u2014with gold the highest syllabus level and newcomer the lowest. In these levels, moves are restricted to those written in syllabus, and illegal moves can lead to disqualification. Each level, bronze, silver, and gold, has different moves on their syllabus, increasing in difficulty. There are three levels in the open category; novice, pre-champ, and champ in increasing order of skill. At those levels, dancers no longer have restrictions on their moves, so complex routines are more common.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Medal evaluations for amateurs enable dancers' individual abilities to be recognized according to conventional standards. In medal evaluations, which are run by bodies such as the Imperial Society of Teachers of Dancing (ISTD) and the United Kingdom Alliance (UKA), each dancer performs two or more dances in a certain genre in front of a judge. Genres such as Modern Ballroom or Latin are the most popular. Societies such as the ISTD and UKA also offer medal tests on other dance styles (such as Country & Western, Rock 'n Roll or Tap). In some North American examinations, levels include Newcomer, Bronze, Silver, Gold, Novice, Pre-championship, and Championship; each level may be further subdivided into either two or four separate sections.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is a part of the ballroom world dedicated to college students. These chapters are typically clubs or teams that have an interest in ballroom dancing. Teams hold fundraisers, social events, and ballroom dance lessons. Ballroom dance teams' goals are to have fun and learn to dance well. There is a strong focus on finding a compatible dance partner and bonding with teammates. There is also a competitive side to collegiate ballroom - collegiate teams often hold competitions and invite other teams to participate. These competitions are often run with many of the same rules are regular amateur competitions as outlined above, but are usually organized entirely by collegiate teams. Examples include the MIT Open Ballroom Dance Competition, Purdue Ballroom Classic, Cardinal Classic, Berkeley Classic, and Harvard Invitational.", "qas": [{"question": "what is a part of the ballroom world dedicated to college students ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 19, 0)"}, {"question": "what are some examples of a ballroom hall competition ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 19, 7)"}]}, {"context": "\"Ballroom dance\" refers most often to the ten dances of International Ballroom (or Standard) and International Latin, though the term is also often used interchangeably with the five International Ballroom dances. Sequence dancing, which is danced predominantly in the United Kingdom, and its development New Vogue in Australia and New Zealand, are also sometimes included as a type of Ballroom dancing.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of ''ballroom dance ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In the United States and Canada, the American Style (American Smooth and American Rhythm) also exists. The dance technique used for both International and American styles is similar, but International Ballroom allows only closed dance positions, whereas American Smooth allows closed, open and separated dance movements. In addition, different sets of dance figures are usually taught for the two styles. International Latin and American Rhythm have different styling, and have different dance figures in their respective syllabi.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the american style of american rhythms ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Other dances sometimes placed under the umbrella \"ballroom dance\" include nightclub dances such as Lindy Hop, West Coast swing, nightclub two step, hustle, salsa, and merengue. The categorization of dances as \"ballroom dances\" has always been fluid, with new dances or folk dances being added to or removed from the ballroom repertoire from time to time, so no list of subcategories or dances is any more than a description of current practices. There are other dances historically accepted as ballroom dances, and are revived via the vintage dance movement.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In Europe, Latin Swing dances include Argentine tango, mambo, Lindy Hop, swing boogie (sometimes also known as nostalgic boogie), and disco fox. One example of this is the subcategory of cajun dances that originated in Acadiana, with branches reaching both coasts of the United States.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ballroom/Smooth dances are normally danced to Western music (often from the mid-twentieth century), and couples dance counter-clockwise around a rectangular floor following the line of dance. In competitions, competitors are costumed as would be appropriate for a white tie affair, with full gowns for the ladies and bow tie and tail coats for the men; though in American Smooth it is now conventional for the men to abandon the tailsuit in favor of shorter tuxedos, vests, and other creative outfits.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Latin/Rhythm dances are commonly danced to contemporary Latin American music and (in case of jive) Western music. With the exception of a few traveling dances like samba and pasodoble, couples do not follow the line of dance but perform their routines more or less in one spot. In competitions, the women are often dressed in short-skirted Latin outfits while the men are outfitted in tight-fitting shirts and pants, the goal being to emphasize the dancers' leg action and body movements.", "qas": [{"question": "what are latin/rhythm dances ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 25, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Waltz began as a country folk dance in Austria and Bavaria in the 17th century. In the early 19th century it was introduced in England. It was the first dance where a man held a woman close to his body. When performing the dance, the upper body is kept to the left throughout all figures, woman's body leaves the right side of the man while the head is extended to follow the elbow. Figures with rotation have little rise. Sway is also used on the second step to make the step longer and also to slow down the momentum by bringing the feet together. Waltz is performed for both International Standard and American Smooth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is performed performed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 26, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Viennese waltz originated in Provence area in France in 1559 and is recognized as the oldest of all ballroom dances. It was introduced in England as German waltz in 1812 and became popular throughout the 19th century by the music of Josef and Johann Strauss. It is often referred to as the classic \u201cold-school\u201d ballroom.Viennese Waltz music is quite fast. Slight shaping of the body moves towards the inside of the turn and shaping forward and up to lengthen the opposite side from direction. Reverse turn is used to travel down long side and is overturned. While natural turn is used to travel short side and is underturned to go around the corners. Viennese waltz is performed for both International Standard and American Smooth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the american waltz ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 27, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Tango originated in Buenos Aires in the late 19th century. Modern Argentine tango is danced in both open and closed embraces which focuses on the male leader and the women moving in harmony of the tango's passionate charging music. The tango's technique is like walking to the music while keeping feet grounded and allowing ankles and knees to brush against one another during each step taken. Body weight is kept over the toes and the connection is held between the man and women in the hips.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Ballroom tango, however, is a dance with a far more open frame, often utilising strong and staccato movements. Ballroom tango, rather than Argentine tango, is performed in international competition.", "qas": [{"question": "where is ballroom cafe performed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 29, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The foxtrot is an American dance, believed to be of African-American origin. It was named by a vaudeville performer Harry Fox in 1914. Fox was rapidly trotting step to ragtime music. The dance therefore was originally named as the \u201cFox\u2019s trot\u201d. The foxtrot can be danced at slow, medium, or fast tempos depending on the speed of the jazz or big band music. The partners are facing one another and frame rotates from one side to another, changing direction after a measure. The dance is flat, with no rise and fall like the waltz. The walking steps are taken as slow for the two beats per steps and quick for one beat per step. Foxtrot is performed for both International Standard and American Smooth.", "qas": [{"question": "what is foxtrot performed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 30, 8)"}]}, {"context": "The quickstep is an English dance and was invented in the 1920s as a combination of faster tempo of foxtrot and the Charleston. It is a fast moving dance, so men are allowed to close their feet and the couples move in short syncopated steps. Quickstep includes the walks, runs, chasses, and turns of the original foxtrot dance, with some other fast figures such as locks, hops, and skips. Quick step is performed as an International Standard dance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The pasodoble originated from Spain and its dramatic bullfights. The dance is mostly performed only in competitions and rarely socially because of its many choreographic rules. The man plays the role of the matador while the woman takes the role of the matador's cape, the bull, or even the matador. The chassez cape refers to the man using the woman to turn her as if she is the cape, and the apel is when the man stomps his foot to get the bull's attention. Pasodoble is performed as an International Latin dance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Spanish bolero was developed in the late 18th century out of the \"seguidilla\", and its popularization is attributed to court dancers such as Sebasti\u00e1n Cerezo. It became one of the most popular ballroom dances of the 19th century and saw many classical adaptations. However, by the 20th century it had become old-fashioned. A Cuban music genre of the same name, bolero, which became popular in the early 20th century, is unrelated to the Spanish dance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although Cuban bolero was born as a form of \"trova\", traditional singer/songwriter tradition from eastern Cuba, with no associated dance, it soon became a ballroom favorite in Cuba and all of Latin America. The dance most commonly represents the couple falling in love. Modern bolero is seen as a combination of many dances: like a slow salsa with contra-body movement of tango, patterns of rhumba, and rise and fall technique and personality of waltz and foxtrot. Bolero can be danced in a closed hold or singly and then coming back together. It is performed as an American Rhythm dance.", "qas": [{"question": "what dance is performed in american rhythms ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 34, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Samba is the national dance of Brazil. The rhythm of samba and its name originated from the language and culture of West African slaves. In 1905, samba became known to other countries during an exhibition in Paris. In the 1940s, samba was introduced in America through Carmen Miranda. The international version of Ballroom Samba has been based on an early version of Brazilian Samba called Maxixe, but has since developed away and differs strongly from Brazilian Ballroom Samba, which is called Samba de Gafieira. International Ballroom Samba is danced with a slight bounce which is created through the bending and straightening the knee. It is performed as an International Latin dance, although most of its modern development has occurred outside Latin America.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rhumba came to the United States from Cuba in the 1920s and became a popular cabaret dance during prohibition. Rhumba is a ballroom adaptation of son cubano and bolero (the Cuban genre) and, despite its name, it rarely included elements of Cuban rumba. It includes Cuban motions through knee-strengthening, figure-eight hip rotation, and swiveling foot action. An important characteristic of rhumba is the powerful and direct lead achieved through the ball of the foot. Rhumba is performed for both International Latin and American Rhythm.", "qas": [{"question": "what is rhumba performed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 36, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Mambo was developed as an offshoot of danz\u00f3n, the national dance of Cuba, in the late 1930s by Orestes L\u00f3pez and his brother Cachao, of Arca\u00f1o y sus Maravillas. They conceived a new form of danz\u00f3n influenced by son cubano, with a faster, improvised final section, which allowed dancers to more freely express themselves, given that danz\u00f3n had traditionally a very rigid structure. In the 1940s, D\u00e1maso P\u00e9rez Prado transformed the mambo from the charanga into the big band format, and took it to Mexico and the United States, where it became a \"dance craze\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cha-cha-cha (sometimes called cha-cha in the US) was delevoped by Enrique Jorr\u00edn in the early 1950s, as a slower alternative to mambo. Cha-cha-cha is a flirtatious dance with many hip rotations and partners synchronising their movements. The dance includes bending and straightening of the knee giving it a touch of Cuban motion. Cha-cha is performed for both International Latin and American Rhythm.", "qas": [{"question": "what is cha-cha performed for ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 38, 3)"}]}, {"context": "Swing in 1927 was originally named the Lindy Hop named by Shorty George Snowden. There have been 40 different versions documented over the years; most common is the East Coast swing which is performed in the American Smooth (or American Rhythm) only in the U.S. or Canada. The East Coast swing was established by Arthur Murray and others only shortly after World War II. Swing music is very lively and upbeat and can be danced to jazz or big band music. The swing dancing is a style with lots of bounce and energy. Swing also includes many spins and underarm turns. East Coast swing is performed as an American Rhythm dance.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the american rhythm dance performed as ?", "answers": [], "id": "(59, 39, 6)"}]}, {"context": "The jive is part of the swing dance group and is a very lively variation of the jitterbug. Jive originated from African American clubs in the early 1940s. During World War II, American soldiers introduced the jive in England where it was adapted to today's competitive jive. In jive, the man leads the dance while the woman encourages the man to ask them to dance. It is danced to big band music, and some technique is taken from salsa, swing and tango. Jive is performed as an International Latin dance.", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to World Dance Council.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Waltz:\n28 bars per minute, 3/4 time, also known as \"Slow Waltz\" or \"English Waltz\" depending on locality", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tango:\n32 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Viennese Waltz:\n60 bars per minute, 3/4 time.\nOn the European continent, the Viennese waltz is known simply as \"waltz\", while the waltz is recognized as \"English waltz\" or \"Slow Waltz\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Foxtrot:\n28 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Quickstep:\n50 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cha-cha-cha:\n30 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Samba:\n48 bars per minute, 2/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rumba:\n24 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Paso Doble:\n56 bars per minute, 2/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Jive:\n42 bars per minute, 4/4 time", "qas": []}, {"context": "Waltz:\n28\u201330 bars per minute\n30\u201332 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tango:\n30 bars per minute\n30\u201332 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Foxtrot:\n30 bars per minute\n32\u201334 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Viennese Waltz:\n53\u201354 bars per minute\n54 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cha Cha:\n30 bars per minute", "qas": []}, {"context": "Rumba:\n30\u201332 bars per minute\n32\u201336 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "East Coast Swing:\n36 bars per minute\n34\u201336 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bolero:\n24 bars per minute\n24\u201326 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mambo:\n47 bars per minute\n48\u201351 bars per minute for Bronze", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historical/Vintage Ballroom dance:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other dances occasionally categorized as ballroom:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\n\u00b7Nott, James, Going to the Palais: a social and cultural history of dancing and dance halls in Britain, 1918-60 - Published 2015 OUP \nhttps://global.oup.com/academic/product/going-to-the-palais-9780199605194?cc=gb&lang=en&", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "The Birth of a Nation", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Birth of a Nation (originally called The Clansman) is a 1915 American silent epic drama film directed and co-produced by D. W. Griffith and starring Lillian Gish. The screenplay is adapted from the novel and play \"\", both by Thomas Dixon Jr., as well as Dixon's novel \"The Leopard's Spots\". Griffith co-wrote the screenplay with Frank E. Woods, and co-produced the film with Harry Aitken. It was released on February 8, 1915.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film is three hours long and was originally presented in two parts separated by an intermission; it was the first 12-reel film in the United States. The film chronicles the relationship of two families in the American Civil War and Reconstruction Era over the course of several years: the pro-Union Northern Stonemans and the pro-Confederacy Southern Camerons. The assassination of Abraham Lincoln by John Wilkes Booth is dramatized.", "qas": [{"question": "how long was ` robopocalypse ' in the us ?", "answers": [], "id": "(60, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The film was a commercial success, though it was highly controversial for its portrayal of black men (many played by white actors in blackface) as unintelligent and sexually aggressive towards white women, and the portrayal of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) as a heroic force. There were widespread black protests against \"The Birth of a Nation\", such as in Boston, while thousands of white Bostonians flocked to see the film. The NAACP spearheaded an unsuccessful campaign to ban the film. Griffith's indignation at efforts to censor or ban the film motivated him to produce \"Intolerance\" the following year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film's release is also credited as being one of the events that inspired the reformation of the Ku Klux Klan in 1915. \"The Birth of a Nation\" was the first American motion picture to be screened inside the White House, viewed there by President Woodrow Wilson.\nGriffith's innovative techniques and storytelling power have made \"The Birth of a Nation\" one of the landmarks of film history.", "qas": [{"question": "what is one of the events that inspired the reformation release ?", "answers": [], "id": "(60, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In 1992, the Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film follows two juxtaposed families. One is the Northern Stonemans: abolitionist U.S. Representative Austin Stoneman (based on the Reconstruction-era Representative Thaddeus Stevens), his daughter, and two sons. The other is the Southern Camerons: Dr. Cameron, his wife, their three sons and two daughters. Phil, the elder Stoneman son, falls in love with Margaret Cameron, during the brothers' visit to the Cameron estate in South Carolina, representing the Old South. Meanwhile, young Ben Cameron idolizes a picture of Elsie Stoneman. During the Civil War, the young men from both families enlist in their respective armies for the war. The younger Stoneman and two of the Cameron brothers are killed in the war. Meanwhile, the Cameron women are rescued by Confederate soldiers who rout a black militia, after an attack on the Cameron home. Ben Cameron leads a heroic charge at the Siege of Petersburg, earning the nickname of \"the Little Colonel\", but he is also wounded and captured. He is then taken to a Union hospital in Washington, D.C.", "qas": [{"question": "how many families are in the film ?", "answers": [], "id": "(60, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "During his stay at the hospital, he is told that he will be hanged. Also at the hospital, he meets Elsie Stoneman, whose picture he has been carrying; she is working there as a nurse. Elsie takes Cameron's mother, who had traveled to Washington to tend her son, to see Abraham Lincoln, and Mrs. Cameron persuades the President to pardon Ben. When Lincoln is assassinated at Ford's Theatre, his conciliatory postwar policy expires with him. In the wake of the president's death, Austin Stoneman and other Radical Republicans are determined to punish the South, employing harsh measures that Griffith depicts as having been typical of the Reconstruction Era.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Stoneman and his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Silas Lynch, a psychopathic mulatto, head to South Carolina to observe the implementation of Reconstruction policies firsthand. During the election, in which Lynch is elected lieutenant governor, blacks are observed stuffing the ballot boxes, while many whites are denied the vote. The newly elected, mostly black members of the South Carolina legislature are shown at their desks displaying inappropriate behavior, such as one member taking off his shoe and putting his feet up on his desk, and others drinking liquor and feasting on fried chicken.\nMeanwhile, inspired by observing white children pretending to be ghosts to scare black children, Ben fights back by forming the Ku Klux Klan. As a result, Elsie, out of loyalty to her father, breaks off her relationship with Ben. Later, Flora Cameron goes off alone into the woods to fetch water and is followed by Gus, a freedman and soldier who is now a captain. He confronts Flora and tells her that he desires to get married. Frightened, she flees into the forest, pursued by Gus. Trapped on a precipice, Flora warns Gus she will jump if he comes any closer. When he does, she leaps to her death. Having run through the forest looking for her, Ben has seen her jump; he holds her as she dies, then carries her body back to the Cameron home. In response, the Klan hunts down Gus, tries him, finds him guilty, and lynches him.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lynch then orders a crackdown on the Klan after discovering Gus's murder. He also secures the passing of legislation allowing mixed-race marriages. Dr. Cameron is arrested for possessing Ben's Klan regalia, now considered a crime punishable by death. He is rescued by Phil Stoneman and a few of his black servants. Together with Margaret Cameron, they flee. When their wagon breaks down, they make their way through the woods to a small hut that is home to two sympathetic former Union soldiers who agree to hide them. An intertitle states, \"The former enemies of North and South are united again in defense of their Aryan birthright.\"", "qas": [{"question": "what happened to the klan ?", "answers": [], "id": "(60, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Congressman Stoneman leaves to avoid being connected with Lt. Gov. Lynch's crackdown. Elsie, learning of Dr. Cameron's arrest, goes to Lynch to plead for his release. Lynch, who had been lusting after Elsie, tries to force her to marry him, which causes her to faint. Stoneman returns, causing Elsie to be placed in another room. At first, Stoneman is happy when Lynch tells him he wants to marry a white woman, but is then angered when Lynch tells him that it is Stoneman's daughter. Undercover Klansmen spies go to get help when they discover Elsie's plight after she breaks a window and cries out for help. Elsie falls unconscious again, and revives while gagged and being bound. The Klan, gathered together and with Ben leading them, rides in to gain control of the town. When news about Elsie reaches Ben, he and others go to her rescue. Elsie frees her mouth and screams for help. Lynch is captured. Victorious, the Klansmen celebrate in the streets. Meanwhile, Lynch's militia surrounds and attacks the hut where the Camerons are hiding. The Klansmen, with Ben at their head, race in to save them just in time. The next election day, blacks find a line of mounted and armed Klansmen just outside their homes, and are intimidated into not voting.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film concludes with a double wedding as Margaret Cameron marries Phil Stoneman and Elsie Stoneman marries Ben Cameron. The masses are shown oppressed by a giant warlike figure who gradually fades away. The scene shifts to another group finding peace under the image of Jesus Christ. The penultimate title is: \"Dare we dream of a golden day when the bestial War shall rule no more. But instead \u2014 the gentle Prince in the Hall of Brotherly Love in the City of Peace.\"", "qas": [{"question": "who is the winner of the double wedding ?", "answers": [], "id": "(60, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "\nUncredited:", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1912, Thomas Dixon Jr. decided that he wanted to turn his popular 1905 novel and play \"\" into a film, and began visiting various studios to see if they were interested. In late 1913, Dixon met the film producer Harry Aitken, who was interested in making a film out of \"The Clansman\", and through Aitken, Dixon met Griffith. Griffith was the son of a Confederate officer and, like Dixon, viewed Reconstruction negatively. Griffith believed that a passage from \"The Clansman\" where Klansmen ride \"to the rescue of persecuted white Southerners\" could be adapted into a great cinematic sequence. Griffith began production in July 1914 and was finished by October 1914. \"The Birth of a Nation\" began filming in 1914 and pioneered such camera techniques as close-ups, fade-outs, and a carefully staged battle sequence with hundreds of extras made to look like thousands. It also contained many new artistic techniques, such as color tinting for dramatic purposes, building up the plot to an exciting climax, dramatizing history alongside fiction, and featuring its own musical score written for an orchestra.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film was based on Dixon's novels \"The Clansman\" and \"The Leopard's Spots\". It was originally to have been shot in Kinemacolor, but D. W. Griffith took over the Hollywood studio of Kinemacolor and its plans to film Dixon's novel. Griffith, whose father served as a colonel in the Confederate States Army, agreed to pay Thomas Dixon $10,000 (equivalent to $ today) for the rights to his play \"The Clansman\". Since he ran out of money and could afford only $2,500 of the original option, Griffith offered Dixon 25 percent interest in the picture. Dixon reluctantly agreed, and the unprecedented success of the film made him rich. Dixon's proceeds were the largest sum any author had received [up to 2007] for a motion picture story and amounted to several million dollars. The American historian John Hope Franklin suggested that many aspects of the script for \"The Birth of a Nation\" appeared to reflect Dixon's concerns more than Griffith's, as Dixon had an obsession in his novels of describing in loving detail the lynchings of black men, which did not reflect Griffith's interests.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Griffith's budget started at US$40,000 (equivalent to $ today) but rose to over $100,000 (the equivalent of $ in constant dollars). West Point engineers provided technical advice on the American Civil War battle scenes, providing Griffith with the artillery used in the film. Some scenes from the movie were filmed on the porches and lawns of Homewood Plantation in Natchez, Mississippi. The film premiered on February 8, 1915, at Clune's Auditorium in downtown Los Angeles. At its premiere the film was entitled \"The Clansman;\" the title was later changed to \"The Birth of a Nation\" to reflect Griffith's belief that the United States emerged from the American Civil War and Reconstruction as a unified nation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although \"The Birth of a Nation\" is commonly regarded as a landmark for its dramatic and visual innovations, its use of music was arguably no less revolutionary. Though film was still silent at the time, it was common practice to distribute musical cue sheets, or less commonly, full scores (usually for organ or piano accompaniment) along with each print of a film.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For \"The Birth of a Nation\", composer Joseph Carl Breil created a three-hour-long musical score that combined all three types of music in use at the time: adaptations of existing works by classical composers, new arrangements of well-known melodies, and original composed music. Though it had been specifically composed for the film, Breil's score was not used for the Los Angeles premi\u00e8re of the film at Clune's Auditorium; rather, a score compiled by Carli Elinor was performed in its stead, and this score was used exclusively in West Coast showings. Breil's score was not used until the film debuted in New York at the Liberty Theatre, and was the score utilized in all showings save those on the West Coast.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Outside of original compositions, Breil adapted classical music for use in the film, including passages from \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\" by Carl Maria von Weber, \"Leichte Kavallerie\" by Franz von Supp\u00e9, Symphony No. 6 by Ludwig van Beethoven, and \"Ride of the Valkyries\" by Richard Wagner, the latter used as a leitmotif during the ride of the KKK. Breil also arranged several traditional and popular tunes that would have been recognizable to audiences at the time, including many Southern melodies; among these songs were \"Maryland, My Maryland\", \"Dixie\", \"Old Folks at Home\", \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", \"America the Beautiful\", \"The Battle Hymn of the Republic\", \"Auld Lang Syne\", and \"Where Did You Get That Hat?\". DJ Spooky has called Breil's score, with its mix of Dixieland songs, classical music and \"vernacular heartland music\" \"an early, pivotal accomplishment in remix culture.\" He has also cited Breil's use of music by Richard Wagner as influential on subsequent Hollywood films, including \"Star Wars\" (1977) and \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979); the latter film also makes use of \"Ride of the Valkyries\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In his original compositions for the film, Breil wrote numerous leitmotifs to accompany the appearance of specific characters. The principal love theme that was created for the romance between Elsie Stoneman and Ben Cameron was published as \"The Perfect Song\" and is regarded as the first marketed \"theme song\" from a film; it was later used as the theme song for the popular radio and television sitcom \"Amos 'n' Andy\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), founded in 1909, protested at premieres of the film in numerous cities. According to the historian David Copeland, \"by the time of the movie's March 3 [1915] premiere in New York City, its subject matter had embroiled the film in charges of racism, protests, and calls for censorship, which began after the Los Angeles branch of the NAACP requested the city's film board ban the movie. Since film boards were composed almost entirely of whites, few review boards initially banned Griffith's picture\". The NAACP also conducted a public education campaign, publishing articles protesting the film's fabrications and inaccuracies, organizing petitions against it, and conducting education on the facts of the war and Reconstruction. Because of the lack of success in NAACP's actions to ban the film, on April 17, 1915, NAACP secretary Mary Childs Nerney wrote to NAACP Executive Committee member George Packard: \"I am utterly disgusted with the situation in regard to \"The Birth of a Nation\" ... kindly remember that we have put six weeks of constant effort of this thing and have gotten nowhere.\"\nJane Addams, an American social worker and social reformer, and the founder of Hull House, voiced her reaction to the film in an interview published by the \"New York Post\" on March 13, 1915, just ten days after the film was released. She stated that \"One of the most unfortunate things about this film is that it appeals to race prejudice upon the basis of conditions of half a century ago, which have nothing to do with the facts we have to consider to-day. Even then it does not tell the whole truth. It is claimed that the play is historical: but history is easy to misuse.\" In New York, Rabbi Stephen Samuel Wise told the press after seeing \"The Birth of a Nation\" that the film was \"an indescribable foul and loathsome libel on a race of human beings\". In Boston, Booker T. Washington wrote a newspaper column asking readers to boycott the film, while the civil rights activist William Monroe Trotter organized demonstrations against the film, which he predicted was going to worsen race relations. On Saturday, April 10, Trotter and a group of other blacks tried to buy tickets for the show's premiere at the Tremont Theater and were refused. They stormed the box office in protest, police on standby rushed in, and a general melee ensued. Trotter and ten others were arrested. The following day a huge demonstration was staged at Faneuil Hall. In Washington D.C, the Reverend Francis James Grimk\u00e9 published a pamphlet entitled \"Fighting a Vicious Film\" that challenged the historical accuracy of \"The Birth of a Nation\" on a scene-by-scene basis. When the film was released, riots also broke out in Philadelphia and other major cities in the United States. The film's inflammatory nature was a catalyst for gangs of whites to attack blacks. On April 24, 1916, the \"Chicago American\" reported that a white man murdered a black teenager in Lafayette, Indiana, after seeing the film, although there has been some controversy as to whether the murderer had actually seen \"The Birth of a Nation\". The mayor of Cedar Rapids, Iowa was the first of twelve mayors to ban the film in 1915 out of concern that it would promote race prejudice, after meeting with a delegation of black citizens. The NAACP set up a precedent-setting national boycott of the film, likely seen as the most successful effort. Additionally, they organized a mass demonstration when the film was screened in Boston, and it was banned in three states and several cities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both Griffith and Dixon in letters to the press dismissed African-American protests against \"The Birth of a Nation\", saying that the reason black men disliked the film was because they wanted to have sex with white women, and the film depicted miscegenation as an evil. In a letter to \"The New York Globe\", Griffith wrote that his film was \"an influence against the intermarriage of blacks and whites\". Dixon likewise called the NAACP \"the Negro Intermarriage Society\" and said it was against \"The Birth of a Nation\" \"for one reason only\u2014because it opposes the marriage of blacks to whites\". Griffith\u2014indignant at the film's negative critical reception\u2014wrote letters to newspapers and published a pamphlet in which he accused his critics of censoring unpopular opinions. Griffith's 1916 pamphlet \"The Rise and Fall of a Free Speech in America\" used racialized language and images, such as a cartoon that depicted \"censorship\" as a monstrous black man with a lascivious expression on his face eyeing \"free speech\" who appeared as a white woman dressed in a white dress. \"Free Speech\" points at \"Censorship\" and says: \"All history, all reason condemns you: GO!\". In his pamphlet, Griffith called censorship \"this malignant pygmy\" who had mutated into a fully grown \"Caliban\" (a character from William Shakespeare's play \"The Tempest\" who is often depicted as a black man).", "qas": []}, {"context": "When Sherwin Lewis of \"The New York Globe\" wrote a piece that expressed criticism of the film's distorted portrayal of history, and said that it was not worthy of constitutional protection because its purpose was to make a few \"dirty dollars\", Griffith responded that \"the public should not be afraid to accept the truth, even though it might not like it\". He also added that the man who wrote the editorial was \"damaging my reputation as a producer\" and \"a liar and a coward\". In November 1915, William Joseph Simmons revived the Klan in Atlanta, Georgia. The historian John Hope Franklin observed that, had it not been for \"The Birth of a Nation\", the Klan might not have been reborn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Thomas Dixon, Jr. was a former classmate of then-president Woodrow Wilson at Johns Hopkins University. Dixon arranged a screening of \"The Birth of a Nation\" at the White House for Wilson, members of his cabinet, and their families, in one of the first ever screenings of a film at the White House. Wilson was reported to have said of the film, \"It is like writing history with lightning. And my only regret is that it is all so terribly true.\" The accuracy of the second half of this quote is questioned by historians. Wilson's aide, Joseph Tumulty, denied the claims and said that \"the President was entirely unaware of the nature of the play before it was presented and at no time has expressed his approbation of it.\" Some historians believe the latter half of the quote attributed to Wilson originated with Dixon, who was relentless in publicizing the film. President Wilson gave the film tacit endorsement by agreeing to view the film in the White House, which, in Griffith's words, \"conferred\" an \"honor\" upon \"The Birth of a Nation\". After controversy over the film had grown, Wilson wrote that he disapproved of the \"unfortunate production\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Besides having the film screened at the White House, Dixon persuaded all nine justices of the Supreme Court to attend a screening of \"The Birth of a Nation\" as well as many members of Congress. With the help of the Navy Secretary, Josephus Daniels, Dixon was able to meet the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Edward Douglass White. Initially Justice White was not interested in seeing the film, but when Dixon told him it was the \"true story\" of Reconstruction and the Klan's role in \"saving the South\", White, recalling his youth in Louisiana, jumped to attention and said: \"I was a member of the Klan, sir\". With White agreeing to see the film, the rest of the Supreme Court followed. Dixon was clearly rattled and upset by criticism by African-Americans that the film version of his books was projecting hatred against them, and wanted the endorsement of many powerful men as possible to offset such criticism. Dixon always vehemently denied having anti-black prejudices\u2014despite the way his books promoted white supremacy\u2014and stated: \"My books are hard reading for a Negro, and yet the Negroes, in denouncing them, are unwittingly denouncing one of their greatest friends\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In a letter sent on May 1, 1915, to Joseph P. Tumulty, the press secretary to President Wilson, Dixon wrote: \"The real purpose of my film was to revolutionize Northern sentiments by a presentation of history that would transform every man in the audience into a good Democrat...Every man who comes out of the theater is a Southern partisan for life!\" In a letter to President Wilson sent on September 5, 1915, Dixon boasted: \"This play is transforming the entire population of the North and the West into sympathetic Southern voters. There will never be an issue of your segregation policy\". Dixon was alluding to the fact that Wilson upon becoming president in 1913 had imposed segregation on federal workplaces in Washington D.C. while reducing the number of black employees through demotion or dismissal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\"The Birth of a Nation\" was very popular, despite the film's controversy; it was unlike anything that American audiences had ever seen before. The \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"the greatest picture ever made and the greatest drama ever filmed\". It became a national cultural phenomenon: merchandisers made Ku-Klux hats and kitchen aprons, and ushers dressed in white Klan robes for openings. In New York there were Klan-themed balls, and in Chicago that Halloween, thousands of college students dressed in robes for a massive Klan-themed party.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Reverend Charles Henry Parkhurst defended the film against the charge of racism by saying that it \"was exactly true to history\" by depicting freedmen as they were, and therefore it was a \"compliment to the black man\" by showing how far black people had \"advanced\" since Reconstruction. Critic Dolly Dalrymple wrote that, \"when I saw it, it was far from silent\u2026 incessant murmurs of approval, roars of laughter, gasps of anxiety, and outbursts of applause greeted every new picture on the screen\". One man viewing the film was so moved by the scene where Flora Cameron flees Gus to avoid being raped that he took out his handgun and began firing at the screen in an effort to help her. Katherine DuPre Lumpkin recalled watching the film as an 18-year-old in 1915 in her 1947 autobiography \"The Making of a Southerner\": \"Here was the black figure\u2014and the fear of the white girl\u2014though the scene blanked out just in time. Here were the sinister men the South scorned and the noble men the South revered. And through it all the Klan rode. All around me people sighed and shivered, and now and then shouted or wept, in their intensity.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The box office gross of \"The Birth of a Nation\" is not known, and was long subject to exaggeration. When it opened tickets were sold at premium prices; the film played at the Liberty Theater in New York City for 44 weeks with tickets priced at $2.20 (). By the end of 1917, Epoch reported to its shareholders cumulative receipts of $4.8 million, and Griffith's own records put Epoch's worldwide earnings from the film at $5.2 million as of 1919, although the distributor's share of the revenue at this time was much lower than the exhibition gross. In the biggest cities, Epoch negotiated with individual theater owners for a percentage of the box office; elsewhere, the producer sold all rights in a particular state to a single distributor (an arrangement known as \"state's rights\" distribution). The film historian Richard Schickel says that under the state's rights contracts, Epoch typically received about 10% of the box office gross\u2014which theater owners often underreported\u2014and concludes that \"\"Birth\" certainly generated more than $60 million in box-office business in its first run\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "By 1940 \"Time\" magazine estimated the film's cumulative gross rental (the distributor's earnings) at approximately $15 million. For years \"Variety\" had the gross rental listed as $50 million, but in 1977 repudiated the claim and revised its estimate down to $5 million. It is not known for sure how much the film has earned in total, but producer Harry Aitken put its estimated earnings at $15\u201318 million in a letter to a prospective investor in a proposed sound version. It is likely the film earned over $20 million for its backers, and generated $50\u2013100 million in box office receipts. In a 2015 \"Time\" article, Richard Corliss estimated the film had earned the equivalent of $1.8 billion adjusted for inflation, a milestone that at the time had only been surpassed by \"Titanic\" (1997) and \"Avatar\" (2009) in nominal earnings.", "qas": []}, {"context": "D. W. Griffith made a film in 1916, called \"Intolerance\", partly in response to the criticism that \"The Birth of a Nation\" received. Griffith made clear within numerous interviews that the film's title and main themes were chosen in response to those who he felt had been intolerant to \"The Birth of a Nation\". A sequel called \"The Fall of a Nation\" was released in 1916. It was the first sequel in film history. The film was directed by Thomas Dixon, Jr., who adapted it from his novel of the same name. Despite its success in the foreign market, the film was not a success among American audiences, and is now a lost film. In 1918, an American silent drama film directed by John W. Noble called \"The Birth of a Race\" was released as a direct response to \"The Birth of a Nation\". The film was an ambitious project by producer Emmett Jay Scott to challenge Griffith's film and tell another side of the story, but was ultimately unsuccessful.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1920, African-American filmmaker Oscar Micheaux released \"Within Our Gates\", a response to \"The Birth of a Nation\". \"Within Our Gates\" depicts the hardships faced by African Americans during the era of Jim Crow laws. The film was remixed in 2004 as \"Rebirth of a Nation\", a live cinema experience by DJ Spooky at the Lincoln Center, and has toured at many venues around the world, including the Acropolis of Athens, as a live cinema \"remix\". The remix version was also presented at the Paula Cooper Gallery in New York. Quentin Tarantino has said that he made his film \"Django Unchained\" (2012) to counter the falsehoods of \"The Birth of a Nation\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film remains controversial due to its interpretation of American history. University of Houston historian Steven Mintz summarizes its message as follows: Reconstruction was a disaster, blacks could never be integrated into white society as equals, and the violent actions of the Ku Klux Klan were justified to reestablish honest government. The South is portrayed as a victim. The first overt mentioning of the war is the scene in which Abraham Lincoln signs the call for the first 75,000 volunteers. However, the first aggression in the Civil War, made when the Confederate troops fired on Fort Sumter in 1861, is not mentioned in the film. The film suggested that the Ku Klux Klan restored order to the postwar South, which was depicted as endangered by abolitionists, freedmen, and carpetbagging Republican politicians from the North. This reflects the so-called Dunning School of historiography. The film is slightly less extreme than the books upon which it is based, in which Dixon misrepresented Reconstruction as a nightmarish time when black men ran amok, storming into weddings to rape white women with impunity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film portrayed President Abraham Lincoln as a friend of the Confederacy, and refers to him as \"the Great Heart\". The two romances depicted in the film, Phil Stoneman with Margaret Cameron and Ben Cameron with Elsie Stoneman, reflect Griffith's retelling of history. The couples are used as a metaphor, representing the film's broader message of the need for the reconciliation of the North and South to defend white supremacy. Among both couples, there is an attraction that forms before the war, stemming from the friendship between their families. With the war, however, both families are split apart, and their losses culminate in the end of the war with the defense of white supremacy. One of the intertitles clearly sums up the message of unity: \"The former enemies of North and South are united again in defense of their Aryan birthright.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "The film further reinforced the popular picture held by whites, especially in the South, of Reconstruction as a disaster. In his 1929 book \"The Tragic Era: The Revolution After Lincoln\", the respected historian Claude Bowers treated \"The Birth of a Nation\" as a factually accurate account of Reconstruction. In \"The Tragic Era\", Bowers presented every black politician in the South as corrupt, portrayed Republican Representative Thaddeus Stevens as a vicious \"race traitor\" intent upon making blacks the equal of whites, and praised the Klan for \"saving civilization\" in the South. Bowers wrote about black empowerment that the worst sort of \"scum\" from the North like Stevens \"inflamed the Negro's egoism and soon the lustful assaults began. Rape was the foul daughter of Reconstruction!\" The American historian John Hope Franklin wrote that not only did Bowers treat \"The Birth of a Nation\" as accurate history, but his version of history seemed to be drawn from \"The Birth of a Nation\". Some historians, such as E. Merton Coulter in his \"The South Under Reconstruction\" (1947), maintained the Dunning School view after World War II. Today, the Dunning School position is largely seen as a product of anti-black racism of the early 20th century, by which many Americans held that black Americans were unequal as citizens. Coulter in \"The South During Reconstruction\", which again treated \"The Birth of a Nation\" as historically correct, and painted a vivid picture of \"black beasts\" running amok, encouraged by alcohol-sodden, corrupt and vengeful black Republican politicians. Franklin wrote that as recently as the 1970s that the popular journalist Alistair Cooke in his books and TV shows was still essentially following the version of history set out by \"The Birth of a Nation\", noting that Cooke had much sympathy with the suffering of whites in Reconstruction while having almost nothing to say about the suffering of blacks or about how blacks were stripped of almost all their rights after 1877.\nVeteran film reviewer Roger Ebert wrote:", "qas": []}, {"context": "... stung by criticisms that the second half of his masterpiece was racist in its glorification of the Ku Klux Klan and its brutal images of blacks, Griffith tried to make amends in \"Intolerance\" (1916), which criticized prejudice. And in \"Broken Blossoms\" he told perhaps the first interracial love story in the movies\u2014even though, to be sure, it's an idealized love with no touching.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite some similarities between the Congressman Stoneman character and Rep. Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania, Rep. Stevens did not have the family members described and did not move to South Carolina during Reconstruction. He died in Washington, D.C. in 1868. However, Stevens' biracial housekeeper, Lydia Hamilton Smith, was considered his common-law wife, and generously provided for in his will.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the film, Abraham Lincoln is portrayed in a positive light due to his belief in conciliatory postwar policies towards southern whites. The president's views are directly contrasted by Austin Stoneman, a character shown in a negative light who acts as an antagonist. The assassination of Lincoln leads to the effective transition between the war and reconstruction, both of which are represented by the two acts of the film. In including the assassination, the film also establishes to the audience that the plot of the movie has historical basis. Franklin wrote the film's depiction of Reconstruction as a hellish time when black freedmen ran amok, raping and killing whites with impunity until the Klan stepped in is not supported by the facts. Franklin wrote that most freed slaves continued to work for their former masters in Reconstruction for the want of a better alternative, and though relations between freedmen and their former masters were not friendly, very few freedmen sought revenge against the people who had held them in chains. The character of Silas Lynch has no basis in fact, and during the Reconstruction no black or mulatto men served as the lieutenant governor of South Carolina.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The depictions of mass Klan paramilitary actions do not seem to have historical equivalents, although there were incidents in 1871 where Klan groups traveled from other areas in fairly large numbers to aid localities in disarming local companies of the all-black portion of the state militia under various justifications, prior to the eventual Federal troop intervention, and the organized Klan's continued activities as small groups of \"night riders\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "The civil rights movement and other social movements created a new generation of historians, such as scholar Eric Foner, who led a reassessment of Reconstruction. Building on W. E. B. DuBois' work but also adding new sources, they focused on achievements of the African-American and white Republican coalitions, such as establishment of universal public education and charitable institutions in the South and extension of suffrage to black men. In response, the Southern-dominated Democratic Party and its affiliated white militias had used extensive terrorism, intimidation and outright assassinations to suppress African-American leaders and voting in the 1870s and to regain power.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Released in 1915, \"The Birth of a Nation\" has been credited as groundbreaking among its contemporaries for its innovative application of the medium of film. According to the film historian Kevin Brownlow, the film was \"astounding in its time\" and initiated \"so many advances in film-making technique that it was rendered obsolete within a few years\". The content of the work, however, has received widespread criticism for its blatant racism. Film critic Roger Ebert writes:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Certainly \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915) presents a challenge for modern audiences. Unaccustomed to silent films and uninterested in film history, they find it quaint and not to their taste. Those evolved enough to understand what they are looking at find the early and wartime scenes brilliant, but cringe during the postwar and Reconstruction scenes, which are racist in the ham-handed way of an old minstrel show or a vile comic pamphlet.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Mary Pickford said: \"\"Birth of a Nation\" was the first picture that really made people take the motion picture industry seriously\". The film held the mantle of the highest-grossing film until it was overtaken by \"Gone with the Wind\", another film about the Civil War and Reconstruction. In 1992, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. Despite its controversial story, the film has been praised by film critics such as Ebert, who said: \"\"The Birth of a Nation\" is not a bad film because it argues for evil. Like Riefenstahl's \"Triumph of the Will\", it is a great film that argues for evil. To understand how it does so is to learn a great deal about film, and even something about evil.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "According to a 2002 article in the \"Los Angeles Times\", the film facilitated the refounding of the Ku Klux Klan in 1915. History.com similarly states that \"There is no doubt that \"Birth of a Nation\" played no small part in winning wide public acceptance\" for the KKK, and that throughout the film \"African Americans are portrayed as brutish, lazy, morally degenerate, and dangerous.\" David Duke used the film to recruit Klansmen in the 1970s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "American Film Institute recognition", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2013, the American critic Richard Brody wrote \"The Birth of a Nation\" was :", "qas": []}, {"context": "...a seminal commercial spectacle but also a decisively original work of art\u2014in effect, the founding work of cinematic realism, albeit a work that was developed to pass lies off as reality. It's tempting to think of the film's influence as evidence of the inherent corruption of realism as a cinematic mode\u2014but it's even more revealing to acknowledge the disjunction between its beauty, on the one hand, and, on the other, its injustice and falsehood. The movie's fabricated events shouldn't lead any viewer to deny the historical facts of slavery and Reconstruction. But they also shouldn't lead to a denial of the peculiar, disturbingly exalted beauty of \"Birth of a Nation\", even in its depiction of immoral actions and its realization of blatant propaganda. The worst thing about \"The Birth of a Nation\" is how good it is. The merits of its grand and enduring aesthetic make it impossible to ignore and, despite its disgusting content, also make it hard not to love. And it's that very conflict that renders the film all the more despicable, the experience of the film more of a torment\u2014together with the acknowledgment that Griffith, whose short films for Biograph were already among the treasures of world cinema, yoked his mighty talent to the cause of hatred (which, still worse, he sincerely depicted as virtuous).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brody also argued that Griffith unintentionally undercut his own thesis in the film, citing the scene before the Civil War when the Cameron family offers up lavish hospitality to the Stoneman family who travel past mile after mile of slaves working the cotton fields of South Carolina to reach the Cameron home-maintaining that a modern audience can see that the wealth of the Camerons comes from the slaves forced to do back-breaking work picking the cotton. Likewise, Brody argued that the scene where people in South Carolina celebrate the Confederate victory at the Battle of Bull Run by dancing around the \"eerie flare of a bonfire\" which imply \"a dance of death\", foreshadowing the destruction of Sherman's March that was to come. In the same way, Brody wrote that the scene where the Klan dumps Gus's body off at the doorstep of Lynch is meant to have the audience cheering, but modern audiences find the scene \"obscene and horrifying\". Finally, Brody argued that the end of the film, where the Klan prevents defenseless African-Africans from exercising their right to vote by pointing guns at them today seems \"unjust and cruel\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In an article for \"The Atlantic\", film critic Ty Burr deemed \"The Birth of a Nation\" the most influential film in history while criticizing its portrayal of black men as savage. Richard Corliss of \"Time\" wrote that Griffith \"established in the hundreds of one- and two-reelers he directed a cinematic textbook, a fully formed visual language, for the generations that followed. More than anyone else\u2014more than all others combined\u2014he invented the film art. He brought it to fruition in \"The Birth of a Nation\".\" Corliss praised the film's \"brilliant storytelling technique\" and noted that \"\"The Birth of a Nation\" is nearly as antiwar as it is antiblack. The Civil War scenes, which consume only 30 minutes of the extravaganza, emphasize not the national glory but the human cost of combat. ... Griffith may have been a racist politically, but his refusal to find uplift in the South's war against the Union\u2014and, implicitly, in any war at all\u2014reveals him as a cinematic humanist.\" In his review of \"The Birth of a Nation\" in \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\", Jonathan Kline writes that \"with countless artistic innovations, Griffith essentially created contemporary film language ... virtually every film is beholden to [\"The Birth of a Nation\"] in one way, shape or form. Griffith introduced the use of dramatic close-ups, tracking shots, and other expressive camera movements; parallel action sequences, crosscutting, and other editing techniques\". He added that \"the fact that \"The Birth of a Nation\" remains respected and studied to this day-despite its subject matter-reveals its lasting importance.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "One famous part of the film was added by Griffith only on the second run of the film and is missing from most online versions of the film (presumably taken from first run prints).", "qas": []}, {"context": "These are the second and third of three opening title cards which defend the film. The added titles read:\nA PLEA FOR THE ART OF THE MOTION PICTURE:\nWe do not fear censorship, for we have no wish to offend with improprieties or obscenities, but we do demand, as a right, the liberty to show the dark side of wrong, that we may illuminate the bright side of virtue \u2013 the same liberty that is conceded to the art of the written word \u2013 that art to which we owe the Bible and the works of Shakespeare", "qas": []}, {"context": "and", "qas": []}, {"context": "If in this work we have conveyed to the mind the ravages of war to the end that war may be held in abhorrence, this effort will not have been in vain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Various film historians have expressed a range of views about these titles. To Nicholas Andrew Miller, this shows that \"Griffith's greatest achievement in \"The Birth of a Nation\" was that he brought the cinema's capacity for spectacle... under the rein of an outdated, but comfortably literary form of historical narrative. Griffith's models... are not the pioneers of film spectacle... but the giants of literary narrative\". On the other hand, S. Kittrell Rushing complains about Griffith's \"didactic\" title-cards, while Stanley Corkin complains that Griffith \"masks his idea of fact in the rhetoric of high art and free expression\" and creates film which \"erodes the very ideal\" of liberty which he asserts.", "qas": []}, {"context": "For many years, \"The Birth of a Nation\" was poorly represented in home media and restorations. This stemmed from several factors, one of which was the fact that Griffith and others had frequently reworked the film, leaving no definitive version. According to the silent film website \"Brenton Film\", many home media releases of the film consisted of \"poor quality DVDs with different edits, scores, running speeds and usually in \"definitely unoriginal\" black and white\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "One of the earliest high-quality home versions was film preservationist David Shepard's 1992 transfer of a 16mm print for VHS and laserdisc release via Image Entertainment. A short documentary, \"The Making of The Birth of a Nation\", newly produced and narrated by Shepard, was also included. Both were released on DVD by Image in 1998 and the UK's Eureka Entertainment in 2000.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the UK, Photoplay Productions restored the Museum of Modern Art's 35mm print that was the source of Shepard's 16\u00a0mm print, though they also augmented it with extra material from the British Film Institute. It was also given a full orchestral recording of the original Breil score. Though broadcast on Channel 4 television and theatrically screened many times, Photoplay's 1993 version was never released on home video.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Shepard's transfer and documentary were reissued in the US by Kino Video in 2002, this time in a 2-DVD set with added extras on the second disc. These included several Civil War shorts also directed by D. W. Griffith. In 2011, Kino prepared a HD transfer of a 35\u00a0mm negative from the Paul Killiam Collection. They added some material from the Library of Congress and gave it a new compilation score. This version was released on Blu-ray by Kino in the US, Eureka in the UK (as part of their \"Masters of Cinema\" collection) and Divisa Home Video in Spain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 2015, the year of the film's centenary, Photoplay Productions' Patrick Stanbury, in conjunction with the British Film Institute, carried out the first full restoration. It mostly used new 4K scans of the LoC's original camera negative, along with other early generation material. It, too, was given the original Breil score and featured the film's original tinting for the first time since its 1915 release. The restoration was released on a 2-Blu-ray set by the BFI, alongside a host of extras, including many other newly restored Civil War-related films from the period.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nI've reclaimed this title and re-purposed it as a tool to challenge racism and white supremacy in America, to inspire a riotous disposition toward any and all injustice in this country (and abroad) and to promote the kind of honest confrontation that will galvanize our society toward healing and sustained systemic change.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nBibliography", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Baltic Sea", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Baltic Sea is a marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean, enclosed by Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, northwest Russia, Poland, Germany and the North and Central European Plain.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The sea stretches from 53\u00b0N to 66\u00b0N latitude and from 10\u00b0E to 30\u00b0E longitude. A mediterranean sea of the Atlantic, with limited water exchange between the two bodies, the Baltic Sea drains through the Danish islands into the Kattegat by way of the straits of \u00d8resund, the Great Belt, and the Little Belt. It includes the Gulf of Bothnia, the Bay of Bothnia, the Gulf of Finland, the Gulf of Riga, and the Bay of Gda\u0144sk.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Proper is bordered on its northern edge, at the latitude 60\u00b0N, by the \u00c5land islands and the Gulf of Bothnia, on its northeastern edge by the Gulf of Finland, on its eastern edge by the Gulf of Riga, and in the west by the Swedish part of the southern Scandinavian Peninsula.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea is connected by artificial waterways to the White Sea via the White Sea Canal and to the German Bight of the North Sea via the Kiel Canal.", "qas": [{"question": "what sea is the baltic sea ?", "answers": [], "id": "(61, 3, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Administration", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Helsinki Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area includes the Baltic Sea and the Kattegat, without calling Kattegat a part of the Baltic Sea, \"For the purposes of this Convention the 'Baltic Sea Area' shall be the Baltic Sea and the Entrance to the Baltic Sea, bounded by the parallel of the Skaw in the Skagerrak at 57\u00b044.43'N.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Traffic history", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historically, the Kingdom of Denmark collected Sound Dues from ships at the border between the ocean and the land-locked Baltic Sea. They were collected in the \u00d8resund at Kronborg castle near Helsing\u00f8r, in the Great Belt at Nyborg. In the Little Belt, the site of intake was moved to Fredericia, after that stronghold had been built. The narrowest part of Little Belt is the \"Middelfart Sund\" near Middelfart.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Oceanography", "qas": []}, {"context": "Geographers widely agree that the preferred physical border of the Baltic is a line drawn through the southern Danish islands, Drogden-Sill and Langeland. The Drogden Sill is situated north of K\u00f8ge Bugt and connects Drag\u00f8r in the south of Copenhagen to Malm\u00f6; it is used by the \u00d8resund Bridge, including the \"Drogden Tunnel\". By this definition, the Danish Straits are part of the entrance, but the Bay of Mecklenburg and the Bay of Kiel are parts of the Baltic Sea.\nAnother usual border is the line between Falsterbo, Sweden and Stevns Klint, Denmark, as this is the southern border of \u00d8resund. It's also the border between the shallow southern \u00d8resund (with a typical depth of 5\u201310 meters only) and notably deeper water.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Hydrography and biology", "qas": []}, {"context": "Drogden Sill (depth of ) sets a limit to \u00d8resund and Darss Sill (depth of ), and a limit to the Belt Sea. The shallow sills are obstacles to the flow of heavy salt water from the Kattegat into the basins around Bornholm and Gotland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Kattegat and the southwestern Baltic Sea are well oxygenated and have a rich biology. The remainder of the Sea is brackish, poor in oxygen and in species. Thus, statistically, the more of the entrance that is included in its definition, the healthier the Baltic appears; conversely, the more narrowly it is defined, the more endangered its biology appears.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Tacitus called it \"Mare Suebicum\" after the Germanic people of the Suebi, and Ptolemy \"Sarmatian Ocean\" after the Sarmatians, but the first to name it the \"Baltic Sea\" (\"Mare Balticum\") was the eleventh-century German chronicler Adam of Bremen. The origin of the latter name is speculative and it was adopted into Slavic and Finnic languages spoken around the sea, very likely due to the role of Medieval Latin in cartography. It might be connected to the Germanic word \"belt\", a name used for two of the Danish straits, the Belts, while others claim it to be directly derived from the source of the Germanic word, Latin \"balteus\" \"belt\". Adam of Bremen himself compared the sea with a belt, stating that it is so named because it stretches through the land as a belt (\"Balticus, eo quod in modum baltei longo tractu per Scithicas regiones tendatur usque in Greciam\").", "qas": []}, {"context": "He might also have been influenced by the name of a legendary island mentioned in the \"Natural History\" of Pliny the Elder. Pliny mentions an island named Baltia (or Balcia) with reference to accounts of Pytheas and Xenophon. It is possible that Pliny refers to an island named Basilia (\"the royal\") in \"On the Ocean\" by Pytheas. \"Baltia\" also might be derived from \"belt\" and mean \"near belt of sea, strait.\"", "qas": []}, {"context": "Meanwhile, others have suggested that the name of the island originates from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*bhel\" meaning \"white, fair\". This root and its basic meaning were retained in both Lithuanian (as \"baltas\") and Latvian (as \"balts\"). On this basis, a related hypothesis holds that the name originated from this Indo-European root via a Baltic language such as Lithuanian. Another explanation is that, while derived from the aforementioned root, the name of the sea is related to names for various forms of water and related substances in several European languages, that might have been originally associated with colors found in swamps (compare Proto-Slavic \"*bolto\" \"swamp\"). Yet another explanation is that the name originally meant \"enclosed sea, bay\" as opposed to open sea. Some Swedish historians believe the name derives from the god Baldr of Nordic mythology.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Middle Ages the sea was known by a variety of names. The name Baltic Sea became dominant only after 1600. Usage of \"Baltic\" and similar terms to denote the region east of the sea started only in 19th century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea was known in ancient Latin language sources as \"Mare Suebicum\" or even \"Mare Germanicum\". Older native names in languages that used to be spoken on the shores of the sea or near it usually indicate the geographical location of the sea (in Germanic languages), or its size in relation to smaller gulfs (in Old Latvian), or tribes associated with it (in Old Russian the sea was known as the Varanghian Sea). In modern languages it is known by the equivalents of \"East Sea\", \"West Sea\", or \"Baltic Sea\" in different languages:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nAt the time of the Roman Empire, the Baltic Sea was known as the \"Mare Suebicum\" or \"Mare Sarmaticum\". Tacitus in his AD\u00a098 \"Agricola\" and \"Germania\" described the Mare Suebicum, named for the Suebi tribe, during the spring months, as a brackish sea where the ice broke apart and chunks floated about. The Suebi eventually migrated southwest to reside for a while in the Rhineland area of modern Germany, where their name survives in the historic region known as Swabia. Jordanes called it the \"Germanic Sea\" in his work, the \"Getica\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the early Middle Ages, Norse (Scandinavian) merchants built a trade empire all around the Baltic. Later, the Norse fought for control of the Baltic against Wendish tribes dwelling on the southern shore. The Norse also used the rivers of Russia for trade routes, finding their way eventually to the Black Sea and southern Russia. This Norse-dominated period is referred to as the Viking Age.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the Viking age, the Scandinavians have referred to the Baltic Sea as \"Austmarr\" (\"Eastern Lake\"). \"Eastern Sea\", appears in the \"Heimskringla\" and \"Eystra salt\" appears in \"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\". Saxo Grammaticus recorded in \"Gesta Danorum\" an older name, \"Gandvik\", \"-vik\" being Old Norse for \"bay\", which implies that the Vikings correctly regarded it as an inlet of the sea. Another form of the name, \"Grandvik\", attested in at least one English translation of \"Gesta Danorum\", is likely to be a misspelling.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "In addition to fish the sea also provides amber, especially from its southern shores within today's borders of Poland, Russia and Lithuania. First mentions of amber deposits on the South coast of the Baltic Sea date back to the 12th century. The bordering countries have also traditionally exported lumber, wood tar, flax, hemp and furs by ship across the Baltic. Sweden had from early medieval times exported iron and silver mined there, while Poland had and still has extensive salt mines. Thus the Baltic Sea has long been crossed by much merchant shipping.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The lands on the Baltic's eastern shore were among the last in Europe to be converted to Christianity. This finally happened during the Northern Crusades: Finland in the twelfth century by Swedes, and what are now Estonia and Latvia in the early thirteenth century by Danes and Germans (Livonian Brothers of the Sword). The Teutonic Order gained control over parts of the southern and eastern shore of the Baltic Sea, where they set up their monastic state. Lithuania was the last European state to convert to Christianity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the period between the 8th and 14th centuries, there was much piracy in the Baltic from the coasts of Pomerania and Prussia, and the Victual Brothers even held Gotland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Starting in the 11th century, the southern and eastern shores of the Baltic were settled by migrants mainly from Germany, a movement called the \"Ostsiedlung\" (\"east settling\"). Other settlers were from the Netherlands, Denmark, and Scotland. The Polabian Slavs were gradually assimilated by the Germans. Denmark gradually gained control over most of the Baltic coast, until she lost much of her possessions after being defeated in the 1227 Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the 13th to 16th centuries, the strongest economic force in Northern Europe was the Hanseatic League, a federation of merchant cities around the Baltic Sea and the North Sea. In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, Poland, Denmark, and Sweden fought wars for \"Dominium maris baltici\" (\"Lordship over the Baltic Sea\"). Eventually, it was Sweden that virtually encompassed the Baltic Sea. In Sweden the sea was then referred to as \"Mare Nostrum Balticum\" (\"Our Baltic Sea\"). The goal of Swedish warfare during the 17th century was to make the Baltic Sea an all-Swedish sea (\"Ett Svenskt innanhav\"), something that was accomplished except the part between Riga in Latvia and Stettin in Pomerania. However, the Dutch dominated Baltic trade in the seventeenth century.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the eighteenth century, Russia and Prussia became the leading powers over the sea. Sweden's defeat in the Great Northern War brought Russia to the eastern coast. Russia became and remained a dominating power in the Baltic. Russia's Peter the Great saw the strategic importance of the Baltic and decided to found his new capital, Saint Petersburg, at the mouth of the Neva river at the east end of the Gulf of Finland. There was much trading not just within the Baltic region but also with the North Sea region, especially eastern England and the Netherlands: their fleets needed the Baltic timber, tar, flax and hemp.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the Crimean War, a joint British and French fleet attacked the Russian fortresses in the Baltic. They bombarded Sveaborg, which guards Helsinki; and Kronstadt, which guards Saint Petersburg; and they destroyed Bomarsund in the \u00c5land Islands. After the unification of Germany in 1871, the whole southern coast became German. World War I was partly fought in the Baltic Sea. After 1920 Poland was connected to the Baltic Sea by the Polish Corridor and enlarged the port of Gdynia in rivalry with the port of the Free City of Danzig.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During World War II, Germany reclaimed all of the southern and much of the eastern shore by occupying Poland and the Baltic states. In 1945, the Baltic Sea became a mass grave for retreating soldiers and refugees on torpedoed troop transports. The sinking of the \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" remains the worst maritime disaster in history, killing (very roughly) 9,000 people. In 2005, a Russian group of scientists found over five thousand airplane wrecks, sunken warships, and other material, mainly from World War II, on the bottom of the sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the end of World War II, various nations, including the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States, have disposed of chemical weapons in the Baltic Sea, raising concerns of environmental contamination. Even now fishermen accidentally retrieve some of these materials: the most recent available report from the Helsinki Commission notes that four small scale catches of chemical munitions representing approximately of material were reported in 2005. This is a reduction from the 25 incidents representing of material in 2003. Until now, the U.S. Government refuses to disclose the exact coordinates of the wreck sites. Rotting bottles leak mustard gas and other substances, thus slowly poisoning a substantial part of the Baltic Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After 1945, the German population was expelled from all areas east of the Oder-Neisse line, making room for displaced Poles and Russians. Poland gained most of the southern shore. The Soviet Union gained another access to the Baltic with the Kaliningrad Oblast. The Baltic states on the eastern shore were annexed by the Soviet Union. The Baltic then separated opposing military blocs: NATO and the Warsaw Pact. Had war broken out, the Polish navy was prepared to invade the Danish isles. This border status restricted trade and travel. It ended only after the collapse of the Communist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe in the late 1980s.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since May 2004, with the accession of the Baltic states and Poland, the Baltic Sea has been almost entirely surrounded by countries of the European Union (EU). The only remaining non-EU shore areas are Russian: the Saint Petersburg area and the exclave of the Kaliningrad Oblast.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Winter storms begin arriving in the region during October. These have caused numerous shipwrecks, and contributed to the extreme difficulties of rescuing passengers of the ferry \"M/S Estonia\" en route from Tallinn, Estonia, to Stockholm, Sweden, in September 1994, which claimed the lives of 852 people. Older, wood-based shipwrecks such as the \"Vasa\" tend to remain well-preserved, as the Baltic's cold and brackish water does not suit the shipworm.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Storm surge floodings are generally taken to occur when the water level is more than one metre above normal. In Warnem\u00fcnde about 110 floods occurred from 1950 to 2000, an average of just over two per year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Historic flood events were the All Saints' Flood of 1304 and other floods in the years 1320, 1449, 1625, 1694, 1784 and 1825. Little is known of their extent. From 1872, there exist regular and reliable records of water levels in the Baltic Sea. The highest was the flood of 1872 when the water was an average of above sea level at Warnem\u00fcnde and a maximum of above sea level in Warnem\u00fcnde. In the last very heavy floods the average water levels reached above sea level in 1904, in 1913, in January 1954, on 2\u20134 November 1995 and on 21 February 2002.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An arm of the North Atlantic Ocean, the Baltic Sea is enclosed by Sweden and Denmark to the west, Finland to the northeast, the Baltic countries to the southeast, and the North European Plain to the southwest.", "qas": []}, {"context": "It is about long, an average of wide, and an average of deep. The maximum depth is which is on the Swedish side of the center. The surface area is about and the volume is about . The periphery amounts to about of coastline.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea is one of the largest brackish inland seas by area, and occupies a basin (a \"zungenbecken\") formed by glacial erosion during the last few ice ages.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Physical characteristics of the Baltic Sea, its main sub-regions, and the transition zone to the Skagerrak/North Sea area", "qas": []}, {"context": "The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Baltic Sea as follows:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The northern part of the Baltic Sea is known as the Gulf of Bothnia, of which the northernmost part is the Bay of Bothnia or Bothnian Bay. The more rounded southern basin of the gulf is called Bothnian Sea and immediately to the south of it lies the Sea of \u00c5land. The Gulf of Finland connects the Baltic Sea with Saint Petersburg. The Gulf of Riga lies between the Latvian capital city of Riga and the Estonian island of Saaremaa.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Northern Baltic Sea lies between the Stockholm area, southwestern Finland and Estonia. The Western and Eastern Gotland Basins form the major parts of the Central Baltic Sea or Baltic proper. The Bornholm Basin is the area east of Bornholm, and the shallower Arkona Basin extends from Bornholm to the Danish isles of Falster and Zealand.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the south, the Bay of Gda\u0144sk lies east of the Hel Peninsula on the Polish coast and west of the Sambia Peninsula in Kaliningrad Oblast. The Bay of Pomerania lies north of the islands of Usedom and Wolin, east of R\u00fcgen. Between Falster and the German coast lie the Bay of Mecklenburg and Bay of L\u00fcbeck. The westernmost part of the Baltic Sea is the Bay of Kiel. The three Danish straits, the Great Belt, the Little Belt and The Sound (\"\u00d6resund\"/\"\u00d8resund\"), connect the Baltic Sea with the Kattegat and Skagerrak strait in the North Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The water temperature of the Baltic Sea varies significantly depending on exact location, season and depth. At the Bornholm Basin, which is located directly east of the island of the same name, the surface temperature typically falls to during the peak of the winter and rises to during the peak of the summer, with an annual average of around . A similar pattern can be seen in the Gotland Basin, which is located between the island of Gotland and Latvia. In the deep of these basins the temperature variations are smaller. At the bottom of the Bornholm Basin, deeper than , the temperature typically is , and at the bottom of the Gotland Basin, at depths greater than , the temperature typically is .", "qas": []}, {"context": "On the long-term average, the Baltic Sea is ice-covered at the annual maximum for about 45% of its surface area. The ice-covered area during such a typical winter includes the Gulf of Bothnia, the Gulf of Finland, the Gulf of Riga, the archipelago west of Estonia, the Stockholm archipelago, and the Archipelago Sea southwest of Finland. The remainder of the Baltic does not freeze during a normal winter, except sheltered bays and shallow lagoons such as the Curonian Lagoon. The ice reaches its maximum extent in February or March; typical ice thickness in the northernmost areas in the Bothnian Bay, the northern basin of the Gulf of Bothnia, is about for landfast sea ice. The thickness decreases farther south.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Freezing begins in the northern extremities of the Gulf of Bothnia typically in the middle of November, reaching the open waters of the Bothnian Bay in early January. The Bothnian Sea, the basin south of Kvarken, freezes on average in late February. The Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Riga freeze typically in late January. In 2011, the Gulf of Finland was completely frozen on 15 February.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ice extent depends on whether the winter is mild, moderate, or severe. In severe winters ice can form around southern Sweden and even in the Danish straits. According to the 18th-century natural historian William Derham, during the severe winters of 1703 and 1708, the ice cover reached as far as the Danish straits. Frequently, parts of the Gulf of Bothnia and Gulf of Finland are frozen, in addition to coastal fringes in more southerly locations such as the Gulf of Riga. This description meant that the whole of the Baltic Sea was covered with ice.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since 1720, the Baltic Sea has frozen over entirely 20 times, most recently in early 1987, which was the most severe winter in Scandinavia since 1720. The ice then covered . During the winter of 2010\u201311, which was quite severe compared to those of the last decades, the maximum ice cover was , which was reached on 25 February 2011. The ice then extended from the north down to the northern tip of Gotland, with small ice-free areas on either side, and the east coast of the Baltic Sea was covered by an ice sheet about wide all the way to Gda\u0144sk. This was brought about by a stagnant high-pressure area that lingered over central and northern Scandinavia from around 10 to 24 February. After this, strong southern winds pushed the ice further into the north, and much of the waters north of Gotland were again free of ice, which had then packed against the shores of southern Finland. The effects of the afore-mentioned high-pressure area did not reach the southern parts of the Baltic Sea, and thus the entire sea did not freeze over. However, floating ice was additionally observed near \u015awinouj\u015bcie harbour in January 2010.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In recent years before 2011, the Bothnian Bay and the Bothnian Sea were frozen with solid ice near the Baltic coast and dense floating ice far from it. In 2008, almost no ice formed except for a short period in March.\nDuring winter, fast ice, which is attached to the shoreline, develops first, rendering ports unusable without the services of icebreakers. Level ice, ice sludge, pancake ice, and rafter ice form in the more open regions. The gleaming expanse of ice is similar to the Arctic, with wind-driven pack ice and ridges up to . Offshore of the landfast ice, the ice remains very dynamic all year, and it is relatively easily moved around by winds and therefore forms pack ice, made up of large piles and ridges pushed against the landfast ice and shores.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In spring, the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Bothnia normally thaw in late April, with some ice ridges persisting until May in the eastern extremities of the Gulf of Finland. In the northernmost reaches of the Bothnian Bay, ice usually stays until late May; by early June it is practically always gone. However, in the famine year of 1867 remnants of ice were observed as late as July 17 near Uddsk\u00e4r. Even as far south as \u00d8resund, remnants of ice have been observed in May on several occasions; near Taarbaek on May 15, 1942 and near Copenhagen on May 11, 1771. Drift ice was also observed on May 11, 1799.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ice cover is the main habitat for two large mammals, the grey seal (\"Halichoerus grypus\") and the Baltic ringed seal (\"Pusa hispida botnica\"), both of which feed underneath the ice and breed on its surface. Of these two seals, only the Baltic ringed seal suffers when there is not adequate ice in the Baltic Sea, as it feeds its young only while on ice. The grey seal is adapted to reproducing also with no ice in the sea. The sea ice also harbours several species of algae that live in the bottom and inside unfrozen brine pockets in the ice.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea flows out through the Danish straits; however, the flow is complex. A surface layer of brackish water discharges per year into the North Sea. Due to the difference in salinity, by salinity permeation principle, a sub-surface layer of more saline water moving in the opposite direction brings in per year. It mixes very slowly with the upper waters, resulting in a salinity gradient from top to bottom, with most of the salt water remaining below deep. The general circulation is anti-clockwise: northwards along its eastern boundary, and south along the western one .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The difference between the outflow and the inflow comes entirely from fresh water. More than 250 streams drain a basin of about , contributing a volume of per year to the Baltic. They include the major rivers of north Europe, such as the Oder, the Vistula, the Neman, the Daugava and the Neva. Additional fresh water comes from the difference of precipitation less evaporation, which is positive.", "qas": []}, {"context": "An important source of salty water are infrequent inflows of North Sea water into the Baltic. Such inflows, important to the Baltic ecosystem because of the oxygen they transport into the Baltic deeps, used to happen regularly until the 1980s. In recent decades they have become less frequent. The latest four occurred in 1983, 1993, 2003 and 2014 suggesting a new inter-inflow period of about ten years.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The water level is generally far more dependent on the regional wind situation than on tidal effects. However, tidal currents occur in narrow passages in the western parts of the Baltic Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The significant wave height is generally much lower than that of the North Sea. Violent and sudden storms often sweep the surface, due to large transient temperature differences and a long reach of wind. Seasonal winds also cause small changes in sea level, of the order of .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea is the world's largest inland brackish sea. Only two other brackish waters are larger on some measurements: The Black Sea is larger in both surface area and water volume, but most of it is located outside the continental shelf (only a small percentage is inland). The Caspian Sea is larger in water volume, but\u2014despite its name\u2014it is a lake rather than a sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea's salinity is much lower than that of ocean water (which averages 3.5%), as a result of abundant freshwater runoff from the surrounding land (rivers, streams and alike), combined with the shallowness of the sea itself; runoff contributes roughly one-fortieth its total volume per year, as the volume of the basin is about and yearly runoff is about .", "qas": []}, {"context": "The open surface waters of the Baltic Sea \"proper\" generally have a salinity of 0.3 to 0.9%, which is border-line freshwater. The flow of fresh water into the sea from approximately two hundred rivers and the introduction of salt from the southwest builds up a gradient of salinity in the Baltic Sea. The highest surface salinities, generally 0.7\u20130.9%, is in the southwestern-most part of the Baltic, in the Arkona and Bornholm Basins (the former located roughly between southeast Zealand and Bornholm, and the latter directly east of Bornholm). It gradually falls further east and north, reaching the lowest in the Bothnian Bay at around 0.3%. Drinking the surface water of the Baltic as a means of survival would actually hydrate the body instead of dehydrating, as is the case with ocean water.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As salt water is denser than fresh water, the bottom of the Baltic Sea is saltier than the surface. This creates a vertical stratification of the water column, a halocline, that represents a barrier to the exchange of oxygen and nutrients, and fosters completely separate maritime environments. The difference between the bottom and surface salinities vary depending on location. Overall it follows the same southwest to east and north pattern as the surface. At the bottom of the Arkona Basin (equalling depths greater than ) and Bornholm Basin (depths greater than ) it is typically 1.4\u20131.8%. Further east and north the salinity at the bottom is consistently lower, being the lowest in Bothnian Bay (depths greater than ) where it is slightly below 0.4%, or only marginally higher than the surface in the same region.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In contrast, the salinity of the Danish straits, which connect the Baltic Sea and Kattegat, tends to be significantly higher, but with major variations from year to year. For example, the surface and bottom salinity in the Great Belt is typically around 2.0% and 2.8% respectively, which is only somewhat below that of the Kattegat. The water surplus caused by the continuous inflow of rivers and streams to the Baltic Sea means that there generally is a flow of brackish water out though the Danish straits to the Kattegat (and eventually the Atlantic). Significant flows in the opposite direction, salt water from the Kattegat through the Danish straits to the Baltic Sea, are less regular. From 1880 to 1980 inflows occurred on average six to seven times per decade. Since 1980 it has been much less frequent, although a very large inflow occurred in 2014.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rating of mean discharges differs from the ranking of hydrological lengths (from the most distant source to the sea) and the rating of the nominal lengths. G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv, a tributary of the Kattegat, is not listed, as due to the northward upper low-salinity-flow in the sea, its water hardly reaches the Baltic proper:", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nCountries that border the sea:", "qas": []}, {"context": "Countries that are in the drainage basin but do not border the sea:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic sea drainage basin is roughly four times the surface area of the sea itself. About 48% of the region is forested, with Sweden and Finland containing the majority of the forest, especially around the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "About 20% of the land is used for agriculture and pasture, mainly in Poland and around the edge of the Baltic Proper, in Germany, Denmark and Sweden. About 17% of the basin is unused open land with another 8% of wetlands. Most of the latter are in the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The rest of the land is heavily populated. About 85 million people live in the Baltic drainage basin, 15 million within of the coast and 29 million within of the coast. Around 22 million live in population centers of over 250,000. 90% of these are concentrated in the band around the coast. Of the nations containing all or part of the basin, Poland includes 45% of the 85 million, Russia 12%, Sweden 10% and the others less than 6% each.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The biggest coastal cities (by population):", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nOther important ports:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Baltic Sea somewhat resembles a riverbed, with two tributaries, the Gulf of Finland and Gulf of Bothnia. Geological surveys show that before the Pleistocene, instead of the Baltic Sea, there was a wide plain around a great river that paleontologists call the Eridanos. Several Pleistocene glacial episodes scooped out the river bed into the sea basin. By the time of the last, or Eemian Stage (MIS\u00a05e), the Eemian Sea was in place. Instead of a true sea, the Baltic can even today also be understood as the common estuary of all rivers flowing into it.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From that time the waters underwent a geologic history summarized under the names listed below. Many of the stages are named after marine animals (e.g. the Littorina mollusk) that are clear markers of changing water temperatures and salinity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The factors that determined the sea's characteristics were the submergence or emergence of the region due to the weight of ice and subsequent isostatic readjustment, and the connecting channels it found to the North Sea-Atlantic, either through the straits of Denmark or at what are now the large lakes of Sweden, and the White Sea-Arctic Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The land is still emerging isostatically from its depressed state, which was caused by the weight of ice during the last glaciation. The phenomenon is known as post-glacial rebound. Consequently, the surface area and the depth of the sea are diminishing. The uplift is about eight millimetres per year on the Finnish coast of the northernmost Gulf of Bothnia. In the area, the former seabed is only gently sloping, leading to large areas of land being reclaimed in what are, geologically speaking, relatively short periods (decades and centuries).", "qas": []}, {"context": "The \"Baltic Sea anomaly\" refers to interpretations of an indistinct sonar image taken by Swedish salvage divers on the floor of the northern Baltic Sea in June 2011. The treasure hunters suggested the image showed an object with unusual features of seemingly extraordinary origin. Speculation published in tabloid newspapers claimed that the object was a sunken UFO. A consensus of experts and scientists say that the image most likely shows a natural geological formation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The fauna of the Baltic Sea is a mixture of marine and freshwater species. Among marine fishes are Atlantic cod, Atlantic herring, European hake, European plaice, European flounder, shorthorn sculpin and turbot, and examples of freshwater species include European perch, northern pike, whitefish and common roach. Freshwater species may occur at outflows of rivers or streams in all coastal sections of the Baltic Sea. Otherwise marine species dominate in most sections of the Baltic, at least as far north as G\u00e4vle, where less than one-tenth are freshwater species. Further north the pattern is inverted. In the Bothnian Bay, roughly two-thirds of the species are freshwater. In the far north of this bay, saltwater species are almost entirely absent. For example, the common starfish and shore crab, two species that are very widespread along European coasts, are both unable to cope with the significantly lower salinity. Their range limit is west of Bornholm, meaning that they are absent from the vast majority of the Baltic Sea. Some marine species, like the Atlantic cod and European flounder, can survive at relatively low salinities, but need higher salinities to breed, which therefore occurs in deeper parts of the Baltic Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There is a decrease in species richness from the Danish belts to the Gulf of Bothnia. The decreasing salinity along this path causes restrictions in both physiology and habitats. At more than 600 species of invertebrates, fish, aquatic mammals, aquatic birds and macrophytes, the Arkona Basin (roughly between southeast Zealand and Bornholm) is far richer than other more eastern and northern basins in the Baltic Sea, which all have less than 400 species from these groups, with the exception of the Gulf of Finland with more than 750 species. However, even the most diverse sections of the Baltic Sea have far less species than the almost-full saltwater Kattegat, which is home to more than 1600 species from these groups. The lack of tides has affected the marine species as compared with the Atlantic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the Baltic Sea is so young there are only two or three known endemic species: the brown alga \"Fucus radicans\" and the flounder \"Platichthys solemdali\". Both appear to have evolved in the Baltic basin and were only recognized as species in 2005 and 2018 respectively, having formerly been confused with more widespread relatives. The tiny Copenhagen cockle (\"Parvicardium hauniense\"), a rare mussel, is sometimes considered endemic, but has now been recorded in the Mediterranean. However, some consider non-Baltic records to be misidentifications of juvenile lagoon cockles (\"Cerastoderma glaucum\"). Several widespread marine species have distinctive subpopulations in the Baltic Sea adapted to the low salinity, such as the Baltic Sea forms of the Atlantic herring and lumpsucker, which are smaller than the widespread forms in the North Atlantic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A peculiar feature of the fauna is that it contains a number of glacial relict species, isolated populations of arctic species which have remained in the Baltic Sea since the last glaciation, such as the large isopod \"Saduria entomon\", the Baltic subspecies of ringed seal, and the fourhorn sculpin. Some of these relicts are derived from glacial lakes, such as \"Monoporeia affinis\", which is a main element in the benthic fauna of the low-salinity Bothnian Bay.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Cetaceans in Baltic Sea have been monitored by the ASCOBANS. Critically endangered populations of Atlantic white-sided dolphins and harbor porpoises inhabit the sea where white-colored porpoises have been recorded, and occasionally oceanic and out-of-range species such as minke whales, bottlenose dolphins, beluga whales, orcas, and beaked whales visit the waters. In recent years, very small, but with increasing rates, fin whales and humpback whales migrate into Baltic sea including mother and calf pair. Now extinct Atlantic grey whales (remains found from Gr\u00e4s\u00f6 along Bothnian Sea/southern Bothnian Gulf and Ystad) and eastern population of North Atlantic right whales that is facing functional extinction once migrated into Baltic Sea.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other notable megafauna include the basking sharks.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Satellite images taken in July 2010 revealed a massive algal bloom covering in the Baltic Sea. The area of the bloom extended from Germany and Poland to Finland. Researchers of the phenomenon have indicated that algal blooms have occurred every summer for decades. Fertilizer runoff from surrounding agricultural land has exacerbated the problem and led to increased eutrophication.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Approximately of the Baltic's seafloor (a quarter of its total area) is a variable dead zone. The more saline (and therefore denser) water remains on the bottom, isolating it from surface waters and the atmosphere. This leads to decreased oxygen concentrations within the zone. It is mainly bacteria that grow in it, digesting organic material and releasing hydrogen sulfide. Because of this large anaerobic zone, the seafloor ecology differs from that of the neighbouring Atlantic.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Plans to artificially oxygenate areas of the Baltic that have experienced eutrophication have been proposed by the University of Gothenburg and Inocean AB. The proposal intends to use wind-driven pumps to inject oxygen (air) into waters at, or around, 130m below sea level.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Construction of the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark (completed 1997) and the \u00d8resund Bridge-Tunnel (completed 1999), linking Denmark with Sweden, provided a highway and railroad connection between Sweden and the Danish mainland (the Jutland Peninsula, precisely the Zealand). The undersea tunnel of the \u00d8resund Bridge-Tunnel provides for navigation of large ships into and out of the Baltic Sea. The Baltic Sea is the main trade route for export of Russian petroleum. Many of the countries neighboring the Baltic Sea have been concerned about this, since a major oil leak in a seagoing tanker would be disastrous for the Baltic\u2014given the slow exchange of water. The tourism industry surrounding the Baltic Sea is naturally concerned about oil pollution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Much shipbuilding is carried out in the shipyards around the Baltic Sea. The largest shipyards are at Gda\u0144sk, Gdynia, and Szczecin, Poland; Kiel, Germany; Karlskrona and Malm\u00f6, Sweden; Rauma, Turku, and Helsinki, Finland; Riga, Ventspils, and Liep\u0101ja, Latvia; Klaip\u0117da, Lithuania; and Saint Petersburg, Russia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "There are several cargo and passenger ferries that operate on the Baltic Sea, such as Scandlines, Silja Line, Polferries, the Viking Line, Tallink, and Superfast Ferries.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Piers", "qas": []}, {"context": "Resort towns", "qas": []}, {"context": "For the first time ever, all the sources of pollution around an entire sea were made subject to a single convention, signed in 1974 by the then seven Baltic coastal states. The 1974 Convention entered into force on 3 May 1980.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the light of political changes and developments in international environmental and maritime law, a new convention was signed in 1992 by all the states bordering on the Baltic Sea, and the European Community. After ratification the Convention entered into force on 17 January 2000. The Convention covers the whole of the Baltic Sea area, including inland waters and the water of the sea itself, as well as the seabed. Measures are also taken in the whole catchment area of the Baltic Sea to reduce land-based pollution. The Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area, 1992, entered into force on 17 January 2000.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The governing body of the Convention is the Helsinki Commission, also known as HELCOM, or Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission. The present contracting parties are Denmark, Estonia, the European Community, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russia and Sweden.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The ratification instruments were deposited by the European Community, Germany, Latvia and Sweden in 1994, by Estonia and Finland in 1995, by Denmark in 1996, by Lithuania in 1997 and by Poland and Russia in November 1999.", "qas": []}, {"context": "\nNotes", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bibliography", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Brackish water", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Brackish water is water having more salinity than freshwater, but not as much as seawater. It may result from mixing seawater with fresh water together, as in estuaries, or it may occur in brackish fossil aquifers. The word comes from the Middle Dutch root \"brak\". Certain human activities can produce brackish water, in particular civil engineering projects such as dikes and the flooding of coastal marshland to produce brackish water pools for freshwater prawn farming. Brackish water is also the primary waste product of the salinity gradient power process. Because brackish water is hostile to the growth of most terrestrial plant species, without appropriate management it is damaging to the environment (see article on shrimp farms).", "qas": [{"question": "what type of water is water more water than water ?", "answers": [], "id": "(62, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Technically, brackish water contains between 0.5 and 30\u00a0grams of salt per litre\u2014more often expressed as 0.5 to 30 parts per thousand (\u2030), which is a specific gravity of between 1.005 and 1.010. Thus, \"brackish\" covers a range of salinity regimes and is not considered a precisely defined condition. It is characteristic of many brackish surface waters that their salinity can vary considerably over space or time.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brackish water condition commonly occurs when fresh water meets seawater. In fact, the most extensive brackish water habitats worldwide are estuaries, where a river meets the sea.", "qas": [{"question": "when water is dry water , what is the other main condition of water ?", "answers": [], "id": "(62, 2, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the most extensive type of water ecosystems in bermuda ?", "answers": [], "id": "(62, 2, 1)"}]}, {"context": "The River Thames flowing through London is a classic river estuary. The town of Teddington a few miles west of London marks the boundary between the tidal and non-tidal parts of the Thames, although it is still considered a freshwater river about as far east as Battersea insofar as the average salinity is very low and the fish fauna consists predominantly of freshwater species such as roach, dace, carp, perch, and pike. The Thames Estuary becomes brackish between Battersea and Gravesend, and the diversity of freshwater fish species present is smaller, primarily roach and dace; euryhaline marine species such as flounder, European seabass, mullet, and smelt become much more common. Further east, the salinity increases and the freshwater fish species are completely replaced by euryhaline marine ones, until the river reaches Gravesend, at which point conditions become fully marine and the fish fauna resembles that of the adjacent North Sea and includes both euryhaline and stenohaline marine species. A similar pattern of replacement can be observed with the aquatic plants and invertebrates living in the river.", "qas": []}, {"context": "This type of ecological succession from a freshwater to marine ecosystem is typical of river estuaries. River estuaries form important staging points during the migration of anadromous and catadromous fish species, such as salmon, shad, and eels, giving them time to form social groups and to adjust to the changes in salinity. Salmon are anadromous, meaning they live in the sea but ascend rivers to spawn; eels are catadromous, living in rivers and streams, but returning to the sea to breed. Besides the species that migrate through estuaries, there are many other fish that use them as \"nursery grounds\" for spawning or as places young fish can feed and grow before moving elsewhere. Herring and plaice are two commercially important species that use the Thames Estuary for this purpose.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Estuaries are also commonly used as fishing grounds, and as places for fish farming or ranching. For example, Atlantic salmon farms are often located in estuaries, although this has caused controversy, because in doing so, fish farmers expose migrating wild fish to large numbers of external parasites such as sea lice that escape from the pens the farmed fish are kept in.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Another important brackish water habitat is the mangrove swamp or mangal. Many, though not all, mangrove swamps fringe estuaries and lagoons where the salinity changes with each tide. Among the most specialised residents of mangrove forests are mudskippers, fish that forage for food on land, and archer fish, perch-like fish that \"spit\" at insects and other small animals living in the trees, knocking them into the water where they can be eaten. Like estuaries, mangrove swamps are extremely important breeding grounds for many fish, with species such as snappers, halfbeaks, and tarpon spawning or maturing among them. Besides fish, numerous other animals use mangroves, including such species as the saltwater crocodile, American crocodile, proboscis monkey, diamondback terrapin, and the crab-eating frog, \"Fejervarya cancrivora\" (formerly \"Rana cancrivora\"). Mangroves represent important nesting site for numerous birds groups such as herons, storks, spoonbills, ibises, kingfishers, shorebirds and seabirds.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Although often plagued with mosquitoes and other insects that make them unpleasant for humans, mangrove swamps are very important buffer zones between land and sea, and are a natural defense against hurricane and tsunami damage in particular.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Sundarbans and Bhitarkanika Mangroves are two of the large mangrove forests in the world, both on the coast of the Bay of Bengal.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Some seas and lakes are brackish. The Baltic Sea is a brackish sea adjoining the North Sea. Originally the confluence of two major river systems prior to the Pleistocene, since then it has been flooded by the North Sea but still receives so much freshwater from the adjacent lands that the water is brackish. Because the salt water coming in from the sea is denser than freshwater, the water in the Baltic is stratified, with salt water at the bottom and freshwater at the top. Limited mixing occurs because of the lack of tides and storms, with the result that the fish fauna at the surface is freshwater in composition while that lower down is more marine. Cod are an example of a species only found in deep water in the Baltic, while pike are confined to the less saline surface waters.", "qas": [{"question": "what are the names of the two lakes that are brackish ?", "answers": [], "id": "(62, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Caspian Sea is the world's largest lake and contains brackish water with a salinity about one-third that of normal seawater. The Caspian is famous for its peculiar animal fauna, including one of the few non-marine seals (the Caspian seal) and the great sturgeons, a major source of caviar.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Hudson Bay is a brackish marginal sea of the arctic ocean, it remains brackish due its limited connections to the open ocean, very high levels freshwater surface runoff input from the large Hudson Bay drainage basin, and low rate of evaporation due to being completely covered in ice for over half the year.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In the Black Sea the surface water is brackish with an average salinity of about 17-18 parts per thousand compared to 30 to 40 for the oceans. The deep, anoxic water of the Black Sea originates from warm, salty water of the Mediterranean.", "qas": [{"question": "what sea is anoxic from ?", "answers": [], "id": "(62, 12, 1)"}]}, {"context": "A brackish marsh may occur where a freshwater flow enters a salt marsh.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brackish seas", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brackish water lakes", "qas": []}, {"context": "Lochs (Scottish)", "qas": []}, {"context": "Coastal lagoons, marshes, and deltas", "qas": []}, {"context": "Estuaries", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "The Bronx", "paragraphs": [{"context": "The Bronx is the northernmost of the five boroughs of New York City, in the U.S. state of New York. It is south of Westchester County; northeast and east of Manhattan, across the Harlem River; and north of Queens, across the East River. Since 1914, the borough has had the same boundaries as Bronx County, the third-most densely populated county in the United States.", "qas": [{"question": "how many boroughs does the bronx have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Bronx has a land area of and a population of 1,471,160 in 2017. Of the five boroughs, it has the fourth-largest area, fourth-highest population, and third-highest population density. It is the only borough predominantly on the U.S. mainland.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the population of the bronx ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The Bronx is divided by the Bronx River into a hillier section in the west, and a flatter eastern section. East and west street names are divided by Jerome Avenue\u2014the continuation of Manhattan's Fifth Avenue. The West Bronx was annexed to New York City in 1874, and the areas east of the Bronx River in 1895. Bronx County was separated from New York County in 1914. About a quarter of the Bronx's area is open space, including Woodlawn Cemetery, Van Cortlandt Park, Pelham Bay Park, the New York Botanical Garden, and the Bronx Zoo in the borough's north and center. These open spaces are situated primarily on land deliberately reserved in the late 19th century as urban development progressed north and east from Manhattan.", "qas": [{"question": "what section of the bronx is the bronx ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The name \"Bronx\" originated with Jonas Bronck, who established the first settlement in the area as part of the New Netherland colony in 1639. The native Lenape were displaced after 1643 by settlers. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the Bronx received many immigrant and migrant groups as it was transformed into an urban community, first from various European countries (particularly Ireland, Germany, and Italy) and later from the Caribbean region (particularly Puerto Rico, Haiti, Jamaica, and the Dominican Republic), as well as African American migrants from the southern United States. This cultural mix has made the Bronx a wellspring of Latin music, hip hop and rock.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronx contains the poorest congressional district in the United States, the 15th, but its wide diversity also includes affluent, upper-income, and middle-income neighborhoods such as Riverdale, Fieldston, Spuyten Duyvil, Schuylerville, Pelham Bay, Pelham Gardens, Morris Park, and Country Club. The Bronx, particularly the South Bronx, saw a sharp decline in population, livable housing, and the quality of life in the late 1960s and the 1970s, culminating in a wave of arson. Since then the communities have shown significant redevelopment starting in the late 1980s before picking up pace from the 1990s until today.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronx was called \"Rananchqua\" by the native Siwanoy band of Lenape (also known historically as \"the Delawares\"), while other Native Americans knew the Bronx as \"Keskeskeck\". It was divided by the Aquahung River.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The origin of the person of Jonas Bronck () is contested. Some sources claim he was a Swedish born emigrant from Komstad, Norra Ljunga parish in Sm\u00e5land, Sweden, who arrived in New Netherland during the spring of 1639. Bronck became the first recorded European settler in the area now known as the Bronx and built a farm named \"Emmanus\" close to what today is the corner of Willis Avenue and 132nd Street in Mott Haven. He leased land from the Dutch West India Company on the neck of the mainland immediately north of the Dutch settlement in Harlem (on Manhattan Island), and bought additional tracts from the local tribes. He eventually accumulated between the Harlem River and the Aquahung, which became known as \"Bronck's River\" or \"the Bronx [River]\". Dutch and English settlers referred to the area as \"Bronck's Land\". The American poet William Bronk was a descendant of Pieter Bronck, either Jonas Bronck's son or his younger brother.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronx is referred to with the definite article as \"The Bronx\", both legally and colloquially. The County of Bronx does not place \"The\" immediately before \"Bronx\" in formal references, unlike the coextensive Borough of the Bronx, nor does the United States Postal Service in its database of Bronx addresses (the city and state mailing-address format is simply \"Bronx, NY\"). The region was apparently named after the Bronx River and first appeared in the \"Annexed District of The Bronx\" created in 1874 out of part of Westchester County. It was continued in the \"Borough of The Bronx\", which included a larger annexation from Westchester County in 1898. The use of the definite article is attributed to the style of referring to rivers. Another explanation for the use of the definite article in the borough's name stems from the phrase \"visiting the Broncks\", referring to the settler's family.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the bronx 's nickname ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 7, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The capitalization of The Bronx's name is sometimes disputed. Generally, the definite article is lowercase in place names (\"the Bronx\") except in official references to the borough. It would be capitalized (\"The Bronx\") at the beginning of a sentence or in any other situation when a normally lowercase word would be capitalized. However, some people and groups refer to the borough with a capital letter at all times, such as Lloyd Ultan, a Bronx County Historical Society historian, and the Great and Glorious Grand Army of The Bronx, a Bronx-based organization. These people say that the definite article is part of the proper name. In particular, the Great and Glorious Grand Army of The Bronx is leading efforts to make the city refer to the borough with an uppercase definite article in all uses, comparing the lowercase article in The Bronx's name to \"not capitalizing the 's' in 'Staten Island.'\"", "qas": [{"question": "what name is sometimes disputed ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "European colonization of the Bronx began in 1639. The Bronx was originally part of Westchester County, but it was ceded to New York County in two major parts (West Bronx, 1874 and East Bronx, 1895) before it became Bronx County. Originally, the area was part of the Lenape's Lenapehoking territory inhabited by Siwanoy of the Wappinger Confederacy. Over time, European colonists converted the borough into farmlands.", "qas": [{"question": "when did european colonization of the bronx begin ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 9, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The development of the Bronx is directly connected to its strategic location between New England and New York (Manhattan). Control over the bridges across the Harlem River plagued the period of British colonial rule. The King's Bridge, built in 1693 where Broadway reached the Spuyten Duyvil Creek, was a possession of Frederick Philipse, lord of Philipse Manor. The tolls were resented by local farmers on both sides of the creek, and in 1759, Jacobus Dyckman and Benjamin Palmer led them into building a free bridge across the Harlem River. After the American Revolutionary War, the King's Bridge toll was abolished.", "qas": [{"question": "what new york city is connected to the bronx ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 10, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The territory now contained within Bronx County was originally part of Westchester County, one of the 12 original counties of the English Province of New York. The present Bronx County was contained in the town of Westchester and parts of the towns in Yonkers, Eastchester, and Pelham. In 1846, a new town was created by division of Westchester, called West Farms. The town of Morrisania was created, in turn, from West Farms in 1855. In 1873, the town of Kingsbridge was established within the former borders of Yonkers, roughly corresponding to the modern Bronx neighborhoods of Kingsbridge, Riverdale, and Woodlawn.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Among famous settlers in the Bronx during the 19th and early 20th centuries were author Willa Cather, tobacco merchant Pierre Lorillard, and inventor Jordan L. Mott, who established Mott Haven to house the workers at his iron works.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The consolidation of the Bronx into New York City proceeded in two stages. In 1873, the state legislature annexed Kingsbridge, West Farms, and Morrisania to New York, effective in 1874; the three towns were soon abolished in the process.", "qas": [{"question": "how many stages did the bronx go in ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 13, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The whole territory east of the Bronx River was annexed to the city in 1895, three years before New York's consolidation with Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. This included the Town of Westchester (which had voted against consolidation in 1894) and portions of Eastchester and Pelham. The nautical community of City Island voted to join the city in 1896.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On January 1, 1898, the consolidated City of New York was born, including the Bronx as one of the five distinct boroughs. (At the same time, the Bronx's territory moved from Westchester County into New York County, which already contained Manhattan and the rest of pre-1874 New York City.)", "qas": []}, {"context": "On April 19, 1912, those parts of New York County which had been annexed from Westchester County in the past decades were newly constituted as Bronx County, the 62nd and last county to be created by the state, effective in 1914. Bronx County's courts opened for business on January 2, 1914 (the same day that John P. Mitchel started work as Mayor of New York City). Marble Hill, Manhattan was now connected to the Bronx, but it did not become part of that county by a historical accident due to changes in waterways.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The history of the Bronx during the 20th century may be divided into four periods: a boom period during 1900\u201329, with a population growth by a factor of six from 200,000 in 1900 to 1.3 million in 1930. The Great Depression and post World War II years saw a slowing of growth leading into an eventual decline. The mid to late century were hard times, as the Bronx declined 1950\u201385 from a predominantly moderate-income to a predominantly lower-income area with high rates of violent crime and poverty. The Bronx has experienced an economic and developmental resurgence starting in the late 1980s that continues into today.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronx was a mostly rural area for many generations, small farms supplying the city markets, but it grew into a railroad suburb in the late 19th century. Faster transportation enabled rapid population growth in the late 19th century, involving the move from horse-drawn street cars to elevated railways and the subway system, which linked to Manhattan in 1904.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The South Bronx was a manufacturing center for many years and was noted as a center of piano manufacturing in the early part of the 20th century. In 1919, the Bronx was the site of 63 piano factories employing more than 5,000 workers.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the bronx 's original name ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 19, 1)"}]}, {"context": "At the end of World War I, the Bronx hosted the rather small 1918 World's Fair at 177th Street and DeVoe Avenue.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Bronx underwent rapid urban growth after World War I. Extensions of the New York City Subway contributed to the increase in population as thousands of immigrants came to the Bronx, resulting in a major boom in residential construction. Among these groups, many Irish Americans, Italian Americans, and especially Jewish Americans settled here. In addition, French, German, Polish, and other immigrants moved into the borough. The Jewish population also increased notably during this time. In 1937, 592,185 Jews lived in The Bronx (43.9% of the borough's population), while only 54,000 Jews lived in the borough in 2011. Many synagogues still stand in the Bronx, but most have been converted to other uses.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Bootleggers and gangs were active in the Bronx during Prohibition (1920\u201333). Irish, Italian, Jewish, and Polish gangs smuggled in most of the illegal whiskey, and the oldest sections of the borough became poverty-stricken.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the bronx during prohibition ?", "answers": [], "id": "(63, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Between 1930 and 1960, moderate and upper income Bronxites (predominantly non-Hispanic Whites) began to relocate from the southwestern neighborhoods of the borough. This migration has left a mostly poor African American and Hispanic (largely Puerto Rican) population in the West Bronx. One significant factor that shifted the racial and economic demographics was the construction of Co-op City, built with the intent of housing middle-class residents in family-sized apartments. The high-rise complex played a significant role in draining middle-class residents from older tenement buildings in the borough's southern and western fringes. Most predominantly non-Hispanic White communities today are located in the eastern and northwestern sections of the borough.", "qas": []}, {"context": "From the early 1960s to the early 1980s, the quality of life declined sharply for many Bronx residents. Historians and social scientists have suggested many factors, including the theory that Robert Moses' Cross Bronx Expressway destroyed existing residential neighborhoods and created instant slums, as put forward in Robert Caro's biography \"The Power Broker\". Another factor in the Bronx's decline may have been the development of high-rise housing projects, particularly in the South Bronx. Yet another factor may have been a reduction in the real estate listings and property-related financial services offered in some areas of the Bronx, such as mortgage loans or insurance policies\u2014a process known as redlining. Others have suggested a \"planned shrinkage\" of municipal services, such as fire-fighting. There was also much debate as to whether rent control laws had made it less profitable (or more costly) for landlords to maintain existing buildings with their existing tenants than to abandon or destroy those buildings.<ref>For an example of this argument, as well as of several other theses mentioned here, see \"When the Bronx was burning\" \"City-data\" forum (blog), 2007, where rubygreta writes:", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "BearShare", "paragraphs": [{"context": "BearShare was a peer-to-peer file sharing application originally created by Free Peers, Inc. for Microsoft Windows and also a rebranded version of iMesh by MusicLab, LLC, tightly integrated with their music subscription service.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The principal operators of Free Peers, Inc. were Vincent Falco and Louis Tatta. Bearshare was launched on December 4, 2000 as a Gnutella-based peer-to-peer file sharing application with innovative features that eventually grew to include IRC, a free library of software and media called BearShare Featured Artists, online help pages and a support forum integrated as dedicated web browser windows in the application; as well as a media player and a library window to organize the user's media collection.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following the June 27, 2005 United States Supreme Court decision on the \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\" case the BearShare Community support forums were abruptly closed during negotiations to settle an impending lawsuit with the RIAA. The webmaster and forum administrator immediately created a new site called Technutopia and the same support staff continue to support the gnutella versions from there. A few months later the unused Community window was removed from BearShare 5.1.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On May 4, 2006, Free Peers agreed to transfer all their BearShare-related assets to MusicLab, LLC (an iMesh subsidiary) and use the $30 million raised from that sale to settle with the RIAA.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On August 17, 2006, MusicLab released a reskinned and updated version of iMesh named BearSharev6 which connected to its proprietary iMesh network instead of gnutella. BearShareV6 and its successors offer paid music downloads in the PlaysForSure DRM controlled WMA format as well as free content in various formats, chiefly MP3. Like BearShare they also include a media player and embedded online and social networking features but with a Web 2.0 style, somewhat similar to MySpace or Facebook. Free content provided by users is automatically verified using acoustic fingerprinting as non-infringing before it can be shared. Video files more than 50 Mb in size and 15 minutes in length cannot be shared, ensuring television shows and feature-length movies cannot be distributed over the network. Only a limited set of music and video file types can be shared, thus excluding everything else like executable files, documents and compressed archives.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the updated version of bearsharev6 called ?", "answers": [], "id": "(64, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "In August 2006, MusicLab released a variant of the original BearShare gnutella servant, called BearFlix, which was altered to limit sharing, searches and downloads to images and videos. Shared videos were limited in length and duration, similar to limits in BearShareV6. The first release was version 1.2.1. Its version numbers appear to start from 1.1.2.1 in the user interface but it presents itself on the gnutella network as versions 6.1.2.1 to 6.2.2.530. This version has since been discontinued by MusicLab and no longer available on their websites; however it remains in wide usage.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On October 27, 2008, responding to uncertainty around the future of PlaysForSure, MusicLab added iPod support in BearShareV7.", "qas": []}, {"context": "As of June 12, 2016, BearShare is no longer available to download. The official page with a message announcing its discontinuation remained active until March 2017.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The latest version of BearShare is version 12.0.0.3093. It is downloadable as a free peer-to-peer application for Windows XP and above, from Downloadastro.com. The developer is listed as Genericom and the software is advertised under the same logo as previous versions, though the date of last update is given as October 3, 2013. There are a range of similar applications for download under the same BearShare brand name on the same website. When installing the software the verified publisher is listed as Bully Unity Ltd.", "qas": [{"question": "version 12.0.0.3093. is version of what version ?", "answers": [], "id": "(64, 8, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Three variants of the original BearShare gnutella servant were distributed by Free Peers: Free, Lite and Pro. The Free version had higher performance limits than the Lite version but contained some adware. The Pro version had higher limits than both the Free and Lite versions but cost US$24. Version numbers in this series ranged from 1.0 to 5.2.5.9. Though lacking MusicLab's support a wide spread of BearShare versions from 4.7 to 5.2.5.6 remain the second most popular servant on gnutella, alongside LimeWire.", "qas": [{"question": "what were the names of the original bearshare ?", "answers": [], "id": "(64, 9, 0)"}, {"question": "what is the second most popular soldier on gnutella ?", "answers": [], "id": "(64, 9, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Old-School fans of the gnutella versions tend to favour the last of the beta versions, 5.1.0 beta25, because it has no adware, is hard-coded for performance levels roughly between Pro and regular (ad-supported) versions and has the unique ability to switch between leaf and ultrapeer mode on demand, a feature deemed necessary for effective testing. No other gnutella servant has enjoyed this capability.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The most recent MusicLab version, V10, was available by free download from their support website and \"Pro\" features could be unlocked with a six or twelve-month subscription. Access to premium content required a $9.95 monthly subscription. Customers in Canada and the U.S.A. could opt for a $14.95 monthly \"BearShare ToGo\" subscription which allowed downloads of premium music to portable music players.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the most recent version of v10, ?", "answers": [], "id": "(64, 11, 0)"}]}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}, {"title": "Belgium", "paragraphs": [{"context": "Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a sovereign state in Western Europe. It is bordered by the Netherlands to the north, Germany to the east, Luxembourg to the southeast, France to the southwest, and the North Sea to the northwest. It covers an area of and has a population of more than 11.4 million. The capital and largest city is Brussels; other major cities are Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi and Li\u00e8ge.", "qas": [{"question": "what country is the kingdom of belgium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 0, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium is a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system. Its institutional organisation is complex and is structured on both regional and linguistic grounds. It is divided into three highly autonomous regions: Flanders in the north, Wallonia in the south, and the Brussels-Capital Region. Brussels is the smallest and most densely populated region, as well as the richest region in terms of GDP per capita.", "qas": [{"question": "what type of government is belgium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 1, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups or \"Communities\": the Dutch-speaking, mostly Flemish Community, which constitutes about 59 percent of the population, and the French-speaking Community, which comprises about 40 percent of all Belgians. A small German-speaking Community, numbering around one percent, exists in the East Cantons. The Brussels-Capital Region is officially bilingual (French and Dutch), although French is the dominant language. Belgium's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance, made up of six different governments.", "qas": [{"question": "how many main linguistic groups does belgium have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 2, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Historically, Belgium was part of an area known as the Low Countries, a somewhat larger region than the current Benelux group of states that also included parts of northern France and western Germany. Its name is derived from the Latin word \"Belgica\", after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica. From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century, the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan centre of commerce and culture. Between the 16th and early 19th centuries, Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers, earning the moniker the \"Battlefield of Europe\", a reputation strengthened by both world wars. The country emerged in 1830 following the Belgian Revolution when it seceded from the Netherlands.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution\nand, during the course of the 20th century, possessed a number of colonies in Africa. The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia. This continuing antagonism has led to several far-reaching reforms, resulting in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993. Despite the reforms, tensions between the groups have remained, if not increased; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities; and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election, a world record. Unemployment in Wallonia is more than double that of Flanders, which boomed after the war.", "qas": [{"question": "when did belgium participate in the industrial revolution ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 4, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and hosts the official seats of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, and the European Council, as well as a seat of the European Parliament in the country's capital, Brussels. Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone, NATO, OECD, and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union and the Schengen Area. Brussels hosts several of the EU's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO.", "qas": [{"question": "how many foreign seats does belgium have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 5, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium is a developed country, with an advanced high-income economy. It has very high standards of living, quality of life, healthcare, education, and is categorized as \"very high\" in the Human Development Index. It also ranks as one of the safest or most peaceful countries in the world.", "qas": [{"question": "what country is a developed country ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 6, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The name \"Belgium\" is derived from \"Gallia Belgica\", a Roman province in the northernmost part of Gaul that before Roman invasion in 100\u00a0BC, was inhabited by the \"Belgae\", a mix of Celtic and Germanic peoples.\nA gradual immigration by Germanic Frankish tribes during the 5th century brought the area under the rule of the Merovingian kings. A gradual shift of power during the 8th century led the kingdom of the Franks to evolve into the Carolingian Empire.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Treaty of Verdun in 843 divided the region into Middle and West Francia and therefore into a set of more or less independent fiefdoms which, during the Middle Ages, were vassals either of the King of France or of the Holy Roman Emperor.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many of these fiefdoms were united in the Burgundian Netherlands of the 14th and 15th centuries.\nEmperor Charles\u00a0V extended the personal union of the Seventeen Provinces in the 1540s, making it far more than a personal union by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 and increased his influence over the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648) divided the Low Countries into the northern United Provinces (\"Belgica Foederata\" in Latin, the \"Federated Netherlands\") and the Southern Netherlands (\"Belgica Regia\", the \"Royal Netherlands\"). The latter were ruled successively by the Spanish (Spanish Netherlands) and the Austrian Habsburgs (Austrian Netherlands) and comprised most of modern Belgium. This was the theatre of most Franco-Spanish and Franco-Austrian wars during the 17th and 18th centuries.", "qas": [{"question": "when was the theater of most franco-spanish and franco-austrian wars ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 10, 2)"}]}, {"context": "Following the , the Low Countries\u2014including territories that were never nominally under Habsburg rule, such as the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge\u2014were annexed by the French First Republic, ending Austrian rule in the region. The reunification of the Low Countries as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands occurred at the dissolution of the First French Empire in 1815, after the defeat of Napoleon.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In 1830, the Belgian Revolution led to the separation of the Southern Provinces from the Netherlands and to the establishment of a Catholic and bourgeois, officially French-speaking and neutral, independent Belgium under a provisional government and a national congress. Since the installation of Leopold\u00a0I as king on 1831, now celebrated as Belgium's National Day, Belgium has been a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy, with a laicist constitution based on the Napoleonic code. Although the franchise was initially restricted, universal suffrage for men was introduced after the general strike of 1893 (with plural voting until 1919) and for women in 1949.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The main political parties of the 19th century were the Catholic Party and the Liberal Party, with the Belgian Labour Party emerging towards the end of the 19th century. French was originally the single official language adopted by the nobility and the bourgeoisie. It progressively lost its overall importance as Dutch became recognized as well. This recognition became official in 1898 and in 1967 the parliament accepted a Dutch version of the Constitution.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Berlin Conference of 1885 ceded control of the Congo Free State to King Leopold\u00a0II as his private possession. From around 1900 there was growing international concern for the extreme and savage treatment of the Congolese population under Leopold\u00a0II, for whom the Congo was primarily a source of revenue from ivory and rubber production. Many Congolese were killed by Leopold's agents for failing to meet production quotas for ivory and rubber. It is estimated that nearly 10\u00a0million were killed during the Leopold period. In 1908, this outcry led the Belgian state to assume responsibility for the government of the colony, henceforth called the Belgian Congo. A Belgian commission in 1919 estimated that Congo's population was half what it was in 1879.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Germany invaded Belgium in August 1914 as part of the Schlieffen Plan to attack France, and much of the Western Front fighting of World War I occurred in western parts of the country. The opening months of the war were known as the Rape of Belgium due to German excesses. Belgium assumed control of the German colonies of Ruanda-Urundi (modern-day Rwanda and Burundi) during the war, and in 1924 the League of Nations mandated them to Belgium. In the aftermath of the First World War, Belgium annexed the Prussian districts of Eupen and Malmedy in 1925, thereby causing the presence of a German-speaking minority.", "qas": []}, {"context": "German forces again invaded the country in May 1940, and 40,690 Belgians, over half of them Jews, were killed during the subsequent occupation and The Holocaust. From September 1944 to February 1945 the Allies liberated Belgium. After World War\u00a0II, a general strike forced King Leopold\u00a0III to abdicate in 1951, since many Belgians felt he had collaborated with Germany during the war. The Belgian Congo gained independence in 1960 during the Congo Crisis; Ruanda-Urundi followed with its independence two years later. Belgium joined NATO as a founding member and formed the Benelux group of nations with the Netherlands and Luxembourg.", "qas": [{"question": "what group joined nato as a founding member ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 16, 4)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium became one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 and of the European Atomic Energy Community and European Economic Community, established in 1957. The latter has now become the European Union, for which Belgium hosts major administrations and institutions, including the European Commission, the Council of the European Union and the extraordinary and committee sessions of the European Parliament.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the european union ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 17, 1)"}, {"question": "when was the european research community and european economic community established ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 17, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium shares borders with France (), Germany (), Luxembourg () and the Netherlands (). Its total surface, including water area, is 30,528 square kilometres from which land area alone 30,278\u00a0km. It lies between latitudes 49\u00b030 and 51\u00b030 N, and longitudes 2\u00b033 and 6\u00b024 E.\nBelgium has three main geographical regions; the coastal plain in the northwest and the central plateau both belong to the Anglo-Belgian Basin, and the Ardennes uplands in the southeast to the Hercynian orogenic belt. The Paris Basin reaches a small fourth area at Belgium's southernmost tip, Belgian Lorraine.", "qas": [{"question": "where does the paris basin reach ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 18, 3)"}, {"question": "what country does belgium share borders with ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 18, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The coastal plain consists mainly of sand dunes and polders. Further inland lies a smooth, slowly rising landscape irrigated by numerous waterways, with fertile valleys and the northeastern sandy plain of the Campine (\"Kempen\"). The thickly forested hills and plateaux of the Ardennes are more rugged and rocky with caves and small gorges. Extending westward into France, this area is eastwardly connected to the Eifel in Germany by the High Fens plateau, on which the Signal de Botrange forms the country's highest point at .\nThe climate is maritime temperate with significant precipitation in all seasons (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\"), like most of northwest Europe. The average temperature is lowest in January at and highest in July at . The average precipitation per month varies between for February and April, to for July. Averages for the years 2000 to 2006 show daily temperature minimums of and maximums of and monthly rainfall of ; these are about 1\u00a0\u00b0C and nearly 10 millimetres above last century's normal values, respectively.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Phytogeographically, Belgium is shared between the Atlantic European and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the territory of Belgium belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests. Because of its high population density, industrialization and its location in the centre of Western Europe, Belgium still faces some environmental problems. However, due to consistent efforts by the various levels of government in Belgium, the state of the environment in Belgium is gradually improving. This led to Belgium being ranked as one of the top 10 countries (9 out of 132) in terms of environmental protection trends, and to Belgium being ranked in 2012 as the 24th country out of 132 for environmental protection. Belgium moreover has one of Europe's highest waste recycling rates. In particular, the Flemish region of Belgium has the highest waste diversion rate in Europe. Almost 75 percent of the residential waste produced there is reused, recycled, or composted.", "qas": [{"question": "which countries have shared between the atlantic european and central european provinces ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 20, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The territory of Belgium is divided into three Regions, two of which, the Flemish Region and Walloon Region, are in turn subdivided into provinces; the third Region, the Brussels Capital Region, is neither a province nor a part of a province.", "qas": [{"question": "how many regions does the metropole region have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 21, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium is a constitutional, popular monarchy and a federal parliamentary democracy. The bicameral federal parliament is composed of a Senate and a Chamber of Representatives. The former is made up of 50 senators appointed by the parliaments of the communities and regions and 10 co-opted senators. Prior to 2014, most of the Senate's members were directly elected. The Chamber's 150 representatives are elected under a proportional voting system from 11 electoral districts. Belgium has compulsory voting and thus maintains one of the highest rates of voter turnout in the world.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the highest rate of voter voter in belgium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 22, 5)"}, {"question": "what type of government does belgium have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 22, 0)"}]}, {"context": "The King (currently Philippe) is the head of state, though with limited prerogatives. He appoints ministers, including a Prime Minister, that have the confidence of the Chamber of Representatives to form the federal government. The Council of Ministers is composed of no more than fifteen members. With the possible exception of the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers is composed of an equal number of Dutch-speaking members and French-speaking members.\nThe judicial system is based on civil law and originates from the Napoleonic code. The Court of Cassation is the court of last resort, with the Court of Appeal one level below.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgium's political institutions are complex; most political power is organized around the need to represent the main cultural communities.\nSince about 1970, the significant national Belgian political parties have split into distinct components that mainly represent the political and linguistic interests of these communities.\nThe major parties in each community, though close to the political centre, belong to three main groups: Christian Democrats, Liberals, and Social Democrats.\nFurther notable parties came into being well after the middle of last century, mainly around linguistic, nationalist, or environmental themes and recently smaller ones of some specific liberal nature.", "qas": []}, {"context": "A string of Christian Democrat coalition governments from 1958 was broken in 1999 after the first dioxin crisis, a major food contamination scandal. A \"rainbow coalition\" emerged from six parties: the Flemish and the French-speaking Liberals, Social Democrats and Greens. Later, a \"purple coalition\" of Liberals and Social Democrats formed after the Greens lost most of their seats in the 2003 election.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The government led by Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt from 1999 to 2007 achieved a balanced budget, some tax reforms, a labour-market reform, scheduled nuclear phase-out and instigated legislation allowing more stringent war crime and more lenient soft drug usage prosecution. Restrictions on withholding euthanasia were reduced and same-sex marriage legalized. The government promoted active diplomacy in Africa and opposed the invasion of Iraq. It is the only country that does not have age restrictions on euthanasia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Verhofstadt's coalition fared badly in the June 2007 elections. For more than a year, the country experienced a political crisis. This crisis was such that many observers speculated on a possible partition of Belgium. From 2007 until 2008 the temporary Verhofstadt\u00a0III Government was in office. This coalition of the Flemish and Francophone Christian Democrats, the Flemish and Francophone Liberals together with the Francophone Social Democrats was an interim government until 2008.", "qas": []}, {"context": "On that day a new government, led by Flemish Christian Democrat Yves Leterme, the actual winner of the federal elections of , was sworn in by the king. On 2008 Leterme announced the resignation of the cabinet to the king, as no progress in constitutional reforms had been made.\nIn December 2008 he once more offered his resignation to the king after a crisis surrounding the sale of Fortis to BNP Paribas. At this juncture, his resignation was accepted and Christian Democratic and Flemish Herman Van Rompuy was sworn in as Prime Minister on 2008.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After Herman Van Rompuy was designated the first permanent President of the European Council on 2009, he offered the resignation of his government to King Albert\u00a0II on 2009. A few hours later, the new government under Prime Minister Yves Leterme was sworn in. On 2010, Leterme again offered the resignation of his cabinet to the king after one of the coalition partners, the OpenVLD, withdrew from the government, and on 2010 King Albert officially accepted the resignation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Parliamentary elections in Belgium on 2010 saw the Flemish nationalist N-VA become the largest party in Flanders, and the Socialist Party PS the largest party in Wallonia. Until December 2011, Belgium was governed by Leterme's caretaker government awaiting the end of the deadlocked negotiations for formation of a new government. By 30 March 2011 this set a new world record for the elapsed time without an official government, previously held by war-torn Iraq. Finally, in December 2011 the Di Rupo Government led by Walloon socialist Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo was sworn in.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The 2014 federal election (coinciding with the regional elections) resulted in a further electoral gain for the Flemish nationalist N-VA, although the incumbent coalition (composed of Flemish and French-speaking Social Democrats, Liberals, and Christian Democrats) maintains a solid majority in Parliament and in all electoral constituencies. On 22 July 2014, King Philippe nominated Charles Michel (MR) and Kris Peeters (CD&V) to lead the formation of a new federal cabinet composed of the Flemish parties N-VA, CD&V, Open Vld and the French-speaking MR, which resulted in the Michel Government. It is the first time N-VA is part of the federal cabinet, while the French-speaking side is represented only by the MR, which achieved a minority of the public votes in Wallonia.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Following a usage which can be traced back to the Burgundian and Habsburg courts, in the 19th century it was necessary to speak French to belong to the governing upper class, and those who could only speak Dutch were effectively second-class citizens. Late that century, and continuing into the 20th century, Flemish movements evolved to counter this situation.", "qas": []}, {"context": "While the people in Southern Belgium spoke French or dialects of French, and most Brusselers adopted French as their first language, the Flemings refused to do so and succeeded progressively in making Dutch an equal language in the education system. Following World War\u00a0II, Belgian politics became increasingly dominated by the autonomy of its two main linguistic communities. Intercommunal tensions rose and the constitution was amended to minimise the potential for conflict.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Based on the four language areas defined in 1962\u201363 (the Dutch, bilingual, French and German language areas), consecutive revisions of the country's constitution in 1970, 1980, 1988 and 1993 established a unique form of a federal state with segregated political power into three levels:", "qas": []}, {"context": "The constitutional language areas determine the official languages in their municipalities, as well as the geographical limits of the empowered institutions for specific matters. Although this would allow for seven parliaments and governments, when the Communities and Regions were created in 1980, Flemish politicians decided to merge both. Thus the Flemings just have one single institutional body of parliament and government is empowered for all except federal and specific municipal matters.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The overlapping boundaries of the Regions and Communities have created two notable peculiarities: the territory of the Brussels-Capital Region (which came into existence nearly a decade after the other regions) is included in both the Flemish and French Communities, and the territory of the German-speaking Community lies wholly within the Walloon Region. Conflicts about jurisdiction between the bodies are resolved by the Constitutional Court of Belgium. The structure is intended as a compromise to allow different cultures to live together peacefully.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Federal State's authority includes justice, defence, federal police, social security, nuclear energy, monetary policy and public debt, and other aspects of public finances. State-owned companies include the Belgian Post Group and Belgian Railways. The Federal Government is responsible for the obligations of Belgium and its federalized institutions towards the European Union and NATO. It controls substantial parts of public health, home affairs and foreign affairs. The budget\u2014without the debt\u2014controlled by the federal government amounts to about 50% of the national fiscal income. The federal government employs around 12% of the civil servants.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Communities exercise their authority only within linguistically determined geographical boundaries, originally oriented towards the individuals of a Community's language: culture (including audiovisual media), education and the use of the relevant language. Extensions to personal matters less directly connected with language comprise health policy (curative and preventive medicine) and assistance to individuals (protection of youth, social welfare, aid to families, immigrant assistance services, and so on.).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Regions have authority in fields that can be broadly associated with their territory. These include economy, employment, agriculture, water policy, housing, public works, energy, transport, the environment, town and country planning, nature conservation, credit and foreign trade. They supervise the provinces, municipalities and intercommunal utility companies.", "qas": []}, {"context": "In several fields, the different levels each have their own say on specifics. With education, for instance, the autonomy of the Communities neither includes decisions about the compulsory aspect nor allows for setting minimum requirements for awarding qualifications, which remain federal matters. Each level of government can be involved in scientific research and international relations associated with its powers. The treaty-making power of the Regions' and Communities' Governments is the broadest of all the Federating units of all the Federations all over the world.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Because of its location at the crossroads of Western Europe, Belgium has historically been the route of invading armies from its larger neighbours. With virtually defenceless borders, Belgium has traditionally sought to avoid domination by the more powerful nations which surround it through a policy of mediation. The Belgians have been strong advocates of European integration. Both the European Union and NATO are headquartered in Belgium.", "qas": [{"question": "where are the european union and nato headquarters ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 41, 3)"}]}, {"context": "The Belgian Armed Forces have about 47,000 active troops. In 2010, Belgium's defence budget totaled \u20ac3.95\u00a0billion (representing 1.12% of its GDP). They are organized into one unified structure which consists of four main components: Land Component, or the Army; Air Component, or the Air Force; Naval Component, or the Navy; Medical Component. The operational commands of the four components are subordinate to the Staff Department for Operations and Training of the Ministry of Defence, which is headed by the Assistant Chief of Staff Operations and Training, and to the Chief of Defence.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The effects of the Second World War made collective security a priority for Belgian foreign policy. In March 1948 Belgium signed the Treaty of Brussels, and then joined NATO in 1948. However the integration of the armed forces into NATO did not begin until after the Korean War. The Belgians, along with the Luxembourg government, sent a detachment of battalion strength to fight in Korea known as the Belgian United Nations Command. This mission was the first in a long line of UN missions which the Belgians supported. Currently, the Belgian Naval Component is working closely together with the Dutch Navy under the command of the Admiral Benelux.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgium's strongly globalized economy and its transport infrastructure are integrated with the rest of Europe. Its location at the heart of a highly industrialized region helped make it the world's 15th largest trading nation in 2007. The economy is characterized by a highly productive work force, high GNP and high exports per capita. Belgium's main imports are raw materials, machinery and equipment, chemicals, raw diamonds, pharmaceuticals, foodstuffs, transportation equipment, and oil products. Its main exports are machinery and equipment, chemicals, finished diamonds, metals and metal products, and foodstuffs.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Belgian economy is heavily service-oriented and shows a dual nature: a dynamic Flemish economy and a Walloon economy that lags behind. One of the founding members of the European Union, Belgium strongly supports an open economy and the extension of the powers of EU institutions to integrate member economies. Since 1922, through the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union, Belgium and Luxembourg have been a single trade market with customs and currency union.\nBelgium was the first continental European country to undergo the Industrial Revolution, in the early 19th century. Li\u00e8ge and Charleroi rapidly developed mining and steelmaking, which flourished until the mid-20th century in the Sambre and Meuse valley and made Belgium among one of the three most industrialized nations in the world from 1830 to 1910. However, by the 1840s the textile industry of Flanders was in severe crisis, and the region experienced famine from 1846 to 1850.", "qas": []}, {"context": "After World War II, Ghent and Antwerp experienced a rapid expansion of the chemical and petroleum industries. The 1973 and 1979 oil crises sent the economy into a recession; it was particularly prolonged in Wallonia, where the steel industry had become less competitive and experienced serious decline. In the 1980s and 1990s, the economic centre of the country continued to shift northwards and is now concentrated in the populous Flemish Diamond area.", "qas": []}, {"context": "By the end of the 1980s, Belgian macroeconomic policies had resulted in a cumulative government debt of about 120% of GDP. , the budget was balanced and public debt was equal to 90.30% of GDP. In 2005 and 2006, real GDP growth rates of 1.5% and 3.0%, respectively, were slightly above the average for the Euro area. Unemployment rates of 8.4% in 2005 and 8.2% in 2006 were close to the area average. By , this had grown to 8.5% compared to an average rate of 9.6% for the European Union as a whole (EU 27). From 1832 until 2002, Belgium's currency was the Belgian franc. Belgium switched to the euro in 2002, with the first sets of euro coins being minted in 1999. The standard Belgian euro coins designated for circulation show the portrait of the monarch (first King Albert\u00a0II, since 2013 King Philippe).", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite an 18% decrease observed from 1970 to 1999, Belgium still had in 1999 the highest rail network density within the European Union with 113.8\u00a0km/1 000\u00a0km. On the other hand, the same period of time, 1970\u20131999, has seen a huge growth (+56%) of the motorway network. In 1999, the density of km motorways per 1000\u00a0km and 1000 inhabitants amounted to 55.1 and 16.5 respectively and were significantly superior to the EU's means of 13.7 and 15.9.", "qas": [{"question": "in what year was the highest rail network density in switzerland ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 48, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Belgium experiences some of the most congested traffic in Europe. In 2010, commuters to the cities of Brussels and Antwerp spent respectively 65 and 64 hours a year in traffic jams. Like in most small European countries, more than 80% of the airways traffic is handled by a single airport, the Brussels Airport. The ports of Antwerp and Zeebrugge (Bruges) share more than 80% of Belgian maritime traffic, Antwerp being the second European harbour with a gross weight of goods handled of 115 988 000 t in 2000 after a growth of 10.9% over the preceding five years. In 2016, the port of Antwerp handled 214 million tons after a year-on-year growth of 2.7%.", "qas": [{"question": "what country has some of the most congested traffic in europe ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 49, 0)"}]}, {"context": "There is a large economic gap between Flanders and Wallonia. Wallonia was historically wealthy compared to Flanders, mostly due to its heavy industries, but the decline of the steel industry post-World War II led to the region's rapid decline, whereas Flanders rose swiftly. Since then, Flanders has been prosperous, among the wealthiest regions in Europe, whereas Wallonia has been languishing. As of 2007, the unemployment rate of Wallonia is over double that of Flanders. The divide has played a key part in the tensions between the Flemish and Walloons in addition to the already-existing language divide. Pro-independence movements have gained high popularity in Flanders as a consequence. The separatist New Flemish Alliance (N-VA) party for instance is the largest party in Belgium.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the largest party in belgium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 50, 6)"}]}, {"context": "Contributions to the development of science and technology have appeared throughout the country's history. The 16th century Early Modern flourishing of Western Europe included cartographer Gerardus Mercator, anatomist Andreas Vesalius, herbalist Rembert Dodoens and mathematician Simon Stevin among the most influential scientists.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Chemist Ernest Solvay and engineer Zenobe Gramme (\u00c9cole industrielle de Li\u00e8ge) gave their names to the Solvay process and the Gramme dynamo, respectively, in the 1860s. Bakelite was developed in 1907\u20131909 by Leo Baekeland. Ernest Solvay also acted as a major philanthropist and gave its name to the Solvay Institute of Sociology, the Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management and the International Solvay Institutes for Physics and Chemistry which are now part of the Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles. In 1911, he started a series of conferences, the Solvay Conferences on Physics and Chemistry, which have had a deep impact on the evolution of quantum physics and chemistry. A major contribution to fundamental science was also due to a Belgian, Monsignor Georges Lema\u00eetre (Catholic University of Louvain), who is credited with proposing the Big Bang theory of the origin of the universe in 1927.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Three Nobel Prizes in Physiology or Medicine were awarded to Belgians: Jules Bordet (Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles) in 1919, Corneille Heymans (University of Ghent) in 1938 and Albert Claude (Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles) together with Christian de Duve (Universit\u00e9 catholique de Louvain) in 1974. Fran\u00e7ois Englert (Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2013. Ilya Prigogine (Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1977. Two Belgian mathematicians have been awarded the Fields Medal: Pierre Deligne in 1978 and Jean Bourgain in 1994.", "qas": []}, {"context": ", the total population of Belgium according to its population register was 11,376,070. Almost all of the population is urban, at 97% in 2004. The population density of Belgium is 373 per square kilometre (966 per square mile) . The most densely inhabited area is Flanders. The Ardennes have the lowest density. , the Flemish Region had a population of 6,552,967, its most populous cities being Antwerp (523,248), Ghent (260,341) and Bruges (118,284). Wallonia had 3,624,377 with Charleroi (201,816), Li\u00e8ge (197,355) and Namur (110,939), its most populous cities. Brussels has 1,198,726 inhabitants in the Capital Region's 19 municipalities, three of which have over 100,000 residents.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the population of belgium ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 54, 0)"}]}, {"context": ", nearly 92% of the population had Belgian citizenship, and other European Union member citizens account for around 6%. The prevalent foreign nationals were Italian (171,918), French (125,061), Dutch (116,970), Moroccan (80,579), Portuguese (43,509), Spanish (42,765), Turkish (39,419) and German (37,621). In 2007, there were 1.38\u00a0million foreign-born residents in Belgium, corresponding to 12.9% of the total population. Of these, 685,000 (6.4%) were born outside the EU and 695,000 (6.5%) were born in another EU Member State.", "qas": [{"question": "how much of the population had irish citizens ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 55, 0)"}]}, {"context": "At the beginning of 2012, people of foreign background and their descendants were estimated to have formed around 25% of the total population i.e. 2.8\u00a0million \"new Belgians\". Of these new Belgians, 1,200,000 are of European ancestry and 1,350,000 are from non-Western countries (most of them from Morocco, Turkey, and the DR Congo). Since the modification of the Belgian nationality law in 1984 more than 1.3\u00a0million migrants have acquired Belgian citizenship. The largest group of immigrants and their descendants in Belgium are Moroccans. 89.2% of inhabitants of Turkish origin have been naturalized, as have 88.4% of people of Moroccan background, 75.4% of Italians, 56.2% of the French and 47.8% of Dutch people.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgium has three official languages: Dutch, French and German. A number of non-official minority languages are spoken as well.\nAs no census exists, there are no official statistical data regarding the distribution or usage of Belgium's three official languages or their dialects. However, various criteria, including the language(s) of parents, of education, or the second-language status of foreign born, may provide suggested figures. An estimated 60% of the Belgian population are native speakers of Dutch (often referred to as Flemish), and 40% of the population speaks French natively. French-speaking Belgians are often referred to as Walloons, although the French speakers in Brussels are not Walloons.", "qas": [{"question": "how many official languages: dutch does belgium have ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 57, 0)"}, {"question": "what french speakers are often referred to as walloons ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 57, 5)"}]}, {"context": "The total number of native Dutch speakers is estimated to be about 6.23\u00a0million, concentrated in the northern Flanders region, while native French speakers number 3.32\u00a0million in Wallonia and an estimated 870,000 (or 85%) in the officially bilingual Brussels-Capital Region. The German-speaking Community is made up of 73,000 people in the east of the Walloon Region; around 10,000 German and 60,000 Belgian nationals are speakers of German. Roughly 23,000 more German speakers live in municipalities near the official Community.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Both Belgian Dutch and Belgian French have minor differences in vocabulary and semantic nuances from the varieties spoken respectively in the Netherlands and France. Many Flemish people still speak dialects of Dutch in their local environment. Walloon, considered either as a dialect of French or a distinct Romance language, is now only understood and spoken occasionally, mostly by elderly people. Walloon is divided into four dialects, which along with those of Picard, are rarely used in public life and have largely been replaced by French.", "qas": [{"question": "what dutch dialect has minor differences in vocabulary ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 59, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Since the country's independence, Roman Catholicism, counterbalanced by strong freethought movements, has had an important role in Belgium's politics. However Belgium is largely a secular country as the \"laicist\" constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the government generally respects this right in practice. During the reigns of Albert\u00a0I and Baudouin, the monarchy had a reputation of deeply rooted Catholicism.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Roman Catholicism has traditionally been Belgium's majority religion; being especially strong in Flanders. However, by 2009 Sunday church attendance was 5% for Belgium in total; 3% in Brussels, and 5.4% in Flanders. Church attendance in 2009 in Belgium was roughly half of the Sunday church attendance in 1998 (11% for the total of Belgium in 1998). Despite the drop in church attendance, Catholic identity nevertheless remains an important part of Belgium's culture.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the majority majority of roman catholicism ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 61, 0)"}]}, {"context": "According to the Eurobarometer 2010, 37% of Belgian citizens responded that they believe there is a God. 31% answered that they believe there is some sort of spirit or life-force. 27% answered that they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life-force. 5% did not respond. According to the Eurobarometer 2015, 60.7% of the total population of Belgium adhered to Christianity, with Roman Catholicism being the largest denomination with 52.9%. Protestants comprised 2.1% and Orthodox Christians were the 1.6% of the total. Non religious people comprised the 32.0% of the population and were divided between atheists (14.9%) and agnostics (17.1%). A further 5.2% of the population was Muslim and 2.1% were believers in other religions. The same survey held in 2012 found that Christianity was the largest religion in Belgium accounting 65% of Belgians.", "qas": [{"question": "what was the largest religion in belgium in 2012 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 62, 8)"}]}, {"context": "Symbolically and materially, the Roman Catholic Church remains in a favourable position. Belgium officially recognises three religions: Christianity (Catholic, Protestantism, Orthodox churches and Anglicanism), Islam and Judaism.\nIn the early 2000s there were approximately 42,000 Jews in Belgium. The Jewish Community of Antwerp (numbering some 18,000) is one of the largest in Europe, and one of the last places in the world where Yiddish is the primary language of a large Jewish community (mirroring certain Orthodox and Hasidic communities in New York, New Jersey, and Israel). In addition most Jewish children in Antwerp receive a Jewish education. There are several Jewish newspapers and more than 45 active synagogues (30 of which are in Antwerp) in the country.\nA 2006 inquiry in Flanders, considered to be a more religious region than Wallonia, showed that 55% considered themselves religious and that 36% believed that God created the universe. On the other hand, Wallonia has become one of Europe's most secular/least religious regions. Most of the French-speaking region's population does not consider religion an important part of their lives, and as much as 45% of the population identifies as irreligious. This is particularly the case in eastern Wallonia and areas along the French border.\nA 2008 estimate found that approximately 6% of the Belgian population (628,751 people) is Muslim. Muslims constitute 23.6% of the population of Brussels, 4.9% of Wallonia and 5.1% of Flanders. The majority of Belgian Muslims live in the major cities, such as Antwerp, Brussels and Charleroi. The largest group of immigrants in Belgium are Moroccans, with 400,000 people. The Turks are the third largest group, and the second largest Muslim ethnic group, numbering 220,000.", "qas": []}, {"context": "The Belgians enjoy good health. According to 2012 estimates, the average life expectancy is 79.65 years. Since 1960, life expectancy has, in line with the European average, grown by two months per year. Death in Belgium is mainly due to heart and vascular disorders, neoplasms, disorders of the respiratory system and unnatural causes of death (accidents, suicide). Non-natural causes of death and cancer are the most common causes of death for females up to age 24 and males up to age 44.", "qas": [{"question": "what do the czechs do ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 64, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Healthcare in Belgium is financed through both social security contributions and taxation. Health insurance is compulsory. Health care is delivered by a mixed public and private system of independent medical practitioners and public, university and semi-private hospitals. Health care service are payable by the patient and reimbursed later by health insurance institutions, but for ineligible categories (of patients and services) so-called 3rd party payment systems exist. The Belgian health care system is supervised and financed by the federal government, the Flemish and Walloon Regional governments; and the German Community also has (indirect) oversight and responsibilities.", "qas": [{"question": "how is healthcare in belgium funded ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 65, 0)"}]}, {"context": "For the first time in Belgian history, the first child was euthanized following the 2 year mark of the removal of the euthanization age restrictions. The child had been euthanized due to an incurable disease that was inflicted upon the child. Although there may have been some support for the euthanization there is a possibility of controversy due to the issue revolving around the subject of assisted suicide.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Education is compulsory from 6 to 18 years of age for Belgians. Among OECD countries in 2002, Belgium had the third highest proportion of 18- to 21-year-olds enrolled in postsecondary education, at 42%. Though an estimated 99% of the adult population is literate, concern is rising over functional illiteracy. The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Belgium's education as the 19th best in the world, being significantly higher than the OECD average. Education being organized separately by each, the Flemish Community scores noticeably above the French and German-speaking Communities.", "qas": [{"question": "how long is education mandatory ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 67, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Mirroring the dual structure of the 19th-century Belgian political landscape, characterized by the Liberal and the Catholic parties, the educational system is segregated within a secular and a religious segment. The secular branch of schooling is controlled by the communities, the provinces, or the municipalities, while religious, mainly Catholic branch education, is organized by religious authorities, although subsidized and supervised by the communities.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Despite its political and linguistic divisions, the region corresponding to today's Belgium has seen the flourishing of major artistic movements that have had tremendous influence on European art and culture. Nowadays, to a certain extent, cultural life is concentrated within each language Community, and a variety of barriers have made a shared cultural sphere less pronounced. Since the 1970s, there are no bilingual universities or colleges in the country except the Royal Military Academy and the Antwerp Maritime Academy, no common media and no single large cultural or scientific organization in which both main communities are represented.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Contributions to painting and architecture have been especially rich. The Mosan art, the Early Netherlandish, the Flemish Renaissance and Baroque painting and major examples of Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque architecture are milestones in the history of art. While the 15th century's art in the Low Countries is dominated by the religious paintings of Jan van Eyck and Rogier van der Weyden, the 16th century is characterized by a broader panel of styles such as Peter Breughel's landscape paintings and Lambert Lombard's representation of the antique. Though the Baroque style of Peter Paul Rubens and Anthony van Dyck flourished in the early 17th century in the Southern Netherlands, it gradually declined thereafter.", "qas": []}, {"context": "During the 19th and 20th centuries many original romantic, expressionist and surrealist Belgian painters emerged, including James Ensor and other artists belonging to the Les XX group, Constant Permeke, Paul Delvaux and Ren\u00e9 Magritte. The avant-garde CoBrA movement appeared in the 1950s, while the sculptor Panamarenko remains a remarkable figure in contemporary art. Multidisciplinary artists Jan Fabre, Wim Delvoye and the painter Luc Tuymans are other internationally renowned figures on the contemporary art scene.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgian contributions to architecture also continued into the 19th and 20th centuries, including the work of Victor Horta and Henry van de Velde, who were major initiators of the Art Nouveau style.\nThe vocal music of the Franco-Flemish School developed in the southern part of the Low Countries and was an important contribution to Renaissance culture. In the 19th and 20th centuries, there was an emergence of major violinists, such as Henri Vieuxtemps, Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe and Arthur Grumiaux, while Adolphe Sax invented the saxophone in 1846. The composer C\u00e9sar Franck was born in Li\u00e8ge in 1822. Contemporary popular music in Belgium is also of repute. Jazz musician Toots Thielemans and singer Jacques Brel have achieved global fame. Nowadays, singer Stromae has been a musical revelation in Europe and beyond, having great success. In rock/pop music, Telex, Front 242, K's Choice, Hooverphonic, Zap Mama, Soulwax and dEUS are well known. In the heavy metal scene, bands like Machiavel, Channel Zero and Enthroned have a worldwide fan-base.\nBelgium has produced several well-known authors, including the poets Emile Verhaeren, Robert Goffin and novelists Hendrik Conscience, Georges Simenon, Suzanne Lilar, Hugo Claus and Am\u00e9lie Nothomb. The poet and playwright Maurice Maeterlinck won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1911. \"The Adventures of Tintin\" by Herg\u00e9 is the best known of Franco-Belgian comics, but many other major authors, including Peyo (\"The Smurfs\"), Andr\u00e9 Franquin (\"Gaston Lagaffe\"), Dupa (\"Cubitus\"), Morris (\"Lucky Luke\"), Greg (\"Achille Talon\"), Lambil (\"Les Tuniques Bleues\"), Edgar P. Jacobs and Willy Vandersteen brought the Belgian cartoon strip industry a worldwide fame.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgian cinema has brought a number of mainly Flemish novels to life on-screen. Other Belgian directors include Andr\u00e9 Delvaux, Stijn Coninx, Luc and Jean-Pierre Dardenne; well-known actors include Jean-Claude Van Damme, Jan Decleir and Marie Gillain; and successful films include \"Bullhead, Man Bites Dog\" and \"The Alzheimer Affair\". In the 1980s, Antwerp's Royal Academy of Fine Arts produced important fashion trendsetters, known as the Antwerp Six.", "qas": [{"question": "what is the name of the dutch film that has brought a number of dutch literature ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 73, 0)"}]}, {"context": "Folklore plays a major role in Belgium's cultural life: the country has a comparatively high number of processions, cavalcades, parades, 'ommegangs' and 'ducasses', 'kermesse' and other local festivals, nearly always with an originally religious or mythological background. The Carnival of Binche with its famous Gilles and the 'Processional Giants and Dragons' of Ath, Brussels, Dendermonde, Mechelen and Mons are recognized by UNESCO as Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Other examples are the Carnival of Aalst; the still very religious processions of the Holy Blood in Bruges, Virga Jesse Basilica in Hasselt and Basilica of Our Lady of Hanswijk in Mechelen; festival in Li\u00e8ge; and the Walloon festival in Namur. Originated in 1832 and revived in the 1960s, the Gentse Feesten have become a modern tradition. A major non-official holiday is the Saint Nicholas Day, a festivity for children and, in Li\u00e8ge, for students.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Many highly ranked Belgian restaurants can be found in the most influential restaurant guides, such as the Michelin Guide. Belgium is famous for beer, chocolate, waffles and french fries with mayonnaise. Contrary to their name, french fries are claimed to have originated in Belgium, although their exact place of origin is uncertain. The national dishes are \"steak and fries with salad\", and \"mussels with fries\".", "qas": []}, {"context": "Brands of Belgian chocolate and pralines, like C\u00f4te d'Or, Neuhaus, Leonidas and Godiva are famous, as well as independent producers such as Burie and Del Rey in Antwerp and Mary's in Brussels. Belgium produces over 1100 varieties of beer. The Trappist beer of the Abbey of Westvleteren has repeatedly been rated the world's best beer.\nThe biggest brewer in the world by volume is Anheuser-Busch InBev, based in Leuven.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Since the 1970s, sports clubs and federations are organized separately within each language community. Association football is the most popular sport in both parts of Belgium; also very popular are cycling, tennis, swimming, judo and basketball.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgians hold the most Tour de France victories of any country except France. They have also the most victories on the UCI Road World Championships. Philippe Gilbert is the 2012 world champion. Another modern well-known Belgian cyclist is Tom Boonen. With five victories in the Tour de France and numerous other cycling records, Belgian cyclist Eddy Merckx is regarded as one of the greatest cyclists of all time. Jean-Marie Pfaff, a former Belgian goalkeeper, is considered one of the greatest in the history of association football.", "qas": []}, {"context": "Belgium hosted the 1972 European Football Championships, and co-hosted the 2000 European Championships with the Netherlands. The Belgium national football team reached first place in the FIFA World Rankings for the first time in November 2015.", "qas": [{"question": "which european football championship did belgium host in 1974 ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 80, 0)"}, {"question": "which world ranking did the belgium national football team reach first place in ?", "answers": [], "id": "(65, 80, 1)"}]}, {"context": "Kim Clijsters and Justine Henin both were Player of the Year in the Women's Tennis Association as they were ranked the number one female tennis player.\nThe Spa-Francorchamps motor-racing circuit hosts the Formula One World Championship Belgian Grand Prix. The Belgian driver, Jacky Ickx, won eight Grands Prix and six 24 Hours of Le Mans and finished twice as runner-up in the Formula One World Championship. Belgium also has a strong reputation in, motocross with the rider Stefan Everts. Sporting events annually held in Belgium include the Memorial Van Damme athletics competition, the Belgian Grand Prix Formula One, and a number of classic cycle races such as the Tour of Flanders and Li\u00e8ge\u2013Bastogne\u2013Li\u00e8ge. The 1920 Summer Olympics were held in Antwerp. The 1977 European Basketball Championship was held in Li\u00e8ge and Ostend.", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}, {"context": "", "qas": []}]}], "version": 1.0}